VILLAGE OF KENILWORTH, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-8 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. 1396, dated December 9, 2025;
and
State legislation approved through 2024 Pamphlet #2
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS
(2024)
 
Village President Cecily Kaz
Trustees          Amelia Hannus
                 Walter Kelly
                 Tim Ransford
                 Christopher Ottsen
                 John Gottschall
                 Matthew Lojkovic
Village Clerk     Michael Gagnon
Village Treasurer Jaramee Finn
Village Manager   Katarzyna Thake
Village Attorney  Gregory Jones
 
PREFACE
   HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE VILLAGE
   The Village of Kenilworth was founded in 1890 by Mr. Joseph Sears to provide
suburban home sites with city conveniences. The name “Kenilworth” and the names
of most of the original streets in the village, were taken from Sir Walter
Scott’s novel, Kenilworth.
   Mr. Joseph Sears guarded the early development of the village by subdividing
the area into large lots and by inserting rigid restrictions in all deeds, many
of which restrictions have since been incorporated in the Kenilworth zoning
regulations. All village functions were carried on by the Kenilworth Company,
which Mr. Sears controlled, until February 4, 1896, when the community was
incorporated as a village. At that time the village was confined to the area
east of the Chicago and North Western Railway. The portion of Kenilworth west
of the railway was annexed to the village in 1920 to prevent it from possible
industrial and commercial use, and with the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance in
1923, it has developed into one of the finest residential neighborhoods on the
North Shore.
   The Village Manager plan of government was adopted in 1920, and the village
has continuously operated under that plan since, enabling the village to
gratuitously receive the benefit of high qualified people to serve as its
officers and trustees.
   The water supply system, previously under private ownership, was purchased
by the village in 1925, and a modern pumping and filtering plant was completed
in 1928 and has since been substantially increased in capacity. Prior to 1929,
fire protection was furnished by a local volunteer fire department. Commencing
in 1929, fire protection has been furnished by contract with the Fire
Department of the adjoining Village of Winnetka. The Police Department has
increased from one chief, one patrol officer and one police officer for night
duty in 1921, to its present force. Equipped with motorized equipment and a
modern two-way radio system interconnected with adjoining North Shore Villages,
it is one of the best Police Departments for its size in the Chicago area.
   Today the Village of Kenilworth is recognized as one of the finest
residential communities in the country.
(1959 Code, Preface)
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CORPORATE LIMITS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
General Provisions
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Supplementation of code generally
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Regulations saved
   
10.15   Historical and statutory references
   
10.16   Village seal
   
10.17   Village records
   
10.18   Annual fee ordinance
   
10.19   Titles, chapters, sections and paragraphs
   10.20 through 10.29   Reserved
Indemnification of Public Officials, Officers and Employees
   
10.30   In general
   
10.31   Exceptions
   
10.32   Punitive damages
   
10.33   Choice of counsel
   
10.34   Additional rights; successors
   
10.35   Insurance; authorization for payments
   
10.36   Voting
 
   
10.99   General penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   The ordinances included in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated as the “Kenilworth Village Code” and may be
so cited.
(1959 Code, § 1-1)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTION. Includes suits, prosecution and all judicial proceedings.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD.  The President and Board of Trustees of
the Village of Kenilworth.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. Board of Trustees or Village Board.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(2))
   COUNTY.  The County of Cook, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of the County of Cook, Illinois.
(5 ILCS 70/1.07)
   COURT. Any court of competent jurisdiction.
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2)
   FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year for the village shall commence on January 1 of
each year and shall end on December 31 of the same year.
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERE- TOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at any
time after that date.
(5 ILCS 70/1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any municipality, town or county of this
state, and all bridges thereupon.
(5 ILCS 70/1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 2010, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   IN THE VILLAGE. Includes all territory over which the village now has or
shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or
other regulatory powers.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(5 ILCS 70/1.12)
   OCCUPANT or TENANT. As applied to a building or structure or land, mean any
person who holds a written or an oral lease of or actually occupies the whole
or a part of any building, structure or land, either alone or with others.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, joint tenant, or tenant in
common of the whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a
land trust which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
limited liability companies, joint ventures and bodies politic and corporate as
well as individuals.
(5 ILCS 70/1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land, structures, and buildings.
   PRESIDENT. The Village President of the Village of Kenilworth.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and other interests.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   SEAL. The seal of the village.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, squares and other public
thoroughfares, except where the context includes private thoroughfares.
   TENANT. See OCCUPANT.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The Kenilworth Village Code hereby
adopted, and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption
of new titles, chapters or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in Section 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.28)
   VILLAGE. The Village of Kenilworth in Cook County, State of Illinois, except
as otherwise provided.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law,
except as otherwise provided by law it shall be:
      (1)   The proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act.
(5 ILCS 70/1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
(1959 Code, § 1-2) (Ord. 1076, passed 3-19-2012)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
(1959 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed:
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(5 ILCS 70/1.03)
      (2)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The
feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter gender shall
include the masculine and feminine.
(5 ILCS 70/1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(5 ILCS 70/1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or
Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(5 ILCS 70/1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (F)   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the President
and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
   (G)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as
those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(5 ILCS 70/2)
(1959 Code, § 1-2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.
(1959 Code, § 1-10)
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in subsection (C) below of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context clearly
indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was not
intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
provision of the code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than
the other provisions of the code, the provision imposing the greater
restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
§ 10.09 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE GENERALLY.
   (A)   Supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the Village Clerk. A supplement to the code shall
include substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during
the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code.
The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into
the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or
partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have
been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the person authorized to
prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances
and parts of ordinances included in the supplement insofar as it is necessary
to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subsections of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes
in such catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subsections to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subsection numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter,” “this article,” “this subsection,” and the like, as the case
may be, or to “sections ____________ to ____________” (inserting section
numbers to indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code); and
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but in no case
may any change be made in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included
in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by a valid
judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code
which can be given effect without the invalid provision.
(1959 Code, § 1-4)
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. These references
shall also include the designee or agent of the officer or office, unless the
law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to, tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 REGULATIONS SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Board
of Trustees or a certain village officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.
§ 10.15 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1)
   (C)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text
of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
      Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
§ 10.16 VILLAGE SEAL.
   The corporate seal of the village shall be circular in form, and be so
constructed as to impress upon paper the word “Seal” in a circle formed by the
words “Village of Kenilworth, Incorporated February 4, 1896.” The seal shall be
and remain in the custody of the Village Clerk and his or her successor in
office, to be used by him or her in all cases provided for by ordinances of the
village or laws of the state and in all other cases where by the laws and
customs of any state or nation the use of the corporate seal of the village
becomes necessary.
(1959 Code, § 1-11)
§ 10.17 VILLAGE RECORDS.
   All village records shall be kept in the Village Hall or other facility
within the village designated by the Village Clerk.
(1959 Code, § 1-15)
§ 10.18 ANNUAL FEE ORDINANCE.
   The Board of Trustees shall annually adopt an ordinance setting forth the
applicable fees and charges due for the various licenses, permits and services
authorized by this code and by other ordinances of the village. Whenever
reference is made to the “annual fee ordinance”, such reference shall mean the
most current annual ordinance adopted pursuant to this section. By this
reference, the annual fee ordinance, as the same may, from time to time, be
amended, is hereby incorporated herein as if fully set forth herein.
§ 10.19 TITLES, CHAPTERS, SECTIONS AND PARAGRAPHS.
   This code is divided into titles, chapters, sections, subsections,
paragraphs and subparagraphs that shall be numbered according to the following
format:
   10.01(A)(1)(a)1.(i)
and that shall be referred to in accordance with the following example:
   III            Title
   30.01            Section
   30.01(B)         Subsection
   30.01(B)(3)         Paragraph
   30.01(B)(3)(a)         Subparagraph
   30.01(B)(3)(a)2.      Subparagraph
   30.01(B)(3)(a)2.(iii)      Subparagraph
§§ 10.20 THROUGH 10.29 RESERVED.
INDEMNIFICATION OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 10.30 IN GENERAL.
   The village shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless its current and former
President and Trustees, officials, commissioners, board members, officers and
employees, as well as representatives of the village serving on other bodies
who have been appointed by the President or by the Board of Trustees pursuant
to this code, whether current or former (the “protected personnel”) from and
against any civil and administrative investigations, claims, actions or
proceedings, and any judgments, fines, liabilities, and other costs thereof,
including reasonable attorneys’ fees and any amount paid in any settlement
approved in advance by the Board of Trustees, based upon any act, error or
omission that could reasonably be construed to be within the exercise of the
lawful duties of such protected personnel.
(Ord. 1097, passed 4-29-2013)
§ 10.31 EXCEPTIONS.
   The village’s undertaking pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the
provision of defense or indemnification to any protected personnel in any such
investigation, claim, action or proceeding instituted by the village against
such protected personnel.
(Ord. 1097, passed 4-29-2013)
§ 10.32 PUNITIVE DAMAGES.
   In addition to the general indemnification and defense undertaking in §
10.30 of this code, the village shall, to the extent permitted by law, defend,
indemnify and hold harmless, or provide insurance coverage for, any protected
personnel from and against claims, actions or proceedings in which punitive
damages are sought from or awarded against any such protected personnel, unless
the Board of Trustees determines that such damages are sought or awarded as the
result of action or activity outside of the lawful duties of such protected
personnel.
(Ord. 1097, passed 4-29-2013)
§ 10.33 CHOICE OF COUNSEL.
   The Village Legal Counsel shall defend any protected personnel from and
against any claim, action or proceeding within the scope of the village’s
indemnification undertakings pursuant to this chapter. At the request of any
protected personnel or upon the recommendation of the Village Legal Counsel,
the Board of Trustees may authorize the appointment of another attorney
approved by the Village Legal Counsel to provide the defense for the protected
personnel.
(Ord. 1097, passed 4-29-2013)
§ 10.34 ADDITIONAL RIGHTS; SUCCESSORS.
   The undertakings by the village pursuant to this chapter shall not be
exclusive of any other rights that any protected personnel may have as a matter
of law. In the event of the death of any protected personnel, the benefits
provided in this chapter shall inure to the benefit of the lawful successors of
the protected personnel.
(Ord. 1097, passed 4-29-2013)
§ 10.35 INSURANCE; AUTHORIZATION FOR PAYMENTS.
   The liability of the village for payments pursuant to this chapter may be
insured to the extent permitted by law, but to the extent not insured shall be
payable out of the funds and monies of the village.
(Ord. 1097, passed 4-29-2013)
§ 10.36 VOTING.
   No member of the Board of Trustees shall consider or vote on any matter in
which such member is the protected personnel; provided, however, that where a
majority of a public body that includes a member or members of the Board of
Trustees are part of the protected personnel, no member of the Board of
Trustees shall be required to recuse himself or herself from considering or
voting on such matters in which such member is the protected personnel in
question and on any such matters described above coming before the Board of
Trustees for a vote pursuant to this chapter, it is hereby declared that such
matters do not involve any work, contract, or business with the village, nor
the provision of materials, merchandise, property, services, or labor to the
village.
(Ord. 1097, passed 4-29-2013)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalties. Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the village
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or
whenever in this code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
provided therefor, any person upon conviction for the violation of any
provision of this code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $1 nor exceeding $750 for each offense. Each day any violation of any
provision of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense. In the construction and interpretation of this section, the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered as a recovery or
penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. No provision of this
code designating the duties of any village officer or employee shall be
construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty
provided in this code for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention
of the board of trustees to impose such a fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty.
   (B)   Procedure for out-of-court settlement. Every person who is cited for
an alleged violation of any provision of this code may resolve each citation by
out-of-court settlement with the village in accordance with the following
procedure.
      (1)   Each alleged violator shall, at the time he or she is first served
with the citation, be given information in writing explaining the out-of-court
settlement option hereunder.
      (2)   The settlement may be accomplished by the alleged violator paying
to the village a specified out-of-court settlement amount within ten days after
the date of the citation. The amount of the out-of-court settlement shall be
indicated on the citation.
      (3)   The payment may be made either in person at the Village Hall, in
which case a receipt shall be issued upon payment, by mail or other method
authorized by the village. In the case of payment by mail, the out-of-court
settlement payment must be actually received within ten days after the date of
the citation, and no receipt shall be issued.
      (4)   If an out-of-court settlement payment is not made within ten days
after the date of the citation as specified in subsection (B)(3) above, the
alleged violator shall have the option, for an additional ten days thereafter,
to resolve the citation with the village by the payment of a late out-of-court
settlement amount indicated on the citation. Payment of the late out-of-court
settlement amount indicated in the citation may be made after the tenth day
through and including the twentieth day after the date the citation was issued
either in person at the Village Hall, in which case a receipt shall be issued
upon payment, or by mail, in which case no receipt shall be issued. In the case
of payment by mail, the late out-of-court settlement payment must be actually
received by the village within 20 days after the date of the citation or notice
violation.
      (5)   If a late out-of-court settlement payment is not made within 20
days after the date of the citation or notice of violation as specified in
subsection (B)(4) above, the alleged violator shall have the option thereafter
to resolve the citation or notice of violation with the village by the payment
of a sum equal to 150% of the late out-of-court settlement amount indicated on
the citation or notice of violation. Payment of the settlement amount shall be
made either in person at the Village Hall, in which case a receipt shall be
issued upon payment, or by mail, in which case no receipt shall be issued. The
payment shall be actually received by the village before the commencement of
procedures to pursue enforcement action against the alleged violator as
contemplated by subsection (B)(7) below.
      (6)   Payment of an out-of-court settlement or a late out-of-court
settlement or subsequent out-of-court settlement shall be without any admission
of guilt by the alleged violator. Upon payment in the amounts and within the
times specified therefor, the matter shall be closed and no further action
shall be taken to pursue the issue, including the filing of any complaint in
the Circuit Court of the county.
      (7)   If no out-of-court settlement or late out-of-court settlement
payment is received by the end of the 20th day after the citation is issued,
unless the alleged violator thereafter shall have paid the settlement amount
required in accordance with subsection (B)(5) above, customary procedures may
then be followed to pursue enforcement action against the alleged violator,
including, but not limited to, the filing of a complaint in the Circuit Court
of the county.
      (8)   If payment of an out-of-court settlement or late out-of-court
settlement hereunder is made by tender of any type of negotiable instrument,
and the same is dishonored or payment thereof is refused for any reason, the
village may, in addition to exercise of any and all other remedies available to
it, pursue the original citation by all appropriate means, including, but not
limited to, filing a complaint in the Circuit Court of the county.
      (9)   The village shall establish and amend, from time to time, a written
list of out-of-court settlement amounts and late out-of-court settlement
amounts for each violation of the code which will be cited by members of the
Police Department, which written list will be adopted as part of the Annual Fee
Ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 1-5) (Ord. 817, passed 6-12-1995; Ord. 1044, passed 8-23-2010;
Ord. 1188, passed 1-23-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-
1.1
   Limitations on penalties and collection upon default in payment, see 65 ILCS
5/1-2-1
CHAPTER 11: CORPORATE LIMITS
Section
   
11.01   Corporate limits
   
11.02   Extent of jurisdiction and ordinances
   
11.03   Village datum
§ 11.01 CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   The Village of Kenilworth extends over and includes all those portions
of Sections 21, 22, 27 and 28 in Township 42 North, Range 13 East of the Third
Principal Meridian, which lie within the following described boundaries and
lands therein:
      (1)   Beginning at a point on the north line of Section 28, township and
range aforesaid, 132.16 feet west of the northeast corner of the section, and
running thence northeasterly along the centerline and the centerline extended
of Winnetka Avenue, 982.0 feet to the water’s edge of Lake Michigan, thence
southeasterly along the water’s edge of Lake Michigan, 3,000 feet more or less
to the east line of the northwest quarter of Section 27, township and range
aforesaid; thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of Section
27, 1,320.0 feet to the southeast corner of the northwest quarter; thence west
along the south line of the northwest quarter 2,671.5 feet to the southwest
corner of the northwest quarter; thence south along the east line of the
northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 28 aforesaid, 492.3 feet;
thence west parallel with the north line of the northeast quarter of the
southeast quarter, 1,327.3 feet to the west line thereof; thence north along
the west line of the northeast quarter of southeast quarter, 492.3 feet to the
northwest corner thereof; thence east along the north line of the northeast
quarter of southeast quarter, 246.0 feet to the northeasterly line of the
right-of-way of the Chicago and North Western Railway Company; thence
northwesterly along the northeasterly line of the right-of-way, 2,366.0 feet to
a point 664.3 feet south of, as measured at right angles to the north line of
the northeast quarter of Section 28 aforesaid; thence east parallel with the
north line of die northeast quarter, 1,022.4 feet to the west line of the east
half of the northeast quarter; thence north along the west line of the east
half of northeast quarter, 664.3 feet to the northwest corner thereof; thence
east along the north line of the east half of northeast quarter, 1,196.64 feet
to the point of beginning;
      (2)   The north 492.3 feet of the northwest quarter of the southeast
quarter; also all that part of the northeast quarter lying and being
southwesterly of the northeasterly line of the right-of-way of the Chicago and
North Western Railway and south of a line which is 13.46 chains south of and
parallel with the north line of the northeast quarter, all being in Section 28
of the township and range aforesaid;
      (3)   All of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter (except the
north 492.3 feet thereof), of the Section 28; and
      (4)   Beginning at the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of the
southwest quarter of the Section 28, and running thence west along the south
line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter to the centerline of
Ridge Road (also known as Ridge Avenue); thence northwesterly along the
centerline of the Ridge Road to the north line of the south half of the north
half of the northwest quarter of the Section 28; thence east along the north
line of the south half of the north half of northwest quarter to the east line
of the west half of the Section 28; thence south along the east line of the
west half of the Section 28 to the point of beginning and including within the
limits of the hereinabove described territory the following lots, blocks,
tracts and parcels of land, to-wit:
         (a)   Lot 1 in the subdivision (known also as Lauermann’s Subdivision)
of the south 100 acres of the southwest quarter of the Section 28;
         (b)   Those portions lying east of the centerline of Ridge Road of
Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 in Barbara Wagner’s Subdivision of the south 50 acres
of die north 60 acres of the southwest quarter of the Section 28;
         (c)   That part lying east of the centerline of Ridge Road of the
north ten acres of the southwest quarter of the Section 28;
         (d)   That part lying east of the centerline of Ridge Road of that
part of the south half of the northwest quarter of the Section 28 lying south
of the north 15.0 chains thereof;
         (e)   Lots 1 to 17 inclusive in McLean’s Subdivision of that part of
the south 4.83-l/3 chains of the north 15.0 chains of the south half of the
northwest quarter of the Section 28 lying east of the centerline of Ridge Road;
         (f)   Lots 1 to 17 inclusive in Indian Hill Ridge, being a subdivision
of that part east of Ridge Road of the south 4.83-1/3 chains of the north
10.16-2/3 chains of the south half of the northwest quarter of the Section 28;
also Lots 1 to 23 inclusive in Manus’ Indian Hill Subdivision Number Four,
being a subdivision of the north 5.33-1/3 chains (352 feet) of that part of the
south half of the northwest quarter of the Section 28 lying east of the
centerline of Church Road, also known as County or Ridge Road;
         (g)   Lots 1 to 26 inclusive in Manus’ Indian Hill Subdivision Number
Three, being a subdivision of that part of the south half of the south half of
the north half of the northwest quarter of Section 28 lying east of the
centerline of Church Road, also known as County or Ridge Road; also that part
lying east of the centerline of Ridge Road of the north half of the south half
of the north half of the northwest quarter of Section 28; and
         (h)   Including all streets, roads, highways, ditches and railroad
rights-of-way lying and being within all the aforesaid lands.
   (B)   Appended to this code and made a part of this section, is a true and
correct outline map showing the corporate limits and boundaries, section lines
and measurements on boundary lines, location of streets and location and extent
of shore of Lake Michigan adjacent to the village.
(1959 Code, § 1-13)
§ 11.02 EXTENT OF JURISDICTION AND ORDINANCES.
   All the territory embraced within the corporate limits of the village and so
much of the water and bed of Lake Michigan as lie within three miles of the
west shore thereof, and adjoining and being east of the territory described in
§
11.01 are hereby declared to be subject to the jurisdiction and ordinances of
the village.
(1959 Code, § 1-9)
§ 11.03 VILLAGE DATUM.
   The base or datum for all grades hereafter fixed or provided for public
improvements or other purposes within the village, shall be and is hereby
established at the plane of low water mark of Lake Michigan, in the year 1847,
as determined by the Trustees of the Illinois and Michigan Canal, and which
plane is located 34.47 feet below the flattened top of a point of rock on the
east side of the archway at the northeast corner of the Chicago and North
Western Railway depot in the village, the point of rock being 2.95 feet below
the top of the cut stone sill of the archway. All grades hereafter established
shall have reference to the base or datum herein fixed.
(1959 Code, § 1-12)
Editor’s note:
   Lake Michigan 579.6 feet above mean tide level New York City; U.S. Survey
Monument, Green Bay Road and Park Drive, elevation 614.081 feet
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   ELECTED OFFICIALS
      
31.   APPOINTED OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   DEPARTMENTS
      
33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
34.   ETHICS
      
35.   TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: ELECTED OFFICIALS
Section
Elected Offices Generally
   
30.01   Elections
   
30.02   Qualifications
   
30.03   Commencement of terms for elected village officials
   
30.04   Failure to qualify for office
   
30.05   Oath
   
30.06   Bond
   
30.07   Compensation
   
30.08   Duty upon termination of office
   
30.09   Vacancy
   30.10 through 30.19   Reserved
Village President
   
30.20   Election and term of office
   
30.21   Powers and duties
   
30.22   President Pro Tem and temporary Chair
   30.23 through 30.29   Reserved
Trustees
   
30.30   Election, term of office and functions
   30.31 through 30.39   Reserved
Board of Trustees
   
30.40   Composition of Board
   
30.41   Regular Board meetings
   
30.42   Special and emergency meetings
   
30.43   Order of business
   
30.44   Procedures and rules
   
30.45   Quorum
   
30.46   Reconsideration at special meetings
   
30.47   Presiding officer and vote
   
30.48   Approval of actions; veto powers
   
30.49   Reconsideration; passing over veto
   
30.50   Village Board Committees
   30.51 through 30.59   Reserved
Village Clerk
   
30.60   Election and term of office
   
30.61   Custody of seal
   
30.62   Attesting
   
30.63   Meetings and minutes
   
30.64   Notice of meetings
   
30.65   Filing of tax levy ordinance with County Clerk
   
30.66   Records
   
30.67   Publication of Village Treasurer’s report
   
30.68   Recording and publication of ordinances
   
30.69   Records and notices of election
   
30.70   Conduct of elections
   
30.71   Additional duties
   
30.72   Deputy Village Clerks
ELECTED OFFICES GENERALLY
§ 30.01 ELECTIONS.
   Elections for village offices shall be held at the time and in the manner
provided by statute.
§ 30.02 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall be eligible to be an elected officer of the village
unless he or she is a qualified elector of the village and has resided therein
for at least one year preceding his or her election or appointment.
   (B)   No person shall be eligible to be an elected officer of the village
who is in arrears in the payment of any tax or other indebtedness due to the
village, or has been convicted in any court located in the United States of any
infamous crime, bribery, perjury or other felony.
§ 30.03 COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS FOR ELECTED VILLAGE OFFICIALS.
   Terms for the Village President, Village Trustees and Village Clerk elected
at the municipal election shall commence at the first regular or special
meeting of May after receipt of the official election results from the County
Clerk for the municipal election at which the officers were elected.
§ 30.04 FAILURE TO QUALIFY FOR OFFICE.
   If any elected officer fails to qualify within 30 days, except as otherwise
specified by ordinance or statute, from the time he or she is notified by the
Village Clerk of his or her election, the office shall be deemed vacant.
§ 30.05 OATH.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, all elected village
officers shall take and subscribe the oath or affirmation of office as
prescribed by statute. This oath or affirmation, so subscribed, shall be filed
in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 30.06 BOND.
   All elected officers, before entering upon his or her duties, shall execute
a bond in the manner provided by law, conditioned upon the faithful performance
of his or her duties and approved by the corporate authorities. The premium of
such bonds shall be paid by the village. The bonds of the Village President,
Village Trustees and Village Treasurer shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
The bond of the Village Clerk shall be filed with the Village Treasurer.
§ 30.07 COMPENSATION.
   No elected officer shall receive salary or other compensation from the
village for his or her services, except reimbursement for expenses incurred in
connection with village business as the Board of Trustees may direct from time
to time.
§ 30.08 DUTY UPON TERMINATION OF OFFICE.
   Upon termination of his or her incumbency in office, every elected officer
of the village shall deliver to his or her successor all books, records and
property that belong to the village or he or she has received in his or her
official capacity. If no successor is appointed within five days after the
termination of the incumbency, the books, records and property shall be
delivered to the Village Clerk.
§ 30.09 VACANCY.
   If a vacancy in an elected office occurs during the term for which an
officer was elected, such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the
applicable provisions set forth in the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-
1 et seq., as amended.
§§ 30.10 THROUGH 30.19 RESERVED.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
§ 30.20 ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Village President shall be elected by the electors of the village for a
term of four years and until his or her successor is elected and has qualified.
§ 30.21 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Village President shall be the chief executive officer of the
village.
   (B)   The Village President shall devote to the duties of his or her office
whatever time the faithful discharge thereof may require.
   (C)   In addition to the foregoing, the Village President shall perform all
such other duties and acts and have all additional powers that are or may be
prescribed by the laws of the state, or the ordinances of the village.
§ 30.22 PRESIDENT PRO TEM AND TEMPORARY CHAIR.
   A temporary absence or disability of the Village President incapacitating
him or her from the performance of his or her duties does not create a vacancy
in the office. In that case, the Trustees shall elect one of their number to
act as Village President Pro Tem. The Village President Pro Tem, during the
Village President’s absence or disability, shall perform the duties and possess
all the rights and powers of the Village President. Where the Village President
or Village President Pro Tem is only temporarily absent from a meeting, but
ready and able to assume his or her duties upon his or her imminent return, the
Trustees shall elect one of their number to act as a temporary Chair. He or she
shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and the right to vote as a
Trustee.
(Ord. 1265, passed 9-21-2020)
§§ 30.23 THROUGH 30.29 RESERVED.
TRUSTEES
§ 30.30 ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE AND FUNCTIONS.
   There shall be six Trustees of the village, each of whom shall be elected to
office for a four-year term and until his or her successors are elected and
have qualified as is provided by statute. The terms shall be staggered such
that the terms of one-half of the Trustees shall be subject to election every
two years. The Trustees shall perform such duties and have such powers as may
be authorized by statute.
§§ 30.31 THROUGH 30.39 RESERVED.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 30.40 COMPOSITION OF BOARD.
   The Board of Trustees shall consist of the Village President and the six
village Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall be the legislative department of
the village government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as
may be authorized by statute.
§ 30.41 REGULAR BOARD MEETINGS.
   The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held on the third
Monday of each month of the year at the hour of 7:30 p.m. at the Kenilworth
Village Hall, except as may be modified by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with applicable law. No meeting of the Village Board or any other meeting
required to be open to the public shall be held on a legal holiday unless the
regular meeting day falls on that holiday. Unless otherwise specified in the
notice of the meeting, all meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held in
the Kenilworth Village Hall, including special adjourned meetings, and all
meetings, except executive sessions, shall be open to the public as is required
by statute.
§ 30.42 SPECIAL AND EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   (A)   Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Village
President or by any three Trustees by written request or notice being filed
with the Village Clerk at least 48 hours prior to the time specified for such
meeting. At least 48 hours’ written notice of such special meeting shall be
given by the Clerk, which notice shall specify the time and purpose of, and an
agenda for, such meeting and shall be delivered to each member of the Board
personally if he or she can be found, and if he or she cannot be found, then by
leaving a copy of such notice at the home of such Board member in the presence
of an adult member of the family of the member of the Board, or by electronic
mail if the Board member has provided an electronic mail address to the Village
Clerk for such purpose.
   (B)   Emergency meetings. In the event of a bona fide emergency, an
emergency meeting may be called by the Village President or by any three
Trustees by written request or notice being filed with the Village Clerk.
Notice of an emergency meeting shall be given as soon as practicable.
   (C)   Notice. The Village Clerk shall cause an affidavit showing service of
such notice provided to be filed in his or her office prior to the time fixed
for such special or emergency meeting, together with a statement of compliance
with the notices to members of the media as provided by statute. The failure to
cause such an affidavit and statement of compliance to be prepared shall not
invalidate any action taken at such special or emergency meeting which is
otherwise accomplished in accordance with law. Any Board member who appears and
participates in such special or emergency meeting with regard to a matter
contained within the call of such meeting shall waive any irregularity in
service.
§ 30.43 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The order of business shall be determined from time to time by the actions
of the Board of Trustees.
§ 30.44 PROCEDURES AND RULES.
   Robert’s Rules of Order, as revised, shall govern the proceedings of all
meetings, insofar as they are applicable. The Board of Trustees may also, by
resolution duly adopted, approve protocols and procedures applicable to
meetings and activities of the corporate authorities and its members.
§ 30.45 QUORUM.
   A majority of the corporate authorities, as defined by the Illinois
Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., as amended, shall constitute a quorum
to do business, and except as otherwise provided in this code or by statute,
the action of the corporate authorities shall be controlled by a majority vote
of those present.
§ 30.46 RECONSIDERATION AT SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   No vote of the Board shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting
unless at the meeting there be present as large a number of Trustees as were
present when the vote was taken.
§ 30.47 PRESIDING OFFICER AND VOTE.
   The Village President shall preside at all meetings of the Board of
Trustees. He or she shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion,
except where the vote of the Trustees has resulted in a tie; where one-half of
the Trustees elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion
even though there is no tie vote; or where a vote greater than a majority of
the corporate authorities is required by statute or ordinance to adopt an
ordinance, resolution, or motion. Nothing in this section shall deprive an
Acting Village President or Village President Pro Tem from voting in this
capacity as a Trustee, but he or she shall not be entitled to another vote in
his or her capacity as Acting Village President or Village President Pro Tem.
§ 30.48 APPROVAL OF ACTIONS; VETO POWERS.
   All resolutions and motions which create any liability against the village;
which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money; or to sell any
village property, and all ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees, shall be
deposited with the Village Clerk. If the Village President approves of an
ordinance or resolution, he or she shall sign it. If he or she disapproves of
an ordinance, resolution or motion, he or she shall return them to the Board of
Trustees with his or her written objections at the next regular meeting of the
Board of Trustees occurring not less than five days after their passage. The
Village President may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any
ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the
remainder shall be effective. The Village President may disapprove entirely of
an ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation. If the Village
President fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motion
with his or her written objections within the designated time, it shall become
effective despite the absence of his or her signature.
§ 30.49 RECONSIDERATION; PASSING OVER VETO.
   Every resolution, motion and ordinance which is returned to the Board of
Trustees by the Village President pursuant to §
30.48 of this code shall be reconsidered by the Board of Trustees at the next
regular meeting following the regular meeting at which the Board of Trustees
receives the Village President’s objection. If, after such reconsideration,
two-thirds of all the Trustees then holding office agree at that regular
meeting to pass an ordinance, resolution, or motion, notwithstanding the
Village President’s refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote
on a question of passage over the Village President's veto shall be by yeas and
nays, and shall be recorded in the journal.
§ 30.50 VILLAGE BOARD COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Standing committees. The following committees are hereby established
as standing committees of the village.
      (1)   The Committee of the Whole.
      (2)   The Finance Committee.
      (3)   The Public Safety/Community Affairs Committee.
      (4)   The Building, Planning and Zoning Committee.
      (5)   The Public Works Committee.
   (B)   Special committees. The Board of Trustees may, from time to time by
resolution duly adopted, establish, modify or abolish additional committees of
its members to address specific issues.
   (C)   Membership and Chair.
      (1)   The Committee of the Whole shall consist of the President and all
Village Trustees. The President shall serve as Chair of the Committee of the
Whole.
      (2)   For all committees established pursuant to this section other than
the Committee of the Whole, there shall be three members, each of whom shall be
appointed by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. The Village President shall appoint, with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees, one of the members of each committee other than the
Committee of the Whole to serve as Chair of the Committee. The President shall
be an ex officio member of each committee other than the Committee of the
Whole.
      (3)   Unless otherwise specifically provided by law or ordinance, the
members of all committees or commissions shall hold their offices from the date
of their appointment and qualification for a period of one year and until their
successors have been duly appointed and qualified.
   (D)   Meetings. Committee meetings shall be held at such times and places as
may be necessary for the proper accomplishment of village business, as
determined and scheduled by the Board of Trustees. Notice of committee meetings
shall be given in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 1265, passed 9-21-2020)
§§ 30.51 THROUGH 30.59 RESERVED.
VILLAGE CLERK
§ 30.60 ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Village Clerk shall be elected to office and serve for a four-year term
and until his or her successor is elected and qualified, as provided by
statute.
§ 30.61 CUSTODY OF SEAL.
   The Clerk shall be the custodian of the village seal, and shall affix its
impression on documents whenever required.
§ 30.62 ATTESTING.
   The Clerk shall seal and attest all licenses, permits and such other
documents as shall require this formality.
§ 30.63 MEETINGS AND MINUTES.
   The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Village Board and keep a full
record of its proceedings in the journal which shall be preserved by the Clerk.
§ 30.64 NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
   The Clerk shall issue and cause to be served upon all members of the Board
of Trustees notices of all meetings of the Board that are required by law.
§ 30.65 FILING OF TAX LEVY ORDINANCE WITH COUNTY CLERK.
   The Clerk shall within the time required by statute, in each year, file with
the County Clerk a certified copy of the ordinance in which the total amount
budgeted for all corporate purposes of the village, legally made, is levied and
assessed.
§ 30.66 RECORDS.
   The Clerk shall be the custodian of this code and of all documents belonging
to the village which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer or
employee. In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the
Clerk is required by statute to keep, the Clerk shall keep a register of all
licenses and permits issued and the payments thereon; and such other records as
may be required from time to time by the Board of Trustees. The Clerk shall
keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept by him or
her, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
§ 30.67 PUBLICATION OF VILLAGE TREASURER’S REPORT.
   Upon receipt of the annual report of the Village Treasurer prepared pursuant
to § 31.29 of this code, the Clerk shall cause the annual report to be
published at least once, in one or more newspapers published within the
village, as required by statute.
§ 30.68 RECORDING AND PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The Clerk shall cause to be published any ordinance required to be published
by statute and shall note on each ordinance the date of its passage, the date
of its approval if approved by the President, and if published, the date of
publication.
§ 30.69 RECORDS AND NOTICES OF ELECTION.
   The Clerk shall keep a record of the election or appointment and
confirmation of all officers of the village, and the record shall exhibit the
name of the officer, to what office elected or appointed, the date or
confirmation of election, the date of his or her commission, and the date of
death, resignation, removal from office, or expiration of term of office. He or
she shall, within five days after the result of any election is declared or
appointment is made, notify all persons elected or appointed.
§ 30.70 CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS.
   The Clerk shall carry out all duties relating to Village elections as may be
authorized by the Village Board or as shall be provided by statute.
§ 30.71 ADDITIONAL DUTIES.
   In addition to the duties herein provided, the Clerk shall perform such
other duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance.
§ 30.72 DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERKS.
   (A)   The Village Clerk, with approval from the Village Board, may appoint
one or more Deputy Village Clerks to assist in the performance of the duties of
the Village Clerk. Deputy Village Clerks shall act under the supervision of the
Village Clerk, and shall assist in the performance of the duties required of
the Village Clerk by state statute and village ordinances. Deputy Village
Clerks shall have the power and duty to execute all documents required by law
to be executed by the Village Clerk, and affix the village seal thereto,
wherever required, under the direction and with the approval of the Village
Clerk.
   (B)   During the absence or disability of the Village Clerk, the Deputy
Village Clerks shall have all the powers and duties of the Village Clerk and
shall perform all functions thereof and such other duties as may be assigned to
the Deputy Village Clerk.
   (C)   Deputy Village Clerks shall not be required to post a bond pursuant to
§
30.06 of this code. The appointment of Deputy Village Clerks shall not relieve
the elected Village Clerk of full responsibility for the fidelity of any Deputy
Village Clerk or for the proper discharge of the Village Clerk’s duties.
CHAPTER 31: APPOINTED OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
Officers and Employees Generally
   
31.01   Provisions and definitions
   
31.02   Appointment of employees
   
31.03   Failure to qualify for office
   
31.04   Term of office for appointed officers
   
31.05   Vacancy
   
31.06   Oath of office
   
31.07   Compensation
   
31.08   Inspection of records
   
31.09   Delivery of records upon termination
   
31.10   Monies received
   
31.11   Misconduct of officers
   31.12 through 31.19   Reserved
Village Treasurer
   
31.20   Office established; appointment and term of office
   
31.21   Qualifications
   
31.22   Bond
   
31.23   General duties
   
31.24   Deposit of funds; private use of funds
   
31.25   Special assessment funds
   
31.26   Warrants; payment of bills; transfer of funds
   
31.27   Annual report of Village Treasurer
   
31.28   Additional duties
   31.29 through 31.39   Reserved
Village Manager
   
31.40   Creation and appointment
   
31.41   Term of office
   
31.42   Temporary absence or permanent vacancy
   
31.43   Compensation
   
31.44   Bond
   
31.45   Powers and duties
   31.46 through 31.49   Reserved
Village Comptroller
   
31.50   Office established; appointment and term of office
   
31.51   Bond
   
31.52   Compensation
   
31.53   Powers and duties
   31.54 through 31.59   Reserved
Village Collector
   
31.60   Office established; appointment and term of office
   
31.61   Bond
   
31.62   Compensation
   
31.63   Powers and duties
   31.64 through 31.69   Reserved
Village Budget Officer
   
31.70   Office established; appointment and term of office
   
31.71   Bond
   
31.72   Powers and duties
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
§ 31.01 PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
   Section 31.01 through 31.11 shall apply to all appointed officers and
employees of the village, regardless of the time of the creation of the office
or position or the time of the appointment of the officer or employee. Wherever
the following words or phrases are used, they shall, for purposes of this
chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the
context otherwise indicates:
   (A)   Employee. All at-will positions appointed by the Village Manager or
other positions governed by a collective bargaining agreement.
   (B)   Officer. All village elected officials, the Village Treasurer,
appointed members of Village commissions and boards, and the Village Manager.
§ 31.02 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   Except as specifically provided to the contrary by law or this code, all
employees shall be appointed by the Village Manager.
§ 31.03 FAILURE TO QUALIFY FOR OFFICE.
   If any appointed officer fails to qualify for office within 30 days, except
as otherwise specified by ordinance or statute, from the time he or she is
notified by the Village Clerk of his or her appointment, the office shall be
deemed vacant.
§ 31.04 TERM OF OFFICE FOR APPOINTED OFFICERS.
   Appointed officers of the village shall hold office for a term of one year
commencing on May 1 and ending on April 30 of the following year, or until his
or her successor is elected or appointed and qualified, unless otherwise
provided herein or by ordinance. Except as otherwise provided by law, any
officer appointed by the Village President with the consent of the Board of
Trustees may be removed by the Village President at any time without cause.
§ 31.05 VACANCY.
   In the event a vacancy occurs, it shall be filled in the same manner in
which appointments are made in the absence of provisions to the contrary.
§ 31.06 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every officer of the village, except appointed members of village
commissions and boards shall, before entering upon his or her duties, take the
oath or affirmation prescribed by statute. This oath or affirmation, so
subscribed, shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
§ 31.07 COMPENSATION.
   Appointed officers and employees of the village shall receive such
compensation as may from time to time be provided by the Board of Trustees or
by ordinance.
§ 31.08 INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   All records kept by any officer or employee of the village shall be open to
inspection at all reasonable times by the President, any Village Trustee, or
the Village Manager whether or not such records are required to be kept by
statute or ordinance.
§ 31.09 DELIVERY OF RECORDS UPON TERMINATION.
   All officers of the village, upon the expiration of their terms or
employment for whatever cause, shall deliver to their successors all property,
books, records and effects belonging to the village, or appertaining to the
office they have held, within five days after notification and request to do
so. If no successor has been appointed, such property shall be delivered to the
Village Clerk or Village Treasurer. Any officer that violates this section
shall be liable for all the damages caused thereby and shall be fined in the
amount set forth in the annual fee resolution.
§ 31.10 MONIES RECEIVED.
   All officers of the village shall turn over to the Village Treasurer all
monies paid to the village and received by the officer or employee in his or
her official capacity, within five days of receipt, along with a statement
showing the sources from which the money was received.
§ 31.11 MISCONDUCT OF OFFICERS.
   Every village officer who is guilty of a culpable omission of duty, or who
is guilty of willful and corrupt oppression, misconduct, or malfeasance in the
discharge of the duties of his or her office, shall be guilty of a business
offense and, on conviction, shall be fined in an amount established in §
10.99 of this code.
§§ 31.12 THROUGH 31.19 RESERVED.
VILLAGE TREASURER
§ 31.20 OFFICE ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   There is hereby established the office of Village Treasurer, who shall be
appointed by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. The Village Treasurer shall serve from the date of his or her
appointment and qualification until the end of the fiscal year and until his or
her successor has been duly appointed and qualified, and shall immediately
relinquish his or her office and its records to such person as may be named as
his or her successor.
§ 31.21 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village Treasurer
unless he or she is a qualified elector of the village and has resided therein
at least one year preceding his or her appointment.
   (B)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village Treasurer
who is in arrears in the payment of any tax or other indebtedness due to the
village.
§ 31.22 BOND.
   The Village Treasurer, before entering upon the duties of his or her office,
shall execute a bond in a sum as shall be determined from time to time by
ordinance or resolution of the Board of Trustees that is an amount not less
than that is required by Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., as
amended, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties, to be
approved by the corporate authorities and filed with the Village Clerk. The
premium of such bond shall be paid by the village.
§ 31.23 GENERAL DUTIES.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer, or his or her designee, shall exercise the
powers and duties prescribed by law and ordinance and other duties as may be
required of him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall keep books and accounts in such manner as
required by statute or ordinance, in accordance with good accounting practice,
and in the manner prescribed by the Board of Trustees. The Village Treasurer
shall keep records showing all money received by him or her, showing the source
from which it is received and the purpose for which it is paid, and shall keep
records at all times showing the financial status of the village.
   (C)   When required by the corporate authorities, the Village Treasurer
shall make a written report of all money collected by him or her, the account
whereon collected, and any other matter pertaining to his or her office.
§ 31.24 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS; PRIVATE USE OF FUNDS.
   The Village Treasurer shall keep all funds belonging to the village on
deposit in the official depositories designated by the Village Board, in manner
provided by law, which funds shall be so deposited to the credit of the proper
bank account in the name of the village. The Village Treasurer shall keep the
deposit of the municipal money separate and distinct from his or her own money,
and shall not make private or personal use of any municipal money.
§ 31.25 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS.
   The Village Treasurer shall keep all special assessment warrant books,
publish for delinquent special assessments and send notices of such
delinquencies to the County Collector, all as prescribed by statute. All monies
received on any special assessment shall be held by the Village Treasurer in
special funds, one for each assessment, to be applied only to the payment of
the improvement, or bonds and vouchers issued therefor, together with interest
thereon, for which the assessment was made. Such monies shall be used for no
other purpose, unless to reimburse the village for money expended for such
improvement. Payment on bonds or vouchers shall be made in accordance with
applicable law, and the Village Treasurer shall keep books and accounts in such
a manner that proper prorations in payments of principal and interest can be
made and ascertained.
§ 31.26 WARRANTS; PAYMENT OF BILLS; TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   Bills and obligations of the village shall be paid in accordance with the
following requirements:
   (A)   Classification of warrants. Warrants are classified and defined as
follows:
      (1)   Class A warrants are all warrants that are not Class B warrants;
and
      (2)   Class B warrants are warrants relating to payroll and non-payroll
taxes; utility payments; flat rate contractual services; monthly credit card
charges; the reimbursement of imprest accounts established for the payment of
health care and worker’s compensation claims; the return of funds from escrow
accounts; payments to correct an error; and items which, in the judgment of the
Village Manager, should be paid prior to the next regular meeting of the Board
of Trustees to avoid additional expense to the village. If the item is $20,000
or more, the Board must have previously approved the expenditure.
   (B)   Approval/ratification of warrants.
      (1)   All warrants shall be signed by the Village President and
countersigned by the Village Clerk upon approval or ratification of the same by
the Village Board.
      (2)   All Class A warrants shall require the approval of the Village
Board, in connection with the warrants list procedure, prior to the issuance of
the same.
      (3)   All Class B warrants may be issued by the Village Treasurer or
without prior approval of the Village Board; provided, however, that the
issuance of Class B warrants shall be ratified by the Village Board, in
connection with the warrants list procedure, at the next regular or special
meeting of the Village Board.
   (C)   Warrants list procedure. A list of all Class A warrants to be paid,
and all Class B warrants previously paid, shall be prepared by the Village
Treasurer and submitted to the Village Board for review on a monthly basis, or
a more or less frequent basis, as the Village Treasurer may deem necessary.
Approval by the Village Board of the warrants list by a roll call vote at a
regular or special meeting of the Village Board shall constitute approval of
all Class A warrants and ratification of all Class B warrants; provided that
the Village Board may, in its sole discretion, except from the approval
specific Class A warrants, in which case the Class A warrants shall not be
issued.
   (D)   Method of payment. Warrants issued pursuant to this section shall be
paid by the Village Treasurer only in the form of a check, wire or other
electronic transfer.
   (E)   Signatures required. All Class A warrants and all Class B warrants
shall be signed by the Village President and shall be countersigned by the
Village Treasurer. In the absence of the Village Treasurer, all checks shall be
manually countersigned by the Village Manager.
   (F)   Facsimile signature. The signatures of the Village President and
Village Treasurer on checks and warrants issued pursuant to this §
31.26 may be by facsimile signature provided that the facsimile signature
complies with the requirements of the Uniform Facsimile Signature of Public
Officials Act (30 ILCS 320/1 et seq.).
   (G)   Maturity account. For convenience in paying matured bonds, coupons and
similar obligations to unknown owners on due date, the Village Treasurer shall
keep a fiscal agency account in the official depository bank, to which account
funds for paying all maturing obligations shall be transferred by regular
village warrant, duly countersigned, after which the funds shall be disbursed
by the trust department of the official depository bank, as fiscal agent, on
written authorization of the Village President, the Village Clerk and the
Village Treasurer or by a resolution of the Village Board, and not otherwise.
   (H)   Reports. In conjunction with the Village Comptroller, Village
Collector and Village Auditors, the Village Treasurer shall make reports of the
finances of the village as may be required by law or ordinances of the village.
   (I)   Cancelled warrants and securities. The Village Treasurer shall cancel
all warrants and securities paid and redeemed by him or her and shall deliver
the same, monthly, to the Village Comptroller for filing in the village office.
(Am. Ord. 1141, passed 4-20-2015; Am. Ord. 1150, passed 8-17-2015)
§ 31.27 ANNUAL REPORT OF VILLAGE TREASURER.
   Within six months after the end of each fiscal year, the Village Treasurer
shall prepare and file with the Village Clerk an account of all monies received
and expenditures incurred during the fiscal year just ended, as prescribed by
state law. A copy of the annual account of the Village Treasurer shall also be
filed with the County Collector of Taxes who collects taxes levied by the
Village, together with an affidavit of the Village Clerk certifying its
publication as required by law and its correctness.
§ 31.28 ADDITIONAL DUTIES.
   In addition to the duties herein provided, the Village Treasurer shall
perform such other duties and functions as may be required of municipal
treasurers or of municipal collectors by statute or ordinance.
§§ 31.29 THROUGH 31.39 RESERVED.
VILLAGE MANAGER
§ 31.40 CREATION AND APPOINTMENT.
   The office of Village Manager is hereby created as a full-time position. The
Village Manager may not engage in other employment without the approval of the
Board of Trustees. The Village Manager shall be appointed by the Village
President and Trustees, voting jointly.
§ 31.41 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of the Village Manager shall be as provided by written
contract between the Village and the Village Manager.
§ 31.42 TEMPORARY ABSENCE OR PERMANENT VACANCY.
   If the Village Manager temporarily is unable to perform the duties of the
office, the Village Manager may appoint a temporary successor to act as acting
Village Manager to perform the duties of the office for a period of 15 days or
less, and may appoint a temporary successor for a longer period with the
approval of the Board of Trustees. If a permanent vacancy occurs, the vacancy
shall be filled in accordance with the appointment procedures set forth in §
31.05 of this code.
§ 31.43 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Manager shall receive compensation in such amount and manner as
provided in the written contract between the village and the Village Manager.
§ 31.44 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Village Manager shall
execute a bond in a sum as shall be determined from time to time by ordinance
or resolution of the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his or her duties, and shall be conditioned to indemnify the
village for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any act of the Village
Manager. The bond shall be approved by the corporate authorities and filed with
the Village Clerk. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the village.
§ 31.45 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Village Manager shall have the following powers and shall perform the
following duties:
   (A)   General duties. The Village Manager shall act as the business and
administrative officer and manager of the village, under the direction of the
Village Board and in cooperation with the President, Clerk, Treasurer, Village
Legal Counsel and other elective or appointive officials, and he or she shall
be responsible for the supervision and management of all administrative
departments, employees and officers of the village except where the management
and control of any department or office is expressly delegated elsewhere by law
or by ordinance of the village.
   (B)   Personnel. Subject to the general supervision of the Village Board and
to the limitations imposed by adoption of a budget or special appropriation,
the Village Manager shall appoint and fix the salaries and wages of all
administrative officers and employees whose appointment is not otherwise
provided by law or ordinance, and he or she shall have the power and authority
to remove all officers and employees appointed by him or her.
   (C)   Purchasing and contracting. The Village Manager shall act ex officio
as purchasing agent and shall exercise and perform, or superintend and direct,
all duties and be subject to all requirements and obligations pertaining to
that office, in accordance with the following provisions.
      (1)   Reports. The Village Manager shall prepare, or cause to be
prepared, reports which may be called for by the Village Board from time to
time, showing in detail satisfactory to the Village Board purchases made under
the provisions of this section.
      (2)   General. Subject to the direction of and powers reserved to the
Village Board, the Village Manager shall purchase or approve the purchase of
all construction, repair and maintenance projects, supplies and services for
the village, as provided in this section.
      (3)   Rules and regulations. The Village Manager shall have the power to
issue rules and regulations that set forth the processes and requirements for
all purchases made by the village.
      (4)   Budget or appropriation required. No purchase shall be made without
an approved budgetary allocation or appropriation by the Village Board in the
amount of the purchase.
      (5)   Approval of purchases. The Village Manager, or his or her designee,
shall have the power to make all purchases involving a total expenditure of
less than $20,000. All other purchases shall require the approval of the
Village Board.
      (6)   Competitive bidding. Any work or other public improvement, not
constructed under the Local Improvements Act, when the expense shall exceed
$20,000, shall be let by contract to the lowest responsible bidder, after
advertising for bids in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, not
less than 15 days prior to the date bids are to be received; provided, however,
that any contract may be entered into without advertising for bids upon the
affirmative vote of two-thirds of all the Trustees then holding office.
      (7)   Credit purchases. The Village Manager is authorized to approve the
use of credit cards and credit accounts for officials and employees of the
village to reasonably facilitate the making of purchases in amounts of less
than $20,000 pursuant to this section. Any purchases made using credit shall be
within approved budget allocations and appropriations.
      (8)   Examination and execution of contracts. The Village Manager shall
examine all proposed contracts governed by this section to which the village
may be a party, and may sign on behalf of the village any contract and other
documents necessary to complete any purchase approved by the Village Board,
except where the Village Board directs that some other officer or officers
shall do so.
      (9)   Emergency purchases. The Village Manager may make purchases and
enter into contracts on behalf of the village in the case of accidents or other
circumstances creating an emergency where necessary to protect life, the public
health and safety and public property, by a process as may be practicable under
the circumstances. All emergency procurements involving expenditures of $20,000
or more must be presented to the Village Board for ratification at the next
scheduled Village Board meeting.
      (10)   Contract performance. The Village Manager shall be responsible to
assure that the terms of any contract governed by this section to which the
village is a party are properly performed by all parties.
      (11)   Approval of payments. No bill shall be paid for goods purchased
unless the person requisitioning the purchase shall have indicated to the
Village Manager that the goods have been received and unless the bill shall be
approved by the person who requisitioned the purchase and the Village Manager.
      (12)   Petty cash. Authorized petty cash funds may be used for purchases
by persons other than the Village Manager and may be replenished if
requisitions for purchases out of the funds shall be approved by the Village
Manager.
   (D)   Budget estimate and administrative reports. The Village Manager shall
prepare and present to the Village Board, prior to the expiration of each
fiscal year, a budget estimate of general fund income and expenditures for the
ensuing year. He or she shall at all times keep the Village President and Board
informed of the operation of the village government, and when requested,
prepare and present to the Board a written report summarizing the work of each
department, and an annual report thereof, including a statement of the
financial condition of the village, together with his or her recommendations.
   (E)   Attendance at meetings. The Village Manager shall attend all regular
meetings of the Village Board and the special meetings thereof and of
committees as the Village Board may direct. He or she shall hold conferences
with the Village Board, regular or special committees thereof and officers of
the village, as are necessary to keep them informed.
   (F)   Issuance of licenses and permits. The Village Manager shall have the
power and authority to issue on behalf of the village, all licenses and permits
not otherwise provided for. Any and all fees and moneys belonging to the
village or in the custody of the village, collected by the Village Manager in
the discharge of his or her duties as such, as Village Collector, Village
Comptroller or otherwise, shall be paid into the village treasury as received
by him or her.
   (G)   Custodian of properties and additional duties. The Village Manager
shall have charge of all public streets, alleys, gutters, parkways and of all
sanitary and storm sewer systems, and shall be custodian of all village
property which is not assigned to the care or custody of any other officer. He
or she shall have charge of the collection and disposal of garbage, ashes and
refuse by the village, and shall perform other duties as may be required of him
or her from time to time by ordinance, resolution or direction of the Village
Board.
   (H)   Other duties. The Village Manager shall perform such other and
additional duties as may be required by the Village President or Board of
Trustees from time to time.
(Am. Ord. 1150, passed 8-17-2015)
§§ 31.46 THROUGH 31.49 RESERVED.
VILLAGE COMPTROLLER
§ 31.50 OFFICE ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   There is hereby established the office of Village Comptroller, an executive
office of the village. The Village Manager shall be ex officio Village
Comptroller for the term of his or her office as Manager and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualifies.
§ 31.51 BOND.
   The Village Manager’s bond shall be conditioned also upon the faithful
discharge of his or her duties as Village Comptroller and no additional bond
shall be required.
§ 31.52 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Manager shall receive no compensation other than his or her
salary as Village Manager for performing his or her duties as Comptroller.
§ 31.53 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   General duties. The Comptroller shall exercise general supervision
over all officers and employees of the village charged in any manner with the
receipt, collection or disbursement of revenues belonging to the village and
the collection and return of all revenues into the village treasury. He or she
shall have charge, custody and control of all warrants, vouchers, books,
records and documents, the custody and control of which is not herein given to
any other officer.
   (B)   Accounts. The Comptroller shall keep complete accounting records of
all financial transactions of the village, in accordance with good accounting
practice and subject to the general supervision of the Village Board.
   (C)   Annual tax levy ordinance. The Comptroller shall prepare an annual tax
levy ordinance, in manner and form provided by law, and submit the annual tax
levy ordinance to the Village Board for consideration as provided by law. The
Comptroller shall promptly file a certified copy of the annual tax levy
ordinance after its passage and approval with the County Clerk.
   (D)   Expenditures to be within appropriations. Except as otherwise provided
by law, no contract shall hereafter be made by the Village Board, or any
committee or member thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any officers
or employees of the village, whether ordered by the Village Board or not,
unless the expenditure was previously budgeted.
   (E)   Financial reports. The Comptroller shall prepare and present to the
Village Board statements showing the financial condition of the village, when
requested and in detail as may be desired by the Village Board and as required
by law.
   (F)   Warrants. The Comptroller shall prepare all warrants drawn on the
Treasury by the authority of the Village Board, and all warrants shall be
signed by the President and countersigned by the Clerk and Treasurer, stating
the particular fund or budget to which the same is chargeable and the person to
whom payable; and no money shall be paid other than upon the warrants so drawn,
except as provided by law or ordinance of the village.
   (G)   Clerical assistance. The Comptroller shall have authority and it shall
be his or her duty to appoint, subject to approval of the Village Board, an
accountant and bookkeeper or other clerical help as may be required; provided,
however, that the appointments shall not relieve the Comptroller of full
responsibility for the fidelity of his or her appointees or for the proper
discharge of his or her duties.
   (H)   Additional duties. The Comptroller shall perform other duties as may
be required of him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the
Village Board or by law.
§§ 31.54 THROUGH 31.59 RESERVED.
VILLAGE COLLECTOR
§ 31.60 OFFICE ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   There is hereby established the office of Village Collector, an executive
office of the village. The Village Manager shall be ex officio Village
Comptroller for the term of his or her office as Manager and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualifies.
§ 31.61 BOND.
   The Village Manager’s bond shall be conditioned also upon the faithful
discharge of his or her duties as Village Collector and no additional bond
shall be required.
§ 31.62 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Manager shall receive no compensation other than his or her
salary as Village Manager for performing his or her duties as Collector.
§ 31.63 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   General duties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the Village
Collector shall have the authority and it shall be his or her duty to collect
all moneys due the village, to issue receipts therefor and to keep a complete
and accurate account in books of original entry in accordance with good
accounting practices and subject to the general supervision of the Village
Board.
      (2)   The Village Collector shall be authorized to accept payment of
moneys due to the village by credit card. The Village Manager may enter into
agreements to process credit and debit card payments with card servicing
companies so long as the terms of these agreements are not less advantageous to
the village than the terms that are commonly available to other organizations
accepting these forms of payment.
      (3)   All books, accounts and papers pertaining to his or her office
shall be at all times open to inspection by the Village President, Village
Clerk or any Village Trustee.
   (B)   Remittance to Village Treasurer. He or she shall promptly pay over to
the Village Treasurer all moneys collected by him or her, and shall at the time
of the remittances, advise the Village Treasurer of the account to which the
remittances should be credited.
   (C)   Deposit account. There is hereby established a deposit account in
which the Collector shall deposit all water, contractors and other similar
deposits paid to him or her in the name of the village and in an official
depository bank designated by the Village Board.
   (D)   Additional duties. The Village Collector shall perform other duties as
may be from time to time required of him or her by ordinance or resolution of
the Village Board or by law.
§§ 31.64 THROUGH 31.69 RESERVED.
VILLAGE BUDGET OFFICER
§ 31.70 OFFICE ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   There is hereby created the Office of the Village Budget Officer who shall
be designated by the Village President, with the approval of the corporate
authorities. The Village Budget Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the
Village President and may be removed by the Village President at any time. The
Village Budget Officer may hold another village office or position, either
elected or appointed, and may receive compensation for both offices, unless one
of the offices is a full-time position for which the officer is being
compensated for on a full-time basis. If the Village Budget Officer is to be
compensated, the compensation shall be determined from time to time by the
Village President and Board of Trustees.
§ 31.71 BOND.
   The Budget Officer, before entering into office, shall execute a bond in a
sum as shall be determined from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the
Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her
duties, and shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by
reason of any neglect of duty or any act of the Budget Officer. The bond shall
be approved by the corporate authorities and filed with the Village Clerk. The
premium of such bond shall be paid by the village.
§ 31.72 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   General duties. The Budget Officer shall perform the duties and
responsibilities set forth in Sections 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., as amended.
   (B)   Alter sub-classes. The Village Budget Officer shall have the authority
to delete, add to, change or create sub-classes within object classes
previously budgeted.
   (C)   Transfer of funds. The Village Budget Officer may, with the approval
of the Finance Committee, transfer funds within the approved annual budget upon
submission of a proper request from the head of any village department, board
or commission and subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Transfers may not be made between or among funds;
      (2)   Transfers may not be made between or among departments, boards or
commissions;
      (3)   Transfers may be made:
         (a)   Between or among subclasses within an object class; and
         (b)   Between or among object classes; provided, however, that each
transfer shall be within the same fund and provided further that, where more
than one department, commission or division is within a fund, each transfer
shall be within that department, commission or division;
      (4)   Transfers shall not exceed $5,000;
      (5)   Transfers to or from a particular account shall not exceed a
reasonable number in each fiscal year, as determined by the Budget Officer and
the Finance Committee; and
      (6)   Transfers may be made from one account to one or more other
accounts only if, at the time of the transfer, sufficient uncommitted and
unspent funds are in the account from which the funds are to be transferred.
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS
Section
Department of Public Works
   
32.01   Creation of Department
   
32.02   Director of Public Works
   32.03 through 32.09   Reserved
Department of Community Development
   
32.10   Creation of Department
   
32.11   Director of Community Development
   
32.12   Building Commissioner
   
32.13   Building Inspector
   32.14 through 32.19   Reserved
Village Legal Counsel
   
32.20   Employment of village legal counsel
   
32.21   Compensation
   
32.22   Duties
   
32.23   Suits and actions
   
32.24   Additional legal counsel
   32.25 through 32.29   Reserved
Police Department
   
32.30   Creation and composition.
   
32.31   Chief of Police; office created; terms
   
32.32   Employment of members
   
32.33   Reserved
   
32.34   Oath and bond of members
   
32.35   Powers and duties of members
   
32.36   Compensation
   
32.37   Conservators of the peace
   
32.38   Village jail
   32.39 through 32.49   Reserved
Fire Department
   
32.50   Creation of Department
   
32.51   Fire Marshal office created
   
32.52   Organization and appointments
   
32.53   Services of fire departments of other municipalities.
   
32.54   Ambulance user fee
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ 32.01 CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.
   There is hereby created a Public Works Department, an administrative
department of the village, which shall consist of a Director of Public Works
and any other employees as may from time to time be appointed.
§ 32.02 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of Director of
Public Works, who shall be an employee and not an officer of the village.
   (B)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   General duties. The Director of Public Works shall have direct
charge and control over the Department of Public Works and shall be responsible
for the faithful and efficient conduct and operation of the Department.
      (2)   Street and public property maintenance. The Director of Public
Works shall have charge of the maintenance and improvement of all streets,
parkways and village-owned parks, including the maintenance of trees, shrubs
and other plantings thereon, and of all buildings, grounds and equipment
belonging to the village except that which is expressly delegated to the
supervision of other officers and departments.
      (3)   Issuance of street permits. The Director of Public Works shall be
responsible to review, prior to issuance, all permits for the opening,
occupation or use of public streets, parkways, sidewalks and alleys, for public
utility equipment, tree planting or removal, private driveway and sidewalk
approaches and all other purposes authorized by law, ordinance or resolution of
the Board of Trustees.
      (4)   Water and sewer systems. The Director of Public Works shall have
charge of the safe and efficient operation of the water treatment plant and its
related infrastructure, including water mains and meters, and the sanitary and
storm sewer systems of the village.
      (5)   Additional duties. The Director of Public Works shall enforce, in
coordination with the Village Manager, all provisions of this code and any
other ordinance of the village relating to them, except traffic ordinances, and
shall perform any other duties as may be required of him or her by law,
ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
§§ 32.03 THROUGH 32.09 RESERVED.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
§ 32.10 CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.
   There is hereby created a Community Development Department, an
administrative department of the village, which shall consist of a Director of
Community Development and any other employees as may from time to time be
appointed.
§ 32.11 DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of Director of
Community Development, who shall be an employee and not an officer of the
Village. The Village Manager shall appoint the Director of Community
Development.
   (B)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   General duties. The Director of Community Development shall have
direct charge and control over the Department of Community Development and
shall be responsible for the faithful and efficient conduct and operation of
the Department.
      (2)   Enforcement. The Director of Community Development shall enforce,
in coordination with the Building Commissioner, the building and construction
regulations, the zoning ordinance, and all laws and ordinances pertaining to
his or her Department.
      (3)   Additional powers and duties. The Director of Community Development
shall have the same powers provided to the Building Inspector in §
32.13(C) of this code, as well and duty to perform any other duties as may be
required of him or her by law, ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
§ 32.12 BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the Office of Building
Commissioner, an administrative office of the village. The Village Manager, or
his or her designee, shall serve as Building Commissioner, unless some other
person is appointed to the position by the Village Board.
   (B)   Oath and bond of Commissioner. Before entering upon the duties of his
or her office, the Building Commissioner shall take the oath of office
prescribed by statute, and furnish a bond determined from time to time by
ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Building Commissioner shall enforce, or cause
to be enforced, the building and construction regulations, the zoning
ordinance, and all laws and ordinances pertaining to his or her Department, and
shall have any other duties as the Village Board may from time to time
prescribe.
(Ord. 1051, passed 11-15-2010)
§ 32.13 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of Building
Inspector. The Village Manager shall appoint the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Compensation. Whenever any person holding any other village office is
serving as Building Inspector, he or she shall receive no salary or
compensation for his or her services as the Building Inspector. Whenever any
other person not holding any other village office is appointed as Building
Inspector, his or her compensation shall be fixed by the Village Manager.
   (C)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   General. Under the general supervision of the Director of Community
Development, the Building Inspector shall inspect all buildings and structures
being erected, altered, wrecked or moved and any other buildings or structures
which, in his or her opinion require it, for the purpose of determining whether
or not all laws and ordinances pertaining to the Department of Community
Development are being complied with.
      (2)   Power to stop work. The Building Inspector shall have the power to
stop any construction work which is being done in violation of any provision of
any ordinance relating thereto, and work shall not be resumed after the
issuance of a stop order except on written permission of the Building
Commissioner, Director of Community Development or Building Inspector.
      (3)   Access to premises. The Building Inspector shall have the right, in
accordance with all applicable laws and during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the village in the discharge of their official
duties.
      (4)   Records. The Building Inspector shall keep complete records of all
permits, inspections and activities of the Building Department.
§§ 32.14 THROUGH 32.19 RESERVED.
VILLAGE LEGAL COUNSEL
§ 32.20 EMPLOYMENT OF VILLAGE LEGAL COUNSEL.
   The corporate authorities shall employ an attorney or firm of attorneys as
the legal advisor to the village as an independent contractor or employee.
§ 32.21 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Legal Counsel shall receive such compensation as may, from time
to time, be approved by the Board of Trustees.
§ 32.22 DUTIES.
   The Village Legal Counsel shall advise the Board of Trustees and the Village
Manager, as well as all other village officers and employees as directed by the
Board of Trustees or by the Village Manager, in all matters of law in which the
interests of the village are involved; and when required by the President or
Board of Trustees or by the Village Manager, shall furnish written opinions
upon any subject submitted to the Village Legal Counsel pertaining to the
village and its interests. When requested by the President or Board of Trustees
or Village Manager, the Village Legal Counsel shall prepare all ordinances and
resolutions, contracts, leases and other documents or instruments to which the
village may be a party; and attend all regular and special meetings of the
Board of Trustees, attend board and commission meetings and committee meetings
of the Board of Trustees. The Village Legal Counsel shall, upon direction from
the Board of Trustees, assist any additional legal counsel employed pursuant to
§
32.24 of this code.
§ 32.23 SUITS AND ACTIONS.
   Except for the prosecution of ordinance violation cases, which the Village
Legal Counsel shall perform only when specifically so directed, the Village
Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or
equity to which the village may be a party, or in which it may be interested,
or which may be brought against, or by, any officer of the village on behalf of
the village, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the village.
§ 32.24 ADDITIONAL LEGAL COUNSEL.
   The corporate authorities may from time to time employ additional lawyers to
perform specialized, consultant or advisory services to the Village Legal
Counsel or the village. Specifically, and without limitation of the foregoing,
the corporate authorities may employ an attorney or firm of attorneys as the
Village Prosecutor for the village, either as an employee or as an independent
contractor. The Village Prosecutor shall prosecute all ordinance violations of
the village unless the Village Manager shall assign the prosecution of certain
cases to some other attorney. The Village Prosecutor shall notify the Village
Legal Counsel of any notice of appeal served in connection with the imposition
of any fine or other penalty for a violation of a village ordinance.
§§ 32.25 THROUGH 32.29 RESERVED.
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.30 CREATION AND COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created a Police Department, an administrative department of
the village, which shall consist of the Chief of Police and of a number of
lieutenants, sergeants, patrol officers, deputies, special police officers, and
part-time officers, as may be from time to time provided by the Village Board,
and all of whom, other than the Chief, shall be employees of the village.
§ 32.31 CHIEF OF POLICE; OFFICE CREATED; TERMS.
   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of Chief of
Police, who shall be an officer of the village. The President and Board of
Trustees, voting jointly, shall appoint the Chief of Police. The Chief of
Police shall hold office for the term established by the President and Board of
Trustees, voting jointly, or otherwise until his or her successor has been duly
appointed and qualified or until his or her removal from office by the
President and Board of Trustees, voting jointly.
   (B)   Powers and duties. Under the general supervision of the Village Board,
the Chief of Police shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Administrative duties. The Chief shall have authority and
responsibility for the management, direction and control of operations and
administration of the Police Department.
      (2)   Law enforcement duties. The Chief of Police shall have
responsibility for the direction and control of law enforcement matters in the
village and shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this
code and the ordinances of the village.
      (3)   Keeper of village jail. The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of
the village jail and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein and
all property pertaining thereto.
      (4)   Duty to keep records. The Chief of Police shall make and keep
records and reports concerning the functions of the Police Department as may be
required by statute, ordinance or the Village Board.
      (5)   Duty to assign rank of member. The Chief of Police shall designate
the rank and grade of the members, and all designations, when approved by the
Village Board, shall be binding upon all members of the Police Department.
      (6)   Duty to make rules and regulations. The Chief of Police shall make
and prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members
of the Police Department as the Chief of Police shall deem advisable, and all
such rules and regulations, when approved by the Village Board, shall be
binding upon all members of the Police Department.
      (7)   Discipline, suspension and discharge. The Chief of Police shall
have the authority to discipline, suspend without pay, or discharge any member
of the Police Department for any neglect of duty, misconduct, or for any other
valid reason, provided, however that any member of the Police Department so
disciplined, suspended, or discharged shall be entitled, and have the right,
within ten days, to file with the Public Safety/Community Affairs Committee of
the village a written request for a hearing before the Public Safety/Community
Affairs Committee, at which hearing the Chief of Police shall have the right to
be present. The Public Safety/Community Affairs Committee shall have full power
and authority to dispose of the matter brought before it.
      (8)   Additional powers and duties. The Chief of Police shall have any
other powers and duties as shall be assigned to the Chief of Police by law,
statute, ordinance, or by the Board of Trustees or its duly authorized
committees.
§ 32.32 EMPLOYMENT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Village Board may from time to time specify the number of officers
(including regular, special, and/or part-time officers) to be employed by the
village. Whenever a vacancy occurs, the Chief shall, subject to the approval of
the Village Board, employ a new member to fill the position. In case of
emergency or in times of peril, danger, riot or pestilence, or apprehension
thereof, the Village President may appoint or employ special and part-time
police officers to act during the emergency, subject to the approval of the
Village Board at its next regular meeting.
   (B)   Hiring requirements of all officers.
      (1)   The following hiring requirements apply to all potential officers:
         (a)   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound
health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
         (b)   Be at least 21 years of age.
            1.   No person shall be employed as a regular member of the
Department unless he or she is not more than 35 years of age at the time of the
beginning of the employment, nor until he or she has first passed the mental
and physical tests required by the Chief of Police.
         (c)   Pass a background check.
         (d)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
         (e)   Possess a valid State of Illinois driver’s license.
         (f)   Possess a valid FOID card.
      (2)   The village reserves the right to change or add to these
requirements as it deems appropriate.
   (C)   Part-time police officers.
      (1)   In accordance with the Illinois Pension Code (40 ILCS 5/3-109.a.1),
part-time police officers shall not be eligible to participate in the
Kenilworth Police Pension Fund.
      (2)   Duties. A part-time police officer shall have all the
responsibilities of a full-time police officer and such specific duties as
delineated in the policy manual of the Police Department, but the hours a part-
time police officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part-time
police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full-time police
officers. Part-time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Police Training Act (50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.), and the rules of the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training and Standards Board. Part-time police officers shall
comply with all applicable rules and policies issued by the Police Department.
      (3)   Any part-time officer hired who has not yet received certification
under Section 8.2 of the Police Training Act (50 ILCS 705/8.2) shall be
directly supervised.
   (D)   All officers serve at the discretion of the village, shall not have
any property rights in said employment, and may be removed by the Chief of
Police at any time.
(Ord. 1078, passed 4-16-2012; Ord. 1380, passed 2-18-2025)
§ 32.33 RESERVED.
§ 32.34 OATH AND BOND OF MEMBERS.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her appointment or employment,
every member of the Police Department shall take and subscribe to the oath of
office prescribed by law, but bond shall be required only of the Chief of
Police and lieutenants. Bond where required shall be conditioned as provided by
law and in an amount as is from time to time determined by ordinance or
resolution of the Village Board.
§ 32.35 POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   General duties. It shall be the duty of every member of the Police
Department to preserve order, prevent infractions of the law, enforce all of
the ordinances of the village and all of the statutes and laws effective in the
village, and to arrest violators thereof.
   (B)   Serving warrants. Every member of the Police Department shall have the
common law and statutory powers of constables for the purpose of serving
warrants for the violation of village ordinances, and crimes and misdemeanors,
to whomsoever directed, within the corporate limits of the village; provided,
however, that all warrants shall be served under the direction and with the
approval of the Chief of Police.
   (C)   Appearing as witnesses; fees. Every member of the Police Department,
when called upon to do so, shall appear as a witness in any prosecution for
violation of any village ordinance or criminal law and in civil cases involving
the public interest as the Chief of Police may approve and direct. No member of
the Police Department shall receive any witness fee for his or her services as
a witness in any action or suit to which the village or the people of the state
are a party, and any witness fee or expense money paid that member in other
cases shall be turned over to the Chief of Police for deposit in the village
treasury.
§ 32.36 COMPENSATION.
   The Chief of Police and all members of the Police Department shall receive
compensation as fixed by the Village Board.
§ 32.37 CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE.
   Upon the receipt of a certificate attesting to the successful completion of
a training course administered by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training
Standards Board in accordance with the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/3.1-
15-25), every member of the Police Department whose duty it is to enforce the
penal ordinances of the village, are hereby declared to be conservators of the
peace, with power to arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process,
all persons who shall break the peace, or be found violating any ordinance of
the village or any criminal law of the state or of the United States of
America, and to commit for examination, and if necessary, detain those persons
in custody over night or Sunday or holidays, in the village jail or other safe
place, until they can be brought before the proper court, and shall have and
exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace as the corporate
authorities may prescribe.
§ 32.38 VILLAGE JAIL.
   (A)   The metal doored and barred rooms or cells in the Police Department
building, or any other place which is hereafter established by the Board of
Trustees for that purpose, shall be the jail of the village.
   (B)   The jail shall be used for the incarceration of any person arrested
until that person is brought before a magistrate or other properly constituted
legal tribunal for a hearing and admitted to bail or discharged, or until that
person is lawfully transferred to some other place of incarceration.
§§ 32.39 THROUGH 32.49 RESERVED.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.50 CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.
   There is hereby created a Fire Department, an administrative department of
the village. The Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Marshal, who shall be
the Chief of the Fire Department, and the Chair and members of the Public
Safety/Community Affairs Committee as ex officio members, and/or any other
persons as may from time to time be appointed by the Village Board.
(Ord. 1265, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 32.51 FIRE MARSHAL OFFICE CREATED.
   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the Office of Fire Marshal,
an administrative office of the village. The Chief of Police shall be the Fire
Marshal unless some other person shall be appointed to the office by the
Village Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Fire Marshal shall have the following powers
and duties:
      (1)   Investigation of fires. The Fire Marshal shall investigate the
nature, cause and extent of all fires in the village and keep a record thereof.
      (2)   Fire limits. The Fire Marshal or other officer in command at any
fire may prescribe limits in the vicinity of any fire, within which no person
except officers and persons who reside therein shall be admitted without
permission from a duly authorized officer.
      (3)   Removal and protection of property. The Fire Marshal shall have the
power to cause the removal of property whenever it shall become necessary for
the preservation of property from fire, or to prevent the spreading of fire or
to protect adjoining property.
      (4)   Deputy Building Inspector. The Fire Marshal shall be an ex officio
Deputy Building Inspector, and as such it shall be his or her duty to make
inspections and cooperate with the Building Commissioner and Inspectors in
administering and enforcing the provisions of this code relating to fire
inspections, fire prevention and public safety.
      (5)   Additional duties. The Fire Marshal shall enforce all ordinances
relating to the occurrence or spread of fires, and shall have any other powers
and perform any other duties as may be authorized or required by law, statute
or ordinance.
§ 32.52 ORGANIZATION AND APPOINTMENTS.
   Upon taking office and at any other times as the Board of Trustees may
direct, the Fire Marshal shall make those appointments and prescribe those
duties as may be necessary and proper for the organization and effective
operation of the Fire Department. The Fire Marshal shall control and supervise,
subject to the order and direction of the Village Board, all apparatus and
equipment owned by the village for the prevention and control of fires.
§ 32.53 SERVICES OF FIRE DEPARTMENTS OF OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   Whenever the village has entered into an agreement for the services of any
fire department of any nearby municipality, all fire calls shall be made in
accordance with the terms of that agreement. In case of emergency, the Fire
Marshal or other duly authorized members of the Fire Department shall have the
authority to call upon other nearby fire departments for assistance.
§ 32.54 AMBULANCE USER FEE.
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, BASIC LIFE SUPPORT AMBULANCE SERVICE
shall mean an emergency procedure that consists of the recognition and
treatment of injuries and ailments without the use of advanced medical
instruments or supplies.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT AMBULANCE
SERVICE shall mean an emergency life saving procedure that consists of the use
of advanced medical instruments or supplies, cardiac monitoring,
defibrillation, the maintenance of and intravenous life line or the infusion of
appropriate medications.
   (B)   Whenever the village has entered into an agreement for the services of
any fire department ambulance service of any nearby municipality, there shall
be an ambulance user fee for any person transported by the ambulance service
from within the village to a hospital or other care facility. The fee shall be
in an amount fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees for
basic life support ambulance service or for advanced life support ambulance
service, as the case may be.
   (C)   The fees established pursuant to subsection (B) above shall be
assessed and paid in the following manner.
      (1)   Every person transported by the ambulance service who has in force
at the time of service any form of insurance that provides coverage for
ambulance service, including Medicare, Medicaid and private or self-insured
programs, shall be, for the purpose of this section, the insured.
      (2)   Any insured, by accepting the ambulance service provided, shall
thereby assign to the village or its contractor, and the village or its
contractor shall thereby become subrogated to, all rights to any of insurance
authorizing payment for ambulance service.
      (3)   Every insured transported by ambulance, or the spouse or
representative of the insured, or the insured’s parent or legal guardian if the
insured is a minor, shall provide to the village or its contractor all
information necessary to present a claim on behalf of the village or its
contractor and shall authorize the release of information to the village or its
contractor by any hospital or physician to whom the insured is transported by
ambulance.
      (4)   The village or its contractor shall file whatever claim may be
necessary to obtain payment from the insurance source. The village or its
contractor shall file claims on behalf of the insured with the primary insurer
or any secondary or supplemental insurance provider.
         (a)   In the event that the insurer requires an assignment accepting
the amount of the fee authorized by that insurer, the village or its contractor
will agree to the assignment and any amount of the user fee remaining unpaid
will be recovered in the manner set forth in subsection (C)(5) below.
         (b)   If the terms of the coverage available to the insured provide a
fixed fee less than the established ambulance user fee, or if the insurer, by
the terms of the agreement with the insured, or, as a consequence of any law or
regulation, is required to pay only a percentage of the fee, then any amount of
the user fee remaining unpaid will be recovered as set forth in subsection (C)
(5) below.
      (5)   The village shall provide in its annual budget, appropriation
ordinance and tax levy ordinance for an account against which a charge shall be
made for all user fees that remain unpaid, in whole or in part, after applying
all available underlying primary, secondary or supplemental insurance.
      (6)   The village or its contractor shall, upon request, provide an
insured with the documentation of any claim or payment.
CHAPTER 33: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Board of Health
   
33.001   Designation of Health Officer
   
33.002   Meetings
   
33.003   Rules and regulations
   
33.004   Enforcement
   33.005 through 33.014   Reserved
Plan Commission
   
33.015   Creation of Commission
   
33.016   Appointment and term of members
   
33.017   Powers and duties
   
33.018   Compensation
   33.019 through 33.049   Reserved
Zoning Board of Appeals
   
33.050   Creation and membership
   
33.051   Meetings
   
33.052   Powers, duties and procedures
   33.053 through 33.069   Reserved
Building Review Commission
   
33.070   Creation; membership; compensation
   
33.071   Meetings; quorum
   
33.072   Powers and duties
   33.073 through 33.079   Reserved
Police Pension Fund Board
   
33.080   Creation of board; members
   
33.081   Appointed and term of members
   
33.082   Powers and duties
   33.083 through 33.089   Reserved
Foreign Fire Insurance Board
   
33.090   Creation of board; members
   
33.091   Appointment and term of members
   
33.092   Powers and duties
   33.093 through 33.099   Reserved
E-911 Board
   
33.100   Joint Emergency Telephone System Board
BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 33.001 DESIGNATION OF HEALTH OFFICER.
   The Village Manager or the Village Manager's designee shall serve as the
Village Health Officer.
(1959 Code, § 2b-1) (Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 33.002 MEETINGS.
   The Board of Health shall meet at times and places as it may determine. The
Health Officer shall attend all meetings and give the Board information and
advice as it may request.
(1959 Code, § 2b-2)
§ 33.003 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Health shall have the power to make reasonable rules and
regulations for the protection and betterment of the health of the residents of
the village, for the abatement of nuisances and health hazards, and for the
prevention and suppression of disease. These rules and regulations shall take
effect and be in force ten days after publication by posting in three public
places within the village. In case of contagious or epidemic disease, or of
danger from anticipated or impending contagious or epidemic disease, or in case
the sanitary condition of the village shall be so dangerous as to warrant it,
it shall be the duty of the Board of Health to make rules and regulations, and
to take measures and to do and order to be done and cause to be done those acts
for the preservation of the public health (though not herein or elsewhere or
otherwise specifically authorized) as it may in good faith believe and declare
the public safety and health demand. All rules and regulations so declared by
the Board of Health to be emergency rules and regulations, shall take effect
immediately, or as soon as may be, after the promulgation of the same by the
Board of Health. The emergency rules and regulations shall also be posted or
published in a manner as the Board of Health shall determine, with notice that
they are in force in the village.
(1959 Code, § 2b-3) (Ord. 325, passed 5-13-1935)
§ 33.004 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of every member of the Health Department, and of every
member of the Police Department, to aid in the enforcement of any order issued
by the Board of Health.
(1959 Code, § 2b-4)
§§ 33.005 THROUGH 33.014 RESERVED.
PLAN COMMISSION
§ 33.015 CREATION OF COMMISSION.
   There is hereby created a Plan Commission, as provided by statute.
(1959 Code, § 2b-9)
§ 33.016 APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF MEMBERS.
   The Plan Commission shall consist of seven members. All members shall be
appointed by the President and Board of Trustees, voting jointly, and shall
hold office for the following terms: three for two years, and three for three
years and the successor to each member so appointed shall hold office for a
term of three years. All members shall serve until their successors are
appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner. The
Chair shall be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees, voting
jointly.
(1959 Code, § 2b-10) (Ord. 926, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 942, passed 9-12-2005;
Ord. 1020, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 1106, passed 6-17- 2013; Ord. 1265, passed 9-
21-2020; Ord. 1355, passed 4-15-2024)
§ 33.017 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Plan Commission has powers and duties as are now or may hereafter be
given to it by statute, and any additional powers and duties as may be granted
by ordinance. In addition, the Plan Commission shall have the power to hear
matters referred to it by the Village Board and to hear applications seeking
approval of (1) a variation involving property located in the B Business Zoning
District, (2) a map amendment involving property located in the B Business
Zoning District, (3) a text amendment involving property located in the B
Business Zoning District, and (4) a special use permit involving property
located in the B Business Zoning District; provided, however, the Plan
Commission may only hear items (1) and (2) above if the application seeks
approval of more than one entitlement request filed pursuant to
Chapter 152 or
153 of this code. The Village Board shall, however, retain the power to prepare
or originate an official plan, and to amend, revise or modify that plan from
time to time as it may deem necessary or desirable.
(1959 Code, § 2b-11) (Ord. 1355, passed 4-15-2024)
§ 33.018 COMPENSATION.
    The members of the Plan Commission shall receive compensation for their
services as may be fixed by the Village Board.
(1959 Code, § 2b-12) (Ord. 1355, passed 4-15-2024)
§§ 33.019 THROUGH 33.049 RESERVED.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 33.050 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby created a Board of Appeals, consisting of seven members to
serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year, one for two
years, one for three years, one for four years, one for five years, one for six
years and one for seven years, the successor to each member so appointed or
heretofore appointed to serve for a term of five years. Appointments shall be
made by the Village President and Trustees, voting jointly, and one of the
members so appointed shall be named Chair at the time of his or her
appointment. The Board of Appeals may select or appoint other officers as it
deems necessary. The Village Board shall have the power to remove any member of
the Board of Appeals for cause and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant, in
the manner provided for appointment of a member.
(1959 Code, § 2b-16) (Ord. 325, passed 5-13-1935; Ord. 1265, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 33.051 MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chair
and at any other times as the Board may determine. All hearings shall be open
to the public. The Chair, or in his or her absence, the acting Chair, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or if absent or failing to vote indicate that fact and shall also
keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every rule or
regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Board shall immediately be filed in the office
of the Board and shall be a public record. The Board shall adopt its own rules
of procedure not in conflict with statute in the case made and provided, or
this code or ordinances which may be adopted.
(1959 Code, § 2b-17) (Ord. 1265, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 33.052 POWERS, DUTIES AND PROCEDURES.
   The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official charged with the enforcement of any ordinance relating to zoning
adopted by the village pursuant to the statute in that case made and provided;
and shall hear requests for variations to relieve properties from practical
difficulties or particular hardship imposed by the strict letter of the
provisions or regulations of ordinances relating to the use, construction or
alteration of buildings or structures, or the use of land, and grant or deny
the variations requested, and may recommend the alteration or change of
provisions of the zoning ordinance or regulations in specific cases properly
coming before it; and the Board of Appeals shall exercise all the powers and
discharge the duties now and which may from time to time hereafter be provided
by statute of the state and by ordinance of the village; provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to alter or change the zoning
ordinances. These powers and duties shall be exercised and performed in
accordance with procedures specified in the statutes and ordinances, but the
Board of Appeals may adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with the
statutes or ordinances.
(1959 Code, § 2b-18) (Ord. 748, passed 3-13-1989)
§§ 33.053 THROUGH 33.069 RESERVED.
BUILDING REVIEW COMMISSION
§ 33.070 CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Creation; members; compensation. There is created a Building Review
Commission for the village consisting of seven members. The members of the
Building Review Commission shall be appointed by the Village President and
Trustees, voting jointly, and shall serve for staggered terms of three years
and until their successors have been appointed. The members of the Building
Review Commission shall serve without compensation.
   (B)   Qualifications. Members of the Building Review Commission shall be
appointed on the basis of expertise in architecture, architectural history,
building construction and rehabilitation, engineering, local history and other
criteria deemed relevant by the Village President and Trustees. Members of the
Building Review Commission need not be residents of the village.
   (C)   Officers. The Village President shall designate one of the members of
the Building Review Commission to serve as Chair. The Village Manager shall
designate one or more employees of the village to serve as Secretary to the
Building Review Commission.
   (D)   Vacancies. Vacancies on the Building Review Commission shall be filled
for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant, in the same
manner as provided for the original appointment.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 1265, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 33.071 MEETINGS; QUORUM.
   Meetings of the Building Review Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chair. All meetings shall be open to the public and conducted in accordance
with the Open Meetings Act, being 5 ILCS 120. The presence of four members of
the Building Review Commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of
business and the holding of any hearing. The Building Review Commission shall
act with the vote or consent of the majority of its members present at the
meeting at which the required quorum is in attendance. The Chair shall have the
power to vote. The Building Review Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member on every question. Every rule,
regulation, decision, determination or repeal of the rule, regulation, decision
or determination, and every order of the Building Review Commission shall
promptly be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be a public
record.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 1108, passed 7-15-2013; Ord. 1265, passed 9-
21-2020)
§ 33.072 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Building Review Commission shall have the following powers and duties in
accordance with §§
150.020 through
150.076:
   (A)   To review applications for demolition permits and to determine whether
a proposed demolition affects a property of special importance due to its
historic and/or architectural significance;
   (B)   To order that the issuance of a demolition permit be delayed to allow
an opportunity to determine alternatives to demolition of buildings or
structures that are historically or architecturally significant;
   (C)   To require the Village Manager to retain outside professional
assistance to:
      (1)   Determine whether the criteria for a finding of special importance,
are met; and
      (2)   Develop alternative plans to save buildings of special importance,
and develop an analysis of rehabilitation and construction alternatives;
provided that, without the approval of the Board of Trustees, the costs thereof
shall not exceed the amounts which the applicant for a demolition permit is
required to deposit, and has deposited, in escrow to reimburse the village;
   (D)   To adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with this chapter, the
Building Code or applicable law.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-12-2004; Ord. 929, passed 12-
14-2004)
§§ 33.073 THROUGH 33.079 RESERVED.
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD
§ 33.080 CREATION OF BOARD; MEMBERS.
   There is hereby created a board of trustees of the Police Pension Fund.
§ 33.081 APPOINTED AND TERM OF MEMBERS.
   The board of trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall consist of five
members, as provided by state law. The term of office of the members shall be
as prescribed by law. The election of the trustees shall be held at such times
and places as are required by law and in the manner required by law.
§ 33.082 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The board of trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall be organized and
shall hold meetings as provided by state law. The board of trustees of the Fund
shall have all of the powers, duties and obligations conferred or imposed upon
it by applicable state law.
§§ 33.083 THROUGH 33.089 RESERVED.
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
§ 33.090 CREATION OF BOARD; MEMBERS.
   There is hereby created a Foreign Fire Insurance Board.
§ 33.091 APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF MEMBERS.
   The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall consist of the Chief of the Fire
Department and no fewer than two, and not more than five, of the members of the
Fire Department, who shall be elected at large annually by the members of the
Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire Department shall serve as the Chair and
Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board. Before taking office, the
Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall execute and file with the
Village Clerk, a sufficient bond to the village, approved by the Village
President, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties as
that officer.
(Ord. 1265, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 33.092 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Duty to make rules and regulations. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board
shall make all needful rules and regulations with respect to the Foreign Fire
Insurance Board and the management of the money to be appropriated to the
Foreign Fire Insurance Fund.
   (B)   Duty to maintain records. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall
develop and maintain a listing of those items that the Foreign Fire Insurance
Board feels are appropriate expenditures for the maintenance, use, and benefit
of the Fire Department.
   (C)   Use of funds. The treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall,
upon the order of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board, pay out the moneys in the
Foreign Fire Insurance Fund solely for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the
Fire Department.
   (D)   Duties of the treasurer. The treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance
Board, on the first Tuesday of May in each year, shall make a sworn report and
statement to the Village Board of all moneys received and disbursed by him or
her as the treasurer and of the balance of moneys in the Foreign Fire Insurance
Fund. The books, records and accounts of the treasurer shall at all times be
open to inspection and audit by the Village Board. Upon the expiration of his
or her term of office, he or she shall surrender, pay and deliver to his or her
successor in office, all books, records, accounts and moneys relating to his or
her office.
§§ 33.093 THROUGH 33.099 RESERVED.
E-911 BOARD
§ 33.100 JOINT EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD.
   There is hereby authorized a joint emergency telephone system board that
shall be established and maintained pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement
approved by a duly adopted resolution of the Village’s Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 764, passed - - ; Ord. 1187, passed 1-23-2017)
CHAPTER 34: ETHICS
Section
Village Officials and Employees Ethics
   
34.01   Definitions
   
34.02   Gifts
   
34.03   Prohibited political activities
   
34.04   Ethics Officer
   
34.05   Interpretation
VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS
§ 34.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state or local public office or office in a political
organization or the selection, nomination or election of presidential or vice-
presidential electors, but does not include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative
or administrative action, as those terms are defined in the Lobbyist
Registration Act, 25 ILCS 170/2;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining, as defined in the State Public
Labor Relations Act, 5 ILCS 315/3; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   CANDIDATE. Any person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at either a general primary election or general election.
   COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to an employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment but, for purposes of this
subchapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a
leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not
fixed, COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer or
employee is on the premises under the control of the employer and any other
time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties,
regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Any authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   EMPLOYEE. All full-time, part-time and contractual employees of the village.
   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink and honoraria for speaking engagements related
to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an
officer or employee.
   INTER-OFFICE GIFT. Any gift given to an officer or employee of the village
from a member of the State General Assembly; or from the Governor, the
Lieutenant Governor, the Attorney General, the Secretary of State, the
Controller, the Treasurer or the Auditor General of the state; or from a
member, officer, appointee or employee of any state agency as defined in the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., or of any
federal agency or of any unit of local government or school village.
   INTRA-OFFICE GIFT. Any gift given to an officer or employee of the village
from another officer or employee of the village.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:
      (1)   Compensation for employment;
      (2)   Service credit towards pension benefits; and
      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the village.
   OFFICER. All appointed and elected officials of the village, regardless of
whether the official is compensated.
   POLITICAL. Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for
elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative
or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under § 9-
3 of the Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/9-3, but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
      (1)   Preparing for, organizing or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration or other political event.
      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to, the
purchase of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for tickets for any
political fundraiser, political meeting or other political event.
      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of or preparing any document
or report regarding any thing of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      (4)   Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes.
      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party
convention.
      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:
      (1)   Is seeking official action by the village or by an officer or
employee of the village;
      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business with the village or with an
officer or employee of the village;
      (3)   Conducts activities regulated by the village or by an officer or
employee of the village;
      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or non-performance of the official duties of the village or an officer or
employee of the village; or
      (5)   Is registered or required to be registered with the Secretary of
State under the Lobbyist Registration Act, except that an entity does not
become a prohibited source merely because a registered lobbyist is one of its
members or serves on its board of directors.
   RELATIVE. Those people related to the officer or employee as father, mother,
son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first
cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson,
granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter- in-law,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter,
stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister and including the father,
mother, grandfather or grandmother of the officer’s or employee’s spouse and
the officer’s or employee’s fiancé or fiancée.
(Ord. 921, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 34.02 GIFTS.
   (A)   Gifts prohibited. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B)
below, no officer or employee, spouse of an officer or employee, or immediate
family member living with an officer or employee, shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any prohibited source or in violation of any federal or
state statute, rule or regulation. No prohibited source shall intentionally
offer or make a gift that violates this subchapter.
   (B)   Exceptions. The restrictions set forth in subsection (A) above shall
not apply to the following, which are mutually exclusive and independent:
      (1)   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public;
      (2)   Anything for which the officer or employee pays the market value or
anything not used and promptly disposed of as provided in subsection (C) below;
      (3)   A contribution, as defined in Article 9 of the State Election Code,
10 ILCS 5/9-1 et seq., that is lawfully made under that Code or under the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act, or activities associated with a fundraising
event in support of a political organization or candidate;
      (4)   Educational materials and missions;
      (5)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss village business;
      (6)   A gift from a relative of an officer or employee;
      (7)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the officer or employee has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee and not because of the personal
friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal
friendship, the officer or employee shall consider the circumstances under
which the gift was offered, such as:
         (a)   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
         (b)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the officer or employee the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
         (c)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the officer or employee the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar
gifts to other officers or employees.
      (8)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a
single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are:
         (a)   Consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared; or
         (b)   Purchased ready to eat and delivered by any means.
      (9)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from the outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the duties of the officer or employee as
an office holder or employee) of the officer or employee, or the spouse of the
officer or employee, if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because
of the official position or employment of the officer or employee and are
customarily provided to others in similar circumstances;
      (10)   Intra-office and inter-office gifts;
      (11)   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; and
      (12)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
   (C)   Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee that is a recipient of a
gift that is given in violation of this subchapter may, at his or her
discretion, return the item to the donor or give the item or an amount equal to
its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under §
501(c)3 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended,
renumbered or succeeded.
(Ord. 921, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 34.03 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time. No officer or employee shall
intentionally use any property or resources of the village in connection with
any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
      (1)   As part of that employee’s duties;
      (2)   As a condition of employment; or
      (3)   During any compensated time off.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded any additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form
of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for the officer’s or employee’s participation
in any prohibited political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter prohibits activities that are otherwise
permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as a part of his or her
official or employment duties or activities that are undertaken by an officer
or employee on a voluntary basis as permitted by law.
   (E)   No person shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party or of a political organization or club because he or she is
either:
      (1)   In a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of
public employment; or
      (2)   In a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by
federal funds and that is subject to the Federal Standards for a Merit System
of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs.
(Ord. 921, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 34.04 ETHICS OFFICER.
   The Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall be designated the Ethics
Officer for the village. The Ethics Officer’s duties and responsibilities shall
include:
   (A)   Providing guidance to officers and employees in completing statements
of economic interest before they are filed with the appropriate office;
   (B)   Providing guidance to officers and employees in the interpretation and
implementation of this subchapter and the requirements of § 5-15 and Article 10
of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, being 5 ILCS 430; and
   (C)   Providing guidance to officers and employees in the interpretation and
implementation of other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations
of the village, the state or the federal government dealing with ethics,
conflicts of interest, interests in contracts, jobs, work or materials or the
profits thereof, or services to be performed for or by the village.
(Ord. 921, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 34.05 INTERPRETATION.
   It is the intent of the village that the provisions of this subchapter shall
be substantially in accordance with the requirements of § 5-15 and Article 10
of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, being 5 ILCS 430. To the
extent that § 5-15 or Article 10 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics
Act, being 5 ILCS 430 may be more restrictive than the requirements of this
subchapter, the provisions of § 5-15 and Article 10 of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act, being 5 ILCS 430 shall apply and control.
(Ord. 921, passed 5-10-2004)
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
Electricity Tax
   
35.01   Definitions
   
35.02   Tax imposed
   
35.03   Exceptions
   
35.04   Additional taxes
   
35.05   Collection
   
35.06   Reports to village
   
35.07   Resales
   
35.08   Books and records
   
35.09   Credit for over-payment
   35.10 through 35.19   Reserved
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
   
35.20   Definitions
   
35.21   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed
   
35.22   Collection of tax by retailers
   
35.23   Returns to Department
   
35.24   Resellers
   
35.25   Surcharge imposed
 
   
35.99   Penalty
ELECTRICITY TAX
§ 35.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions,
any state university created by statute or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE STATE OF ILLINOIS. Any person
having or maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission
facility, sales office or other place of business or any employee, agent or
other representative operating within the state under the authority of the
person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, regardless of whether the place of
business or agent or other representative is located in the state permanently
or temporarily, or whether the person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in the state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in § 8-11-2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
(Ord. 844, passed 2-8-1999; Ord. 850, passed 4-12-1999)
§ 35.02 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the occupation or privilege
of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates,
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser in an amount as established in
the annual fee ordinance.
   (B)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the rates set forth in subsection (A)
above shall be effective:
      (1)   On May 1, 1999 for residential customers; and
      (2)   For nonresidential customers, on the earlier of:
         (a)   The first bill for electric service issued after January 1,
2001; or
         (b)   The date of the first bill for electric service issued pursuant
to 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
   (C)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the tax imposed by § 1(c) of Ordinance
556 (providing for a gross receipts utility tax), as amended by Ordinance 695,
shall remain in effect:
      (1)   For receipts attributable to residential customers, until April 30,
1999; and
      (2)   For receipts attributable to nonresidential customers, the earlier
of:
         (a)   Through the last bill for electric service issued prior to
December 31, 2000; or
         (b)   The date of the first bill for electric service issued to the
nonresidential customer pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
(Ord. 844, passed 2-8-1999; Ord. 850, passed 4-12-1999)
§ 35.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   None of the taxes authorized by this subchapter may be imposed with respect
to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which
the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the
United States, be made the subject of taxation by the state or any political
subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling or transmitting gas, water or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this subchapter for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; nor shall any tax
authorized by this subchapter be imposed upon any person engaged in a business
or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same
rate or rates upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the
village, whether privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the
same privilege within the village.
(Ord. 844, passed 2-8-1999; Ord. 850, passed 4-12-1999)
§ 35.04 ADDITIONAL TAXES.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be in addition to other taxes
levied upon the taxpayer or its business.
(Ord. 844, passed 2-8-1999; Ord. 850, passed 4-12-1999)
§ 35.05 COLLECTION.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be collected from the purchaser by
the person maintaining a place of business in the state who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser
to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this subchapter and
any tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt
owed to the village by the person delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding the
tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity; provided that the
person delivering electricity shall be allowed a credit for the tax related to
deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as
uncollectible, and provided further, that if the charges are thereafter
collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit the tax. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to the gross charge an
amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity
for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and
filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village upon
request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
village in the manner prescribed by the village. A person delivering
electricity who files a return pursuant to this section shall, at the time of
filing the return, pay the village the amount of the tax collected pursuant to
this subchapter.
(Ord. 844, passed 2-8-1999; Ord. 850, passed 4-12-1999)
§ 35.06 REPORTS TO VILLAGE.
   (A)   Every person required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this
subchapter shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form prescribed by the
Village Treasurer. The return and the accompanying remittance shall be due on
or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is
collected or is required to be collected under §
35.05.
   (B)   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer who has not
paid the tax imposed by this subchapter to a person delivering electricity as
set forth in §
35.05 and who is not otherwise exempted from paying the tax shall file a return
in the form prescribed by the Village Treasurer.
   (C)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making the return, pay to the village the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he or she so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between the billings and the taxable gross
receipts.
(Ord. 844, passed 2-8-1999; Ord. 850, passed 4-12-1999)
§ 35.07 RESALES.
   (A)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Village
Treasurer and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity,
and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially
nontaxable as a sale for resale.
   (B)   If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Village
Treasurer for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it
is not liable for the tax imposed by this subchapter on any purchases of
electricity and shall furnish additional information as the Village Treasurer
may reasonably require.
   (C)   Upon approval of the application, the Village Treasurer shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   (D)   The Village Treasurer may cancel the resale number of any person if
the person fails to pay any tax payable under this subchapter for electricity
used or consumed by the person, or if the number:
      (1)   Was obtained through misrepre- sentation; or
      (2)   Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making
resales.
   (E)   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this
subchapter directly to the Village Treasurer on the amount of electricity that
the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect and remit the tax on the
amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
   (F)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the Village
Treasurer the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and any
other information that the Village Treasurer may reasonably require.
(Ord. 844, passed 2-8-1999; Ord. 850, passed 4-12-1999)
§ 35.08 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every tax collector and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by
this subchapter shall keep accurate books and records of its business or
activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions
that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this
subchapter. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
(Ord. 844, passed 2-8-1999; Ord. 850, passed 4-12-1999)
§ 35.09 CREDIT FOR OVER-PAYMENT.
   (A)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake
of fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment. No person shall be entitled to a refund of, or a credit for,
a tax imposed under this subchapter unless the person files a claim for refund
or credit within one year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted.
   (B)   In the absence of fraud or willful violation of this subchapter, no
action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of the amount.
(Ord. 844, passed 2-8-1999; Ord. 850, passed 4-12-1999)
§§ 35.10 THROUGH 35.19 RESERVED.
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
§ 35.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, 35 ILCS 636, as
amended from time to time.
   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in the
village regardless of where the amount is billed or paid.
   DEPARTMENT. The State Department of Revenue.
   GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of telecommunications, the cost of the materials used,
labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS
CHARGES for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
termination point within the village and charges for the portion of the inter-
office channels provided within the village. Charges for that portion of the
inter-office channel connecting two or more channel termination points, one or
more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of the village,
shall be determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total
charge for the inter-office channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is
the number of channel termination points that are located within the
jurisdictional boundary of the village and the denominator of which is the
total number of channel termination points connected by the inter-office
channel. However, GROSS CHARGE shall not include:
      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
         (a)   The tax imposed by this subchapter;
         (b)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, being
35 ILCS 630;
         (c)   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (d)   911 surcharges; or
         (e)   Charges added to customers’ bills pursuant to the provisions of
§§ 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5, as amended, or
any similar charges added to customers’ bills by retailers who are not subject
to rate regulation by the State Commerce Commission for the purpose of
recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those
provisions of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5.
      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of
the village;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. The equipment includes, but
is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein the charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under § 9-222.1
of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5 to the extent of the exemption
and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and
Community Affairs;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this Act has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering the
service;
      (7)   Any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which
GROSS CHARGES are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become
worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax
standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid,
the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting
period in which the payment is made;
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices;
      (9)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, being 35 ILCS 635; or
      (10)   (a)   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if:
            1.   Those charges are aggregated with other charges for
telecommunications that are taxable;
            2.   Those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill
or invoice; and
            3.   The retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on
the retailer’s books and records kept in the regular course of business.
         (b)   If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the
GROSS CHARGE from the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or
telecommunications billed on a combined basis shall be attributed to the
taxable services or telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable
charges shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county or other political
subdivision of this state.
   PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING ARRANGEMENTS. That term as defined in § 2-27 of
the Retailers’ Occupations Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 120.
   PRIVATE LINE. A dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single
customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified
locations to one or more other specified locations.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER. Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the Department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment
of the tax. The retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
the tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
Department at its discretion.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE OR ANY LIKE TERM. Any
retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary,
an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office,
warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative
operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether the place of business or agent or other
representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether the
retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments and state universities created by statute and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems and maritime systems,
service address means the customer’s place of primary use. For air-to-ground
systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of a taxpayer’s
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in this state where bills are sent.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   TAXPAYER. A person who individually, or through his or her agents, employees
or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a liability for the tax
imposed by this subchapter.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, private
line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer
exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized
mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service or any other form of
mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by the provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-
company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS
subject to the tax imposed under this subchapter.
(Ord. 943, passed 9-12-2005)
§ 35.21 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 5-10 and 5-
20 of the Act, upon the act or privilege of originating in the village or
receiving in the village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of
6% of the gross charge for the telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer, in lieu of the rate of tax that would otherwise be imposed pursuant
to §§ 5-25 and 5-30 of the Act. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of
the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any
taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality
on that event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or
authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due
and paid in the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit
against any other municipal tax.
   (B)   A tax is hereby imposed, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 5-10 and 5-
20 of the Act, upon the act or privilege of originating in the village or
receiving in the village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of
6% of the gross charge for the telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer, in lieu of the rate of tax that would otherwise be imposed pursuant
to §§ 5-25 and 5-30 of the Act. To prevent actual multi-state or multi-
municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under
this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in
another state or municipality in this state on that event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the
extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in another state or the
tax properly due and paid in a municipality in this state which was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this
state.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this subchapter is not imposed on the foregoing
acts or privileges to the extent the acts or privileges may not, under the
Constitution and statutes of the United States or the Act or statutes of this
state, be made the subject of taxation by the village.
(Ord. 943, passed 9-12-2005)
§ 35.22 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by the retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this subchapter and any tax collected by the
retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the Department. The tax imposed by this subchapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for the sale at
retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the
manner provided by the Department.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax imposed by this subchapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(Ord. 943, passed 9-12-2005)
§ 35.23 RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT.
   Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed by this subchapter on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the Department pursuant to § 5-50 of the Act and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to implement that
Act.
(Ord. 943, passed 9-12-2005)
§ 35.24 RESELLERS.
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of those telecommunications, the person shall apply to the
Department for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts which will show
the Department why the applicant is not liable for the tax imposed by this
subchapter on any of the purchases and shall furnish additional information as
the Department may reasonably require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant. The
Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive the telecommunication tax-free when the
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person’s having discontinued the making of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege
of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to that
person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
(Ord. 943, passed 9-12-2005)
§ 35.25 SURCHARGE IMPOSED.
   A surcharge is hereby imposed upon the monthly billed subscribers of
telecommunications carriers residing within the village for funding of the 9-1-
1 emergency telephone system at a rate per network connection, in an amount of
$0.00.
(Ord. 952, passed 4-10-2006; Ord. 1187, passed 1-23-2017)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
TITLE V: VILLAGE UTILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER SERVICE
      
51.   WATER CONSERVATION
      
52.   SEWER USE
      
53.   WASTEWATER
      
54.   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
      
55.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
56.   CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
57.   TREES AND SHRUBS
CHAPTER 50: WATER SERVICE
Section
Water Service
   
50.01   Water use rules
   
50.02   Application for water service
   
50.03   Deposit by non-owners; owner’s agreement
   
50.04   Meter required
   
50.05   Meter size
   
50.06   Metered water rates
   
50.07   Fire hydrant rental
   
50.08   Water bills, when due and payable; failure to pay penalties
   
50.09   Water bills a lien on real property
   
50.10   Change in ownership or tenancy of premises
   
50.11   Water supplied to several customers through one service pipe
   
50.12   Resale of water prohibited
   
50.13   Use of water from fire hydrants
   
50.14   Return of deposit
   
50.15   Damaged meters; consumer to pay cost of repairs
   
50.16   Repairs to meters to be made by village only
   
50.17   Service pipe leaks; responsibility for repairs
   
50.18   Liability for damage
   
50.19   Liability for claims
   
50.20   Right reserved to limit or suspend use of water
   
50.21   Right of entry of members of Water Department
 
   
50.99   Penalty
WATER SERVICE
§ 50.01 WATER USE RULES.
   Every consumer of water and every owner, occupant or person in possession,
charge or control of any premises supplied with water by the village shall be
governed by and be subject to the provisions of this chapter and those rules
and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the Village Board
concerning the use of water. It is hereby made the duty of the Director of
Public Works to enforce the provisions of this chapter and of those rules and
regulations as may be adopted.
(1959 Code, § 38-1)
§ 50.02 APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   No water shall be turned on for service or be supplied to any premises
in the village where water is not now being supplied by the village until an
application shall have been made in writing to the Village Manager, stating the
full name and address of the applicant, the premises to be supplied, the
purpose for which a water supply is desired and the charges and deposits
hereinafter specified shall have been made and paid.
   (B)   In case the applicant is not the owner of the premises for which water
service is applied, no water shall be supplied to the premises until the amount
hereinafter specified has been deposited. A tenant or non-owner whose service
is temporarily disconnected for nonpayment of water bills shall, upon renewing
service, be considered a new customer and shall be required to sign the
application and to make the required deposit.
   (C)   The application shall contain an agreement by the applicant to accept
and abide by all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances
of the village concerning the furnishing and use of water by the village.
(1959 Code, § 38-2)
§ 50.03 DEPOSIT BY NON-OWNERS; OWNER’S AGREEMENT.
   Water shall not be furnished to a new tenant or non-owner until he or she
makes a cash deposit with the Village Clerk in an amount as established in the
annual fee ordinance to cover the value of the meter furnished, and a further
sum of an amount as established in the annual fee ordinance as a guarantee that
water bills rendered will be paid. The Village Manager is hereby authorized to
increase the amount of the deposit where the consumption of water exceeds, or
it is estimated that the amount of water may exceed, the consumption of water
during any billing period.
(1959 Code, § 38-3) (Ord. 720, passed 10-14-1985)
§ 50.04 METER REQUIRED.
   All water supplied by the village shall be measured through meters of the
kind designated or approved by the Village Board, and all water passing through
a meter shall be charged for, whether used or wasted through defective pipes,
fixtures or otherwise. If any meter ceases to register, stops or is otherwise
out of repair, and fails to correctly indicate the water consumed, the Director
of Public Works shall estimate from the most reliable data available the
quantity of water passing through the meter during the failure and the bill so
estimated must be paid by the consumer. All meters shall be installed at the
expense of the property served. The Village Board shall, by resolution,
establish and amend, from time to time, a written list of charges for
installation of new and replacement water meters.
(1959 Code, § 38-4) (Ord. 646, passed 10-10-1977; Ord. 1064, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 50.05 METER SIZE.
   One five-eighths-inch meter, designed to supply 1,000 gallons per hour to
the premises, shall be furnished by the village, without charge to each
consumer. When a consumer desires to regularly use larger quantities of water
than can be supplied through a five-eighths-inch meter, he or she shall pay the
cost of the larger meter. In no case shall a meter be installed of larger size
than the existing water service pipe. All meters when installed shall become
and remain the property of the village.
(1959 Code, § 38-5)
§ 50.06 METERED WATER RATES.
   (A)   The rates established for consumers within the village receiving water
from the water system of the village shall be found in the annual fee
ordinance.
   (B)   The rates established for consumers outside the village receiving
water from the water system of the village shall be found in the annual fee
ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 38-6) (Ord. 545, passed 2-14-1966; Ord. 567, passed 7-8-1968;
Ord. 571, passed 8-12-1968; Ord. 601, passed 8-16-1971; Ord. 625, passed 1-27-
1975; Ord. 658, passed 4-18-1979; Ord. 678, passed 12-14-1981; Ord. 741, passed
3-14-1988; Ord. 768, passed 12-10-1990; Ord. 782, passed 12-9-1991; Ord. 799,
passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 828, passed 8-12-1996; Ord. 858, passed 6-14-1999; Ord.
888, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 1016, passed 5-11-2009; Ord. 1037, passed 4-19-
2010; Ord. 1061, passed 4-18-2011; Ord. 1086, passed 11-19-2012)
§ 50.07 FIRE HYDRANT RENTAL.
   An annual service charge of an amount as established in the annual fee
ordinance, payable one-third on February 1, June 1 and October 1 of each year,
shall be paid by the village from its general corporate fund to the Water
Department of the village for each public and private fire hydrant in use.
(1959 Code, § 38-8) (Ord. 545, passed 2-14-1966; Ord. 554, passed 11-14-1966)
§ 50.08 WATER BILLS, WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE; FAILURE TO PAY PENALTIES.
   (A)   Water meters shall be read every four months at times as shall be
determined by the Village Water Department and bills for water furnished during
each four-month meter reading period preceding the date of billing shall be
rendered and be due and payable within 30 days after the date of the billing.
   (B)   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
water service (collectively referred to as “consumer” for purposes of this
section) shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the charges of the
village for water service to the premises. Any person responsible for the
payment of any water service charges imposed by the village who shall fail to
pay the charges when due shall be responsible for payment of the costs incurred
by the village, including the fees and costs of any attorney and/or collection
agency retained by the village for the purpose of seeking collection of the
charges, whether or not suit is instituted, in addition to all other fees,
charges, fines, and penalties then due and payable.
   (C)   If a bill for water is not paid within 30 days, it shall become
delinquent and a penalty of 7%, compounded monthly, shall be added to the bill.
A notice of delinquency and a second bill showing the gross amount due,
including the penalty, shall be sent to the consumer by U.S. mail. If a
delinquent bill remains unpaid 40 days after the date of the billing, then a
water termination notice shall be sent to the consumer, which notice will
direct the consumer to submit full payment within ten days. If a delinquent
bill remains unpaid 50 days after the date of the billing, then the Village
Manager or his or her designee shall post a yellow termination notice on the
front door of the premises of the delinquent customer, which notice will direct
the customer to submit full payment within ten days. If a delinquent bill
remains unpaid 60 days after the date of the billing, then the Village Manager
or his or her designee shall post a red termination notice on the front door of
the premises of the delinquent customer, which notice will direct the customer
to submit full payment within three business days. If a delinquent bill remains
unpaid after the date specified in the red termination notice, then the Village
Manager may direct the Director of Public Works to shut off the water supply lo
the premises of the delinquent consumer. After the water supply is shut off, it
will not be turned on again until the customer either (i) pays the full amount
of the unpaid bill plus all penalty charges and a reconnection fee in the
amount provided in the annual fee ordinance or (ii) enters into a payment plan
approved by the Village Manager as provided in division (D) below.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a termination notice pursuant to division (C) above, a
consumer may contact the Village Manager or his or her designee and request to
be put on a payment plan. The Village Manager may, in his or her sole
discretion, approve a payment plan with a term of not more than six months,
provided that, before beginning the payment plan, the consumer pays at least
50% of the outstanding bill plus all penalty charges and the reconnection fee.
If the consumer fails to make any payment when due under the payment plan, then
a water termination notice shall be sent to the consumer, and the village shall
follow the notice and termination procedures provided in division (C) above for
bills that are 40 or more days delinquent.
   (E)   Each termination notice shall inform the consumer that the consumer
has a right to request a hearing regarding the water billing by submitting a
written appeal to the Village Manager or his or her designee within three
business days after the date of the termination notice that states the basis
for the appeal and requests a hearing. Within three business days after
receiving such an appeal, the Village Manager will schedule a hearing and send
a notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing to the consumer by U.S.
mail. The notice must be mailed at least five days in advance of the hearing.
If the Village Manager or his or her designee fails to schedule a hearing
within three days after receiving the initial notification of appeal, the
resident shall either deliver a second notification of appeal to the Office of
the Village Manager, via hand-delivery or a courier service (with signature
confirmation by a village employee). The hearing will be conducted by a
committee of two Village Trustees appointed as hearing officers by the Village
President. At the hearing, the consumer shall have the right to appear in
person or through counsel and to present evidence in support of his or her
appeal. The village may conduct its own investigation of the consumer’s appeal
and may present evidence with respect thereto at the hearing. Within seven days
after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officers must issue a final
written order and send a copy of the order to the consumer by U.S. mail. If the
order requires the consumer to pay to the village service charges, penalties,
or other fees or costs, the order must specify the date by which payment is due
and state that water service may be terminated if full payment is not made by
that date. If the consumer fails to make full payment in accordance with the
order, then the Village Manager may direct the Director of Public Works to shut
off the water supply to the consumer’s premises. If the village fails to
conduct a hearing and issue a written order within the timeframes prescribed by
this division (E), then the appeal shall be deemed sustained.
   (F)   The Village Manager is authorized to develop and recommend rules and
procedures for the implementation and administration of this section.
(1959 Code, § 38-9) (Ord. 545, passed 2-14-1966; Ord. 755, passed 12-11-1989;
Ord. 820, passed 6-12-1995; Ord. 858, passed 6-14-1999; Ord. 1104, passed 6-17-
2013; Am. Ord. 1189, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 50.09 WATER BILLS A LIEN ON REAL PROPERTY.
   Whenever a bill due the village for water service or any penalty, charge or
cost of the village in seeking collection thereof remain unpaid upon the
expiration of 65 days after the date of the original bill for water service,
the Village Collector may file with the Recorder of Deeds in the county a
statement of a lien claim containing the legal description of the premises
served, the amount of the unpaid bill, penalty, charges and costs of
collection, and a notice that the village claims a lien for the amount as well
as for all charges for water supplied subsequent to the period covered by the
bill. Whenever a bill for water service or other charges remains unpaid for 65
days after the date of the original bill, if the water consumer whose bill is
unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the Village Collector has notice
thereof, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her
address is known to the Village Collector. Failure of the Village Collector to
record the lien claim or to mail the notice or failure of the owner to receive
the notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid water
bills, penalty charges and costs of collection thereof. Property subject to a
lien for unpaid charges for water service, penalties, charges and costs may be
sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of sale shall be applied to
pay the charges, after deducting costs of the proceedings, as is the case in
the foreclosure of statutory liens. The foreclosure shall be by bill in equity
in the name of the village. The Village Attorney or other legal counsel
retained by the village is authorized and directed to institute proceedings in
the name of the village and in accordance with applicable law against any
person responsible for unpaid charges and/or any property for which the bill
for water service, penalty charges or costs of collection remain unpaid 65 days
after the date of the original bill.
(1959 Code, § 38-10) (Ord. 820, passed 6-12-1995; Ord. 1104, passed 6-17-2013)
§ 50.10 CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP OR TENANCY OF PREMISES.
   When an owner or tenant vacates premises and does not desire to assume
further responsibility for water bills accruing on the premises, he or she may
give notice in writing to the Village Manager to read and remove the meter and
turn off the water supply, and upon receipt of the notice, the Village Manager
shall promptly cause the meter to be read, and may cause the meter to be
removed and the water supply turned off at the main service cock in the public
parkway. Before renewing service for a new owner, the Village Manager shall
require him or her to make an affidavit as to the time of purchase, date of
deed, name of grantor and Recorder’s document number.
(1959 Code, § 38-11)
§ 50.11 WATER SUPPLIED TO SEVERAL CUSTOMERS THROUGH ONE SERVICE PIPE.
   Whenever two or more customers in the same or in different buildings on the
same premises are supplied with water through a single pipe connected with the
water service system, the Village Manager may cut off and withhold the water
supply from the service pipe for failure on the part of any one of the
consumers to comply with all provisions of this chapter or to pay or have paid
any sum of money due the village for any water supplied through the service
pipe.
(1959 Code, § 38-12)
§ 50.12 RESALE OF WATER PROHIBITED.
   No water supplied by the village shall be resold or distributed to any
premises other than that for which application has been made and a meter
installed.
(1959 Code, § 38-13)
§ 50.13 USE OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No person except a regular employee of the Water or Street Department of the
village, or of the Fire Department of the village or serving the village, shall
open, take water from or in any way interfere with any public fire hydrant, or
unmetered private fire hydrant, without obtaining a permit to do so. The
regular rates for the use of water shall be charged for all water taken from
fire hydrants.
(1959 Code, § 38-14) (Ord. 554, passed 11-14-1966)
§ 50.14 RETURN OF DEPOSIT.
   The deposit required by this chapter shall be returned to the customer upon
the discontinuance of service and the payment for all water previously
furnished.
(1959 Code, § 38-15)
§ 50.15 DAMAGED METERS; CONSUMER TO PAY COST OF REPAIRS.
   The consumer shall protect the meter installed in or upon the premises
served thereby from excessive cold, backflow of hot water, injury or theft and
the cost of making repairs or replacements resulting from any causes shall be
charged to and be paid by the consumer.
(1959 Code, § 38-16)
§ 50.16 REPAIRS TO METERS TO BE MADE BY VILLAGE ONLY.
   No water meter shall be repaired, changed, altered, disconnected or in any
manner disturbed except by the Village Water Department, provided that in case
of freezing, bad leak or other dangerous emergencies, qualified plumbers may,
without first obtaining a permit, remove the damaged meter from the line, but
in no case from the premises. Notice of the removal shall be filed with the
Village Manager by the plumber within 48 hours after the removal.
(1959 Code, § 38-17)
§ 50.17 SERVICE PIPE LEAKS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIRS.
   (A)   Every person supplied by the village with water shall, at his or her
own expense, keep in repair all service pipes and appurtenances leading from
the village water main to his or her meter and prevent waste of water from
those mains, service pipes and appurtenances.
   (B)   Every water main leading from village water main which is installed to
serve a private fire hydrant, is hereby designated a private water main, and
every owner of private premises for whose protection from fire the private
water main is or may be installed, shall at his or her own expense, keep the
private water main and the private fire hydrant served thereby and all
appurtenances thereto, in repair and prevent waste of water from the private
water main, private fire hydrant and all appurtenances thereto.
   (C)   If leaks between the village mains and the meter, or in a private
water main or private fire hydrant, are not repaired within two days after
notice is served either upon the owner or person in possession, charge or
control of the premises, in person or by mail, the Director of Public Works may
shut off the water until proper repairs have been made; provided, however, that
if in the opinion of the Superintendent, the leak is of sufficient size to
require that service be shut off sooner, he or she may shut off the service
without notice until the repair is made. No reduction shall be made from the
regular rates as billed on account of leaking pipes, private water mains,
hydrants or fixtures.
(1959 Code, § 38-18) (Ord. 554, passed 11-14-1966)
§ 50.18 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE.
   The village shall not be liable for any damage caused by leak or break in
any service pipe or private water main, or the damage caused by a failure to
repair the same promptly, or for any damage caused or resulting from failure to
furnish water to the premises while pipes or mains are undergoing repair. The
Director of Public Works shall shut off the water to allow repairs to be made
when notice is given by him or her that repairs are contemplated, and he or she
may shut off the water without notice to the consumer when in his or her
judgment emergency requires the making of repairs without the giving of notice.
(1959 Code, § 38-19) (Ord. 554, passed 11-14-1966)
§ 50.19 LIABILITY FOR CLAIMS.
   No claim shall be allowed against the village on account of variation in
water pressure, the ram of water from the mains (water hammer), stoppage for
repairs, interruptions of water supply caused by the breaking or collapse of
pipes or machinery, on account of fires, or by stoppage for repairs or other
emergency or cause whatsoever.
(1959 Code, § 38-20)
§ 50.20 RIGHT RESERVED TO LIMIT OR SUSPEND USE OF WATER.
   The right is reserved by the Village Board to suspend or limit the use of
water supplied at and during times as in its judgment the public exigency may
require.
(1959 Code, § 38-21)
§ 50.21 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF MEMBERS OF WATER DEPARTMENT.
   The Director of Public Works and any employee of the Village Water
Department, shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to enter the premises or
buildings of consumers for the purpose of reading meters, testing and examining
water pipes and fixtures and the manner in which water is used.
(1959 Code, § 38-22)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 51: WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
51.01   Lawn sprinkling and emergency powers
   
51.02   Reserved
   
51.03   Failure to obey orders
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 LAWN SPRINKLING AND EMERGENCY POWERS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, LAWN shall mean that portion of any
lot under cultivation with grass, trees, shrubs, bushes or other types of
vegetation.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), from May 15 through
September 15of every year, lawn sprinkling shall be limited as follows:
      (1)   Lawn sprinkling is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. daily on all lots, except that hand-held hoses or sprinkling cans may
be used for the watering of gardens and shrubs.
      (2)   During all hours outside the prohibited hours, lawn sprinkling is
allowed only on:
         (a)   Even numbered days for lots bearing an even-numbered address;
and
         (b)   Odd numbered days for lots bearing an odd-numbered address.
      (3)   Newly sodded or seeded areas of lawn may be watered at any time for
the two-week period immediately following the installation of such sod or seed.
   (C)   (1)   If, in the judgment of the Village Manager, a public water
shortage emergency exists or is deemed to be imminent, that official shall have
the authority to invoke an immediate ban or additional restrictions on all
external use of village water. The Village Manager may mitigate the impact of
such ban or additional restrictions in specific circumstances of hardship as
may be deemed reasonable, prudent and appropriate to the precise nature of the
water emergency. The emergency ban or additional restrictions on external use
of village water shall be implemented by written, posted and electronic news
media and direct contact with users by employees of the village.
      (2)   In the event any such water shortage emergency is expected to
continue for more than three days, the Board of Trustees shall review all data
applicable to the emergency at a timely regular, special or emergency meeting.
Based upon the water shortage emergency data, the Board of Trustees may remove
or mitigate the ban or additional restrictions, or promulgate such additional
controls, on the use of the village water supply as are deemed necessary. In
the event any such emergency is expected to continue for two weeks or more,
notice of resultant village water use restrictions shall be given to affected
water utility customers via posting and electronic news media, and other
available means such as village newsletters and electronic communications.
(Ord. 647, passed 12-12-1977; Ord. 1149, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 51.02 RESERVED.
§ 51.03 FAILURE TO OBEY ORDERS.
   It shall be unlawful not to obey an order promulgated under this chapter.
(Ord. 647, passed 12-12-1977)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
(Ord. 647, passed 12-12-1977)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER USE
Section
Use of Public Sewers Required
   
52.001   Depositing unsanitary matter
   
52.002   Discharging to natural outlets
   
52.003   Privies, privy vaults, septic tanks and cesspools
   
52.004   Toilet facilities
   52.005 through 52.014   Reserved
Private Sewage Disposal
   
52.015   Private sewage disposal systems
   52.016 through 52.029   Reserved
Building Sewers, Connections and Maintenance
   
52.030   Permit required
   
52.031   Certificate of competency
   
52.032   Filing; bond
   
52.033   Revocation
   
52.034   Junction piece to be placed by village
   
52.035   Connections
   
52.036   Notice
   
52.037   Master sewer builder; permit
   
52.038   Drainage work
   
52.039   Storm sewer system
   
52.040   Encountering water, gas or other pipes or drains; approval
   
52.041   Encountering gas or water mains or other pipes; protection
   
52.042   Steam traps or heating apparatus
   
52.043   Proper openings
   
52.044   Installation of drains
   
52.045   Building sewer pipe requirements
   
52.046   Dead ends
   
52.047   Receiving basins
   
52.048   Intercepting basins
   
52.049   Floor drains
   
52.050   Roof and area run-off
   
52.051   Subhouse drains
   
52.052   Soil or vent pipe
   
52.053   Motors, air compressors and air tanks
   
52.054   Automatic water ejectors
   
52.055   Metallic rain leaders and eave or cornice gutters
   
52.056   Downspout connection
   
52.057   Rain leaders along sidewalks or passageways
   
52.058   Conductor pipes
   
52.059   Subsoil drains
   
52.060   Catch basins
   
52.061   Disposal into sewer system
   
52.062   Building sewer permits
   
52.063   Costs and expenses
   
52.064   Separate building sewers
   
52.065   Use of old building sewers
   
52.066   Conformance to specifications of the American Society of Testing
Materials
   
52.067   Building sewer elevation
   
52.068   Connections to building sewer connected to public sanitary sewer
   
52.069   Connection of building sewer to conform
   
52.070   Inspection
   
52.071   Excavations
   
52.072   Replacement of defective material
   
52.073   Installations and maintenance
   
52.074   Repairs
   52.075 through 52.084   Reserved
Use of Public Sewers
   
52.085   Discharge of stormwater, surface water and the like
   
52.086   Discharge of prohibited items
   
52.087   Discharge of industrial users
   
52.088   Discharge of wastes that may harm the sewer system
   
52.089   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
52.090   Maintenance of flow-equalizing facilities
   
52.091   Control manholes
   
52.092   Industrial wastes
   
52.093   Measurements, tests and analyses
   
52.094   Special agreements
   52.095 through 52.104   Reserved
Protection of Sewer System from Damage
   
52.105   Damage to sewer system
   52.106 through 52.119   Reserved
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
   
52.120   Permission to enter properties
   
52.121   Observance of safety rules
   
52.122   Entrance; easements
   52.123 through 52.134   Reserved
Extraneous Flows Into the Sanitary Sewer System Through Illegal Connections
from Private Properties
   
52.135   Extraneous flows
 
   
52.999   Penalty
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
§ 52.001 DEPOSITING UNSANITARY MATTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.002 DISCHARGING TO NATURAL OUTLETS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.003 PRIVIES, PRIVY VAULTS, SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOLS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.004 TOILET FACILITIES.
   Except as provided in this section, the owner of all houses, buildings or
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes
situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way
in which there is now located or may in the future be located any public
sanitary sewer of the village, is hereby required at his or her expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities
directly with the public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that the public sanitary sewer is within 200 feet (61 meters) of the property
line. In the event a public sanitary sewer is greater than 200 feet (61 meters)
away from a property and a combined sewer is located within 200 feet (61
meters) from the property, the owner is required at his or her expense to
connect the facilities directly with the combined sewer.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§§ 52.005 THROUGH 52.014 RESERVED.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 52.015 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   Public sanitary (or combined) sewers are available throughout the village
under the provisions of §
52.004. Private sewage disposal systems shall be unlawful in the village.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§§ 52.016 THROUGH 52.029 RESERVED.
BUILDING SEWERS, CONNECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE
§ 52.030 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the village.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.031 CERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY.
   No person, firm or corporation shall be granted any permit to build any
building sewer or lay any drain within the village unless he or she shall have
obtained a certificate as to his or her competency to engage in the business,
as required by the Department of Registration and Education in Springfield,
Illinois.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.032 FILING; BOND.
   Every person desiring a permit to work on sewers shall file with the
Building Commissioner a copy of his or her state certificate, accompanied by a
bond with good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the Village Board, in
the penal sum of an amount as established in the annual fee ordinance
conditioned that he, she or they will indemnify and save harmless the village
from all accidents and damages caused by any negligence in either the execution
or protection of his or her work, either by himself, herself or anyone acting
under his or her direction, or for any unfaithful or inadequate work done under
and by virtue of his or her permit; and that the permittee will conform to the
ordinances of the village, and will pay the cost of restoring any street,
alley, sidewalk or pavement disturbed by him or her, so as to leave same in as
good state and condition as he or she found it. The Building Commissioner shall
investigate the application and report on the responsibility and skill of the
applicant. A master sewer builder who holds a state master plumber’s
certificate may file a single bond in the penal sum of an amount as established
in the annual fee ordinance to cover both classes of work and liability.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.033 REVOCATION.
   The President and Board of Trustees shall have the power to suspend or
revoke the permit to work on sewers of any master sewer builder for violation
of any of the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.034 JUNCTION PIECE TO BE PLACED BY VILLAGE.
   (A)   Whenever it may be found necessary to make a connection between a
building drain and the public sewer in the street where no junction piece was
originally placed in the latter in front of the lot, the junction piece will be
furnished and put in place by the village at cost.
   (B)   Under no circumstances will drain layers or other unauthorized parties
be allowed to break into the sewers for the purpose of setting junctions or
making any kind of connections whatsoever.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.035 CONNECTIONS.
   Where no stub, Y or T exists, an entire length of the public sewer shall be
removed and replaced with a Y or T length unless a special M-D cut in
connection, or equal, which will not allow the spigot end of the house sewer to
project beyond the inner surface of the main sewer, is used. No cut-in
connection made by breaking or cutting a hole in the main and inserting the
spigot end of an ordinary sewer pipe shall be permitted.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.036 NOTICE.
   Notice must be filed in the office of the Village Manager before any street
or highway can be opened for the purpose of constructing a house sewer. Nothing
in this section contained shall render the village liable to the sewer builder
or drain layer or relieve him or her from the duty and expense of protecting
trenches until a time as the village is able to make the inspections and do any
incidental work it is required to perform.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.037 MASTER SEWER BUILDER; PERMIT.
   No master sewer builder shall open any street pavement or sidewalk for the
purpose of making a new connection to the sewer or for any other purpose, nor
shall he or she tunnel under any part of the street pavement without a permit
issued by the Building Commissioner, and no permit shall be issued except to
bonded master sewer builders upon deposit by the applicant therefor of a
sufficient sum to secure the cost of restoring the pavement or sidewalk, which
deposit shall be not less than an amount as established in the annual fee
ordinance and shall be returned to the person making it upon the restoration
being approved by the Building Commissioner. All street openings and sidewalk
tunnels shall be backfilled by the applicant with clean sand and thoroughly
compacted, and all tunnels under street pavements shall be backfilled with a
one to 12 mixture of cement and limestone screenings or a 1:4:8 concrete
aggregate.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.038 DRAINAGE WORK.
   Drainage work on the outside of buildings and between buildings and public
sewer shall be constructed of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) or other material
equally as good and approved by the Building Commissioner; and shall be laid,
when practicable, with a fall toward sewer connections of not less than one-
quarter inch to the running foot. All drainage is to be constructed to as near
a uniform grade and in as direct line to sewer connections as practical. The
pipe and fittings must be of clean and smooth interior, and shall be full area
of its respective size. Pipe and fittings shall be put together with a cement
mortar composed of one part of portland cement to two parts of clean, sharp
sand. Natural cement may be used for wet trench. Each length of pipe and each
fitting shall have solid or tramped earth, or other solid and imperishable
material under full length of same. A one-fourth bend shall not be used where
same can be avoided. No fittings or bend shall be used to change direction of
line of drainage, unless the fitting or bend shall be of a radius of not less
than 12 inches. Connection of one line of drainage with another shall be made,
where at all practical, with full half Y branches. The use of T connections is
prohibited. Change in direction of any line of drainage shall not be made by
the use of mitered pieces of straight pipe, but shall be made by the use of
approved fitting of the required angle. The interior of each joint of pipe or
fitting laid shall be swabbed out before another joint is made. No clay or tile
pipe or fittings shall be constructed inside, or under any building for
drainage purposes having an outlet to any sewer except on written permit from
the Building Commissioner. All building sewers run to receive drainage of any
kind from buildings shall terminate two feet outside the foundation walls of
the building. No tile house sewer shall at any time be laid nearer than two
feet to any wall, foundation or footing, except at or nearly perpendicular to
the wall or footing. If it should become necessary to place the building sewer
nearer to any wall, foundation or footing, or under any area wall or pier, the
building sewer shall be constructed of extra heavy cast iron pipe as for a
building drain.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.039 STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
   All new buildings hereafter constructed shall be provided with a separate
storm sewer system for roof and surface drainage. Except as provided in this
section, all stormwater discharge, including, without limitation, discharge
from sump pumps, foundation drains, downspouts, exterior foundation drains,
areaway drains, catch basins, inlets, and yard/site drains shall connect
directly to and be deposited directly into the storm sewer system. All separate
storm sewer systems shall be connected into the storm sewers where the storm
sewers are available in the parkway. Where no storm sewer is available in the
parkway or where the Public Works Director determines, due to existing or
planned design or environmental variables that direct discharge into a storm
sewer is not feasible, stormwater discharge shall be directed and managed in
accordance with the following:
   (A)   The use of green infrastructure best management practices;
   (B)   Stormwater may only discharge into the combined sewer system if it is
demonstrated that best management practices cannot feasibly be implemented to
address the full volume of discharge;
   (C)   Stormwater discharge must be directed to splash toward green
infrastructure, the street or alley, but no closer than ten feet from the
public right-of-way, and should splash in such a manner as to prevent basement
seepage into the building foundation or the expulsion of runoff onto adjacent
property; and
   (D)   Stormwater discharge shall be in accordance with plans approved by the
Public Works Director. The sanitary and storm sewer drains may be laid side by
side in one trench.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.040 ENCOUNTERING WATER, GAS OR OTHER PIPES OR DRAINS; APPROVAL.
   Should water, gas or other pipes or drains be encountered in the direct line
of a building sewer during its construction, the method of carrying the sewer
under, over or around such or similar obstructions, or of doing anything
involving such or similar obstructions, or of doing anything involving a
deviation from the proper line or standard grade, shall be approved by the
Building Commissioner.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.041 ENCOUNTERING GAS OR WATER MAINS OR OTHER PIPES; PROTECTION.
   Should gas or water mains or other pipes be encountered during the laying of
sewers or drains, the pipes encountered shall be carefully and thoroughly
protected against injury or settlement by the contractor at his or her own
expense.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.042 STEAM TRAPS OR HEATING APPARATUS.
   No steam, exhaust, blow-off drip, drain or return pipe from any steam trap
or heating apparatus shall connect direct with the sewer or with any house
drain, soil, or waste pipe or rain water pipe. The water steam or condensation
from those pipes before it shall enter any sewer or drain shall be discharged
into a suitable intercepting basin.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.043 PROPER OPENINGS.
   An arched or other proper opening shall be provided in the wall for the
building drain to prevent damage by settlement. The opening around the building
drain shall be filled with pure refined asphaltum, or made watertight by some
other method satisfactory to the Plumbing Inspector.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.044 INSTALLATION OF DRAINS.
   It shall be the duty of every person or corporation installing or causing to
be installed any drain, soil or waste pipe, with any sewer from any building,
structure or premises, to install the drain, soil or waste pipe or connection
of a size and dimensions as will convey and allow freely to pass, whatever may
properly enter the same, and in no case shall any drain be less than six inches
in diameter.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.045 BUILDING SEWER PIPE REQUIREMENTS.
   The building sewer when laid in made or filled-in ground shall be of
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) or other material equally as good and approved by the
Building Commissioner, laid on bed of approved grillage or concrete, or of cast
iron pipe, ASTM approved standards.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.046 DEAD ENDS.
   In the installation of any sewerage or plumbing system, no dead ends will be
permitted, except on repair work where an anti-siphon trap is to be used as
hereinafter provided. In making alterations of any existing plumbing or
sewerage system, or upon removing any existing fixture or fixtures connected at
the end of a branch drain, soil or waste pipe, the branch shall be removed its
entire length, or provision shall be made for a free circulation of air through
same. When the pipe is cut off where it branches from the main, the opening
shall be properly closed with a tile cover cemented in, or a cast iron plug
caulked in or a threaded cap or plug properly made up.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.047 RECEIVING BASINS.
   Waste from any kitchen sinks, floor drains or other fixtures likely to
contain greasy matter from hotels, apartment houses, restaurants, butcher
shops, packing houses, lard rendering establishments, manufacturing
establishments, bakeries, laundries, cleaning establishments, garages, stables,
yard and floor drains and drains from gravel roofs shall be made through
intervening receiving basins.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.048 INTERCEPTING BASINS.
   Intercepting basins for sinks, floor drains, downspouts, steam or heating
boilers or basins, constructed for any purpose, shall not be placed nearer than
two feet to the wall of any building or area unless properly tested and when
the basin is placed where the cover of same will be in the line of any
sidewalk, the cover shall be made of extra heavy cast iron, or when the basin
shall be within the lines of any road or driveway, the cover shall be a cast
iron manhole cover and frame.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.049 FLOOR DRAINS.
   (A)   Floor drains may be installed by means of Y fittings inserted in the
building drain and provided with a four inch cast iron deep seal trap and
fitted with a heavy barred strainer and back water valve or a screw type plug
normally closed.
   (B)   Where the floor of an entrance area to a basement or a round floor is
more than four inches lower than the basement or ground floor, an area drain
may be installed as follows. The opening shall be four inches in diameter and
provided with a heavy barred strainer set so that it cannot be easily removed.
The outlet pipe shall be of cast iron and shall be connected into the sewer
through a frost-proof trap. All area drains shall be provided with an approved
back water valve, set where it can be conveniently reached for cleaning. All
area drains located outside of buildings shall be connected to the storm drain
and discharge in accordance with §
52.039.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.050 ROOF AND AREA RUN-OFF.
   All roofs and paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards shall be drained
into the storm sewer in accordance with § 52.039. When existing drains used for
this purpose are connected with the storm sewer system, they shall be
effectually trapped, except roof leaders and conductors, where the roof or
gutter opening is located not less than 12 feet from a door, window scuttle or
air shaft. One trap may serve for all connections, but traps must be set below
the frost line or on the inside of the building.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.051 SUBHOUSE DRAINS.
   All subhouse drains shall discharge into an air-tight sump or receiving tank
so located as to receive the sewage by gravity, from which sump or receiving
tank the sewage shall be lifted and discharged into the house sewer by pumps,
ejectors or any equally efficient method. The sumps shall be either
automatically discharged or be of sufficient capacity to receive the house
sewage and wastes for not less than 24 hours.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.052 SOIL OR VENT PIPE.
   The soil or vent pipe leading to an ejector or other appliance for raising
sewage or other waste matter to the street sewer shall, where a water closet or
closets are installed, be provided with a vent pipe not less than four inches
in diameter, and where fixtures other than water closets are installed, the
waste vent pipe shall be the same diameter as the waste pipe.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.053 MOTORS, AIR COMPRESSORS AND AIR TANKS.
   All motors, air compressors and air tanks shall be located where they are
open for inspection and repair at all times. The air tanks shall be so
proportioned as to be of equal cubical capacity to the ejectors connected
therewith, in which there shall be maintained an air pressure of not less than
two pounds for each foot of height the sewage is to be raised.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.054 AUTOMATIC WATER EJECTORS.
   When subsoil, catch basins are installed below the sewer level, automatic
water ejectors provided with a ball float attached to the main water supply
shall be used. These ejectors or any device raising subsoil water shall
discharge into a properly trapped fixture or into a stormwater drain.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.055 METALLIC RAIN LEADERS AND EAVE OR CORNICE GUTTERS.
   (A)   All buildings or parts of buildings unless exempted herein shall be
kept provided with proper metallic rain leaders and eave or cornice gutters for
conducting rain water from the roof in a manner as shall protect the walls and
foundations of the building and adjacent structures from damage.
   (B)   The following structures are exempt from the requirements of this
section, provided that the roofs are so arranged as to discharge on the
premises of which they are a part draining equally from all sides of the roof,
and in a manner that they do not cause any damage to the same adjoining
property, or become a nuisance to the occupants of same:
      (1)   Sheds located on the rear of lots, not adjoining any building on
the same lot and having a roof area not greater than 250 square feet;
      (2)   Porch, bay window or show window roofs or balconies not greater in
area than 24 square feet; and
      (3)   Roofs of rear porches entirely within the lot line and not greater
in area than 24 square feet.
   (C)   (1)   Every rain leader located without the walls of a building shall
be substantially constructed of galvanized sheet iron, sheet copper or other
suitable material, and shall be thoroughly supported in place. Rain leaders run
within a building shall be considered a downspout and shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Short connections to rain
leader pipes passing through attic or other parts of buildings shall be
considered a downspout and shall be constructed of lead pipe or extra heavy
cast iron pipe or galvanized wrought-iron pipe with recessed fittings. No
gutter or rain leader shall be of less size than the following.
 
Roofs Containing       Leader Gutter
Up to 100 sq. ft.      2 inch 4 inch
101 to 500 sq. ft.     3 inch 5 inch
501 to 1,500 sq. ft.   4 inch 6 inch
1,501 to 2,500 sq. ft. 5 inch 8 inch
2,501 to 4,500 sq. ft  6 inch 10 inch
 
      (2)   The foregoing sizes of rain leaders are based on diameter of
circular rain leaders and gutters are based on semi-circular sheet metal
gutters with top dimensions given. Rectangular leaders and gutters or those of
other shapes shall have the same sectional area as the circular leaders and
gutters given in the table. In all cases where gutters and rain leaders are
provided and there is no public storm sewer available, the rain leader shall
discharge in accordance with §
52.039.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.056 DOWNSPOUT CONNECTION.
   Every downspout connection to a storm sewer shall be trapped with a water
sealing trap, placed as near as possible to the foot thereof; except that two
or more adjacent leaders may be connected together on one trap. A cast iron hub
connection shall be provided above grade at least six inches for the reception
of sheet metal leader which shall be thoroughly cemented in every case. No
downspout trap shall be of less internal diameter than four inches, and shall
be placed at least four feet below the surrounding grade and the iron terminal
piece shall be at least two feet six inches long. No downspout or leader pipe
shall discharge into any soil or waste stack nor shall any downspout receive
waste water from any plumbing fixture.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.057 RAIN LEADERS ALONG SIDEWALKS OR PASSAGEWAYS.
   Along sidewalks or passageways, rain leaders shall enter cast iron downspout
pipe not less than five feet above grade. Along alleys, streets or trafficways
not separated from the building by sidewalks, all rain leaders shall be placed
in niches, in the walls protected by wheel guards or shall enter the building
through the wall at a 45-degree slope at a point at least 12 feet above the
ground level. The leader pipes from any gravel roof shall not discharge
directly into any storm sewer or house drain but shall first enter a settling
basin fitted with a trap placed at a depth of not less than four feet.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.058 CONDUCTOR PIPES.
   Conductor pipes shall not be used as soil, waste or vent pipes, nor shall
any soil, waste or vent pipes be used as conductors.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.059 SUBSOIL DRAINS.
   Subsoil drains below the building sewer level shall discharge into a sump or
receiving tank, the contents of which shall be automatically lifted and
discharged into the storm sewer system above the cellar through some properly
trapped fixture or drain.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.060 CATCH BASINS.
   Catch basins shall be constructed of precast concrete or polyvinyl chloride
(PVC).
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.061 DISPOSAL INTO SEWER SYSTEM.
   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.062 BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential and commercial services; and
      (2)   For services to establishments producing industrial wastes.
   (B)   In either case, the owner, or his or her agent, shall make application
on a form furnished by the village. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the village. A permit and inspection fee which
shall be found in the annual fee ordinance for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time the application
is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of
activity.
   (C)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sanitary sewer
connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream
sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.063 COSTS AND EXPENSES.
   The costs and expenses incident to the maintenance, installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.064 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWERS.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.065 USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS.
   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the village (including, without
limitation, televising and dye testing), to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.066 CONFORMANCE TO SPECIFICATIONS OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF TESTING
MATERIALS.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.067 BUILDING SEWER ELEVATION.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by the building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in
accordance with §
52.031 and discharged to the building sewer.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.068 CONNECTIONS TO BUILDING SEWER CONNECTED TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER.
   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface run-off or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.069 CONNECTION OF BUILDING SEWER TO CONFORM.
   The connection of the building sanitary sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing
Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the village before
installation.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.070 INSPECTION.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the village when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sanitary sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
village or his or her representative.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.071 EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.072 REPLACEMENT OF DEFECTIVE MATERIAL.
   Whenever any length of the public sewer or building sewer becomes broken or
cracked, the defective length shall be entirely replaced. No patching of the
break will be accepted.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.073 INSTALLATIONS AND MAINTENANCE.
   All building sewers shall be installed and maintained at the cost of the
owner of the premises to be served thereby. All installations shall be under
the supervision of the Plumbing Inspector, and all sewers and the connections
thereof with the public sewer shall conform to specifications as outlined in §
52.038. The owner of the property upon which the building sewer is located
shall be responsible, at his or her sole cost, for the installation,
maintenance, repair, and replacement of that portion of the building sewer
located between the storm sewer and the house, including the Y fitting and any
portion of the building sewer located within or around the house. Where no
stub, "Y" or "T" exists, an entire length of the public sewer shall be removed
and replaced with a "Y" or "T" length unless a special saddle cap cut in
connection, or equal, which will not allow the spigot end of the house sewer to
project beyond the inner surface of the main sewer, is used. No cut-in
connection, made by breaking or cutting a hole in the main and inserting the
spigot end of an ordinary sewer pipe shall be permitted.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.074 REPAIRS.
   The village may, in case of emergency, but shall not be obligated to, repair
any building sewer, but any repairs made by the village shall be at the cost
and risk of the owner of the premises to be served, and it shall not be liable
for any damage resulting from the undertaking or making by it of repairs, nor
for any damage caused by, or resulting from obstructions in the branch or house
drain sewer or from any disrepair thereof, or from failure to make needed
repairs.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§§ 52.075 THROUGH 52.084 RESERVED.
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 52.085 DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER, SURFACE WATER AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged
directly to the storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the village in
accordance with §
52.039. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the village, to a storm sewer or natural outlet
approved in accordance with §
52.039.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.086 DISCHARGE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works; or
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.087 DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until the
village has adopted an industrial cost recovery system which:
   (A)   Meets the requirements of § 204(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. No. 92-500 and Pub. L. No.
93-243), being 33 USC 1251 et seq. and applicable federal regulations; and
   (B)   Has been approved by the agency in accordance with the conditions of
any grant made to the village by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or by the state for the construction of any part of the sewer system or
sewage treatment works of the village.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.088 DISCHARGE OF WASTES THAT MAY HARM THE SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the village that these wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream;
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
village will give consideration to the factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory
agencies.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(0°C and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the village;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (6)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
      (7)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations;
      (8)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfite);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;
and
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
slugs.
      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to
the receiving waters; and
      (10)   Water or wastes which are prohibited by any regulations of the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago.
   (C)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection (B) above, and/or which are in
violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules
and Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment Standards
Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973 and any
amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the village may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, process, equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the village may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of §
52.063.
      (2)   If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the village, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.089 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the village, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the village, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.090 MAINTENANCE OF FLOW- EQUALIZING FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his or her expense.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.091 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together
with those necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. The manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the village. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or
her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.092 INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (B)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per
year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at those times and in a
manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the village. At those times as
deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.093 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards of life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.094 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the village for conveyance subject to payment therefor, in accordance with §§
52.001 through
52.004 hereof, by the industrial concern, provided the payments are in
accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system and
industrial cost recovery system.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§§ 52.095 THROUGH 52.104 RESERVED.
PROTECTION OF SEWER SYSTEM FROM DAMAGE
§ 52.105 DAMAGE TO SEWER SYSTEM.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewer system. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§§ 52.106 THROUGH 52.119 RESERVED.
POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
§ 52.120 PERMISSION TO ENTER PROPERTIES.
   Duly authorized employees of the village, the State Environmental Protection
Agency and the United States Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The village or its
representative shall have no authority to inquire to any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.121 OBSERVANCE OF SAFETY RULES.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in §
52.120, duly authorized employee(s) of the village, the State Environmental
Protection Agency and the United States Environmental Protection Agency shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company
and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village
employees and the village shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by village employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§
52.091.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 52.122 ENTRANCE; EASEMENTS.
   Duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§§ 52.123 THROUGH 52.134 RESERVED.
EXTRANEOUS FLOWS INTO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM THROUGH ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS
FROM PRIVATE PROPERTIES
§ 52.135 EXTRANEOUS FLOWS.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this section that the entry of extraneous flows
into the sanitary sewer system be prohibited and be discontinued, where the
entry may be occurring accidentally or knowingly. EXTRANEOUS FLOWS are those
flows, other than domestic sewage or industrial waste, consisting of ground
waters, surface waters, stormwaters and other drainage or clear waters.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged,
directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system of the village, any
ground waters, surface waters, stormwaters or any other extraneous flows.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to make a connection or to maintain or operate
a connection which serves any home, building or any other establishment
premises or facilities, and which contributes, directly or indirectly, to the
sanitary sewer system of the village, any ground waters, surface waters,
stormwaters or any other extraneous flows.
   (C)   All drains or connections designed or intended to receive and
discharge ground waters, surface waters, stormwaters and other drainage, shall
be considered illegal connections if they discharge directly or indirectly into
the sanitary sewer system. These illegal connections include, but are not
limited to, roof drains, downspouts, areaway drains, drain tiles (and sump
pumps used to collect and discharge same), yard drains, catch basins and
inlets, and those connections shall not be allowed to discharge directly or
indirectly into the sanitary sewers.
   (D)   The proper maintenance and operation of a building service sewer,
house connection or sanitary sewer line to the point of connection to the
municipal sanitary sewer system shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
premises served by the sanitary sewer pipes. Maintenance means keeping the
sanitary sewer connection, sewer lines or other sewer facilities or structures
in satisfactory working condition and good state of repair (including, but not
limited to, preventing any obstruction or extraneous materials or flows from
entering the facilities, protecting the facilities from any damage and keeping
same free from defects or malfunctions), and making necessary provisions and
taking necessary precautions to assure that the sewer facilities are at all
times capable of satisfactorily performing the services and adequately
discharging the functions and producing the final results and purposes the
facilities are intended to perform, discharge or produce.
   (E)   All downspouts or roof drains shall discharge in accordance with §
52.039. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge ground waters or other
stormwaters shall discharge in accordance with §
52.039. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain flow, laundry
tubs or other sanitary sewage shall be connected to the sanitary sewers. Yard,
driveway and other outdoor area drains shall discharge in accordance with §
52.039. A sump pump shall be used for one function only, either the discharge
of stormwaters, or the discharge of sanitary sewage.
   (F)   Subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, and within 60 days after
notice to the property owner by the village of the presence of illegal
connections, the property owner shall, at his or her expense, disconnect all
illegal connections observed.
   (G)   In addition to visual inspections on the outside, the Village Manager
is hereby authorized and directed to cause an inspection to be made of plumbing
fixtures and facilities, downspouts, sump pumps, building drains, yard drains,
driveway drains and to make other tests and inspections of the municipal sewer
systems, including smoke tests, dye tests and TV monitor tests, as he or she
deems necessary in order to locate illegal connections and sources of
extraneous flows as may exist. The Village Manager is hereby directed to
attempt to conduct inspections and testing with the consent of the property
owners involved, but the Village Manager is hereby authorized and directed to
seek judicial authorization for village employees to enter and conduct those
inspections and tests if consent is denied, withheld or unobtainable after
reasonable effort.
(Ord. 719, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 53: WASTEWATER
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Bills
   
53.02   Lien; notice of delinquency
   
53.03   Foreclosure of lien
   
53.04   Revenues
   
53.05   Accounts
   
53.06   Notice of rates
   
53.07   Access to records
   
53.08   Definitions
   53.09 through 53.19   Reserved
Wastewater Service Charges
   
53.20   Basis for wastewater service charges
   
53.21   Measurement of flow
   
53.22   Basic user rate
 
   
53.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 BILLS.
   (A)   The rates or charges for wastewater service shall be payable at the
same time and for the same periods as water service charges are billed and
payable. Bills for wastewater service shall be delivered with billings for
water service and shall be due and payable within 30 days after the date of the
billing.
   (B)   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
wastewater service (collectively referred to as “consumer” for purposes of this
section) shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the charges of the
village for wastewater service to the premises. Any person responsible for the
payment of any wastewater service charges imposed by the village who shall fail
to pay the charges when due shall be responsible for payment of the costs
incurred by the village, including the fees and costs of any attorney and/or
collection agency retained by the village for the purpose of seeking collection
of the charges, whether or not suit is instituted, in addition to all other
fees, charges, fines, and penalties then due and payable. When an owner or
occupant vacates a premises and does not desire to assume further
responsibility for wastewater service charges, he or she shall give notice in
writing to the Village Manager requesting termination of wastewater service
and, upon receipt of the notice, the charge shall terminate as of the end of
the month in which notice is received, and the water supply to the premises
shall be turned off in accordance with § 50.10.
   (C)   If a bill for wastewater service is not paid within 30 days, it shall
become delinquent and a penalty of 7%, compounded monthly, shall be added to
the bill. A notice of delinquency and a second bill showing the gross amount
due, including the penalty, shall be sent to the consumer by U.S. mail. If a
delinquent bill remains unpaid 40 days after the date of the billing, then a
service termination notice shall be sent to the consumer, which notice will
direct the consumer to submit full payment within ten days. If a delinquent
bill remains unpaid 50 days after the date of the billing, then the Village
Manager or his or her designee shall post a yellow termination notice on the
front door of the premises of the delinquent customer, which notice will direct
the customer to submit full payment within ten days. If a delinquent bill
remains unpaid 60 days after the date of the billing, then the Village Manager
or his or her designee shall post a red termination notice on the front door of
the premises of the delinquent customer, which notice will direct the customer
to submit full payment within three business days. If a delinquent bill remains
unpaid after the date specified in the red termination notice, then the Village
Manager may direct the Director of Public Works to shut off the water supply to
the premises of the delinquent consumer. After the water supply is shut off, it
will not be turned on again until the customer either (i) pays the full amount
of the unpaid bill plus all penalty charges and a reconnection fee in the
amount provided in the annual fee ordinance or (ii) enters into a payment plan
approved by the Village Manager as provided in division (D) below.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a termination notice pursuant to division (C) above, a
consumer may contact the Village Manager or his or her designee and request to
be put on a payment plan. The Village Manager may, in his or her sole
discretion, approve a payment plan with a term of not more than six months,
provided that, before beginning the payment plan, the consumer pays at least
50% of the outstanding bill plus all penalty charges and the reconnection fee.
If the consumer fails to make any payment when due under the payment plan, then
a service termination notice shall be sent to the consumer, and the village
shall follow the notice and termination procedures provided in division (C)
above for bills that are 40 or more days delinquent.
   (E)   Each termination notice shall inform the consumer that the consumer
has a right to request a hearing regarding the wastewater billing by submitting
a written appeal to the Village Manager or his or her designee within three
business days after the date of the termination notice that states the basis
for the appeal and requests a hearing. Within three business days after
receiving such an appeal, the Village Manager will schedule a hearing and send
a notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing to the consumer by U.S.
mail. The notice must be mailed at least five days in advance of the hearing.
If the Village Manager or his or her designee fails to schedule a hearing
within three days after receiving the initial notification of appeal, the
resident shall either deliver a second notification of appeal to the Office of
the Village Manager, via hand-delivery or a courier service (with signature
confirmation by a village employee). The hearing will be conducted by a
committee of two Village Trustees appointed as hearing officers by the Village
President. At the hearing, the consumer shall have the right to appear in
person or through counsel and to present evidence in support of his or her
appeal. The village may conduct its own investigation of the consumer’s appeal
and may present evidence with respect thereto at the hearing. Within seven days
after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officers must issue a final
written order and send a copy of the order to the consumer by U.S. mail. If the
order requires the consumer to pay to the village service charges, penalties,
or other fees or costs, the order must specify the date by which payment is due
and state that service may be terminated if full payment is not made by that
date. If the consumer fails to make full payment in accordance with the order,
then the Village Manager may direct the Director of Public Works to shut off
the water supply to the consumer’s premises. If the Village fails to conduct a
hearing and issue a written order within the timeframes prescribed by this
division (E), then the appeal shall be deemed sustained.
   (F)   The Village Manager is authorized to develop and recommend rules and
procedures for the implementation and administration of this section.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 742, passed 3-14-1988; Ord. 821, passed 6-
12-1995; Ord. 1104, passed 6-17-2013; Am. Ord. 1189, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 53.02 LIEN; NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
   Whenever a bill due the village for wastewater service remains unpaid upon
the expiration of 65 days after the date of the original bill for wastewater
service, the Village Collector may file with the Recorder of Deeds in the
county a statement of a lien claim containing the legal description of the
premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, costs of collection and other
charges, and a notice that the village claims a lien for those amounts as well
as for all charges for wastewater service supplied subsequent to the period
covered by the bill. Whenever a bill for wastewater services remains unpaid for
65 days after the date of the original bill, if the user of wastewater services
whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the Village Collector
has notice thereof, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his
or her address is known to the Village Collector. Failure of the Village
Collector to record the lien claim or to mail the notice, or failure of the
owner to receive the notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien
for unpaid wastewater service bills, costs of collection thereof and other
charges.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 821, passed 6-12-1995; Ord. 1104, passed 6-
17-2013)
§ 53.03 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges for wastewater services, costs
of collection thereof and other charges may be sold for nonpayment of the same,
and the proceeds of sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting
costs of the proceedings, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens.
The foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the village. The
Village Attorney or other legal counsel retained by the village is authorized
and directed to institute proceedings in the name of the village and in
accordance with applicable law against any person responsible for unpaid
charges and/or property for which the bill for wastewater service, costs of
collection thereof and other charges remains unpaid 65 days after the date of
the original bill.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 821, passed 6-12-1995; Ord. 1044, passed 6-
17-2013)
§ 53.04 REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. All
revenues and moneys shall be held by the Village Manager separate and apart
from his or her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of
the village and all of the sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be
delivered to the Village Manager not more than ten days after receipt of the
same, or at more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
President and Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Village Manager shall receive all revenues from the sewerage
system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of the system
as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the account
of the fund designated as the “Sewerage Fund of the Village of Kenilworth.” The
Manager shall administer the fund in every respect in the manner provided in
accordance with applicable state law.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 53.05 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Village Manager shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and
at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
   (B)   The financial information to be shown in the audit report shall
include the following:
      (1)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
      (2)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (3)   Number of users connected to the system; and
      (4)   A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 53.06 NOTICE OF RATES.
   (A)   A copy of this subchapter, properly certified by the Village Manager,
shall be filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county and shall
be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the sewerage
system of the village on their properties.
   (B)   Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges attributable to
wastewater conveyance services.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 53.07 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The State Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village
which are applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state
grant.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 53.08 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of Chapter 51 and this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond and the like) outstanding
and shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of
users connected to the wastewater facilities.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments of
1972, Pub. L. No. 92-500 and Pub. L. No. 93-243.
   FEDERAL GRANT. The United States government participation in the financing
of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II - Grants for
Construction Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state so that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities
involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance
into products.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes schools, hospitals, churches,
penal institutions and users associated with federal, state and local
governments.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is one-one-thousandth gram of the constituent in 1,000
milliliters of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts
per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results
of water and wastewater analysis.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   ORDINANCE. Chapters 51 and 52 of this code.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree that all particles will
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (one and twenty- seven
hundredths centimeters) in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village
sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with village funds.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works
were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
replacement.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments and permanent multi-family dwellings.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. Used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   SEWERAGE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
   SHALL. Mandatory; MAY is permissible.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STATE ACT. The State Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORMWATER RUN-OFF. The portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in §
53.20.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER. Any owner or owners of a building which is connected to the sanitary
sewer system and which have a connection permit from the village.
   USER CLASS. The type of user: residential, institutional/governmental,
commercial or industrial, as defined in this section.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Kenilworth.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per billing period levied on all users
of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined
in §
53.20 and shall consist of the total or the basic user charge, the debt service
charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with waste treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant or pollution control
plant.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 705, passed 12-12-1983; Ord. 1365, passed
11-18-2024)
§§ 53.09 THROUGH 53.19 RESERVED.
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
§ 53.20 BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied
by the wastewater facilities of the village shall consist of a basic user
charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement.
   (B)   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
concentrations:
      (1)   A five-day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 300 mg/l; and
      (2)   A suspended solids (SS) content of 300 mg/l.
   (C)   It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement
and shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the sanitary sewer system including a replacement fund for the year;
      (2)   Estimate wastewater volume to be treated;
      (3)   Proportion the estimated costs to users by volume, suspended solids
and BOD; and
      (4)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons.
   (D)   Any surcharge above the basic user charge, for wastewaters containing
pollutants in excess of normal concentrations, will be established and
collected by the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago.
   (E)   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed
annually by certified public accountants for the village in their annual audit
report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect
a change in debt service or a change in operation and maintenance costs
including replacement costs.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 705, passed 12-12-1983; Ord. 1365, passed
11-18-2024)
§ 53.21 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges
shall be the metered water consumption read in gallons.
   (A)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the public water
works system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the
person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a
type approved by the village for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
   (B)   Water used for yard sprinkling, if measured by a separate irrigation
meter, shall be exempt from the sewer user charge.
   (C)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the village if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
   (D)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the persons. Following approval and
installation, the meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled,
without the consent of the village.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 53.22 BASIC USER RATE.
   (A)   There shall be and there is hereby established a basic user rate for
the use of and for service supplied by the sanitary sewer system of the
village.
   (B)   A basic user rate of an amount as established in the annual fee
ordinance per 1,000 gallons of water consumption shall be applied to all users.
   (C)   The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following
formula:
 
CW = CU x V
Where:
CW = Dollar amount of wastewater service charge per billing period
CU = Basic user charge for operation, maintenance and replacement
V = Wastewater volume for billing period based on water meter readings
 
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 705, passed 12-12-1983; Ord. 1365, passed
11-18-2024)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
(Ord. 703, passed 10-10-1983)
CHAPTER 54: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Section
   
54.01   General policy and purposes
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Cross-connections prohibited
   
54.04   Surveys and inspections
   
54.05   Protection required
   
54.06   Type of protection required
   
54.07   Backflow prevention devices
   
54.08   Inspection and maintenance
   
54.09   Violations
 
   
54.99   Penalty
§ 54.01 GENERAL POLICY AND PURPOSES.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is:
      (1)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system;
      (2)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-
connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable
water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or
systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety; and
      (3)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumers’ potable water systems.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all premises served by the public potable
water supply system of the village.
   (C)   The owner or official custodian of each premises served by the water
supply system of the village shall be responsible for protection of the public
water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage of
contaminants through the customer’s water service connection. If, in the
judgment of the Director of Public Work, or his or her authorized
representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system, the Director of Public Works shall
give notice to the consumer to install an approved backflow prevention device
at each service connection to the premises.
(Ord. 785, passed 1-13-1992)
§ 54.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGENCY. The State Environmental Protection Agency.
      AGENCY REGULATIONS. The regulations of the Agency in effect from time to
time.
      APPROVED. Devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California, Association
of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works Association, American
National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation
Foundation.
      APPROVED CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR. An inspector approved
by the Agency to perform inspections of cross-connection control devices.
      AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor’s public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes or streams or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted
or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over
which the water purveyor does not have control.
      BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system and which meets the
standards of the State Plumbing Code and the Agency.
      CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control
of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to the public water
system.
      CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer’s
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a CONSUMER’S WATER
SYSTEM.
      CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of
any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
      CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
      DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross- connection formed when a safe potable
water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
      DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015, including
tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable
connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve.
      FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
      HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers.
      INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
      INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of this chapter and the
State Plumbing Code.
      NON-POTABLE WATER.  Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use
as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code Part 604.
      PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or
at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. PLUMBING includes all piping, from discharge of
pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. PLUMBING
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of
connection of the building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
      POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
      POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code
Part 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
      POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
      PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer’s potable water system. This includes, but is not
limited to:
         (a)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
         (b)   Process waters;
         (c)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system
which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
         (d)   Cooling waters;
         (e)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams or irrigation systems;
         (f)   Chemicals in solution or suspension; or
         (g)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes or for firefighting purposes.
      PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All mains, pipes and structures through which water
is obtained and distributed to the public by the village, including wells and
well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants,
reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally,
actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for
drinking or general domestic use within the village.
      REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and
at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two valves shall be
less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each
end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with suitable connections
for testing.
      SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and
appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
      SEVERE HEALTH HAZARD. A hazard to the health of the user that could be
expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
      STATE PLUMBING CODE.  The provisions of 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 890, as
amended from time to time.
      SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable
or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water system
or a consumer’s potable water system.
      USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   (B)   Water systems.
      (1)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water system and the consumer’s water system.
      (2 )   The public water system shall consist of the source facilities and
the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable
water system under the control of the Director of Public Works up to the point
where the consumer’s water system begins.
      (3)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized
in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
system.
      (4)   The public water system shall include the network of conduits used
to deliver water from the source to the consumer’s water system.
      (5)   The consumer’s water system shall include all parts of the
facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public
water system to points of use.
(Ord. 785, passed 1-13-1992)
§ 54.03 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in
accordance with all applicable ordinances of the village and the State Plumbing
Code.
   (B)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
      (1)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Agency.
      (2)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a water supply.
   (C)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply may enter the public water system, unless the private, auxiliary
or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of the supply
shall have been approved by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 785, passed 1-13-1992)
§ 54.04 SURVEYS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to cause surveys
and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water system to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. The survey shall include the collection of
information pertaining to a customer’s piping system regarding the location of
all connections to the public water supply system and must include the
location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross-
connection control devices and methods located within that customer’s piping
system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection. The surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of
public record and shall be repeated at least every two years or as often as the
Director of Public Works shall deem necessary. Records of the surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five years.
   (B)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of
cross-connections within the consumer’s premises, and for testing, repair and
maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the consumer’s premises.
The Director of Public Works, or his or her authorized agent, shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply for the purpose of verifying information submitted by
the customer regarding the required cross-connection control inspection. On
demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish
to the Director of Public Works any information which he or she may request
regarding the piping system or systems or water use on the property. The
refusal to provide the information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion
of the Director of Public Works, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper
cross-connections.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the
consumer’s or the public water supply. All cross-connection control or other
plumbing inspections must be conducted by persons licensed in accordance with
225 ILCS 320.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      (1)   All cross-connections are removed or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage;
      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s instructions; and
      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by an approved cross-connection control
device inspector. The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical
testing in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
   (E)   Testing and records.
      (1)   Each cross-connection control device shall be tested at the time of
installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer.
      (2)   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/IV.
      (3)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of the approved cross-connection control device inspector and
type and date of repairs.
      (4)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         (a)   Date of each test;
         (b)   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
         (c)   Test results;
         (d)   Repairs or servicing required;
         (e)   Repairs and date completed; and
         (f)   Service performed and dated completed.
(Ord. 785, passed 1-13-1992)
§ 54.05 PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the State Plumbing Code and Agency
regulations. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises,
where in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water system, unless the auxiliary
system is accepted as an additional source by the Director of Public Works and
the source is approved by the Agency;
      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual health hazard;
      (3)   Premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or
waters originating from the public water system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Director of Public Works;
      (4)   Premises having internal cross- connections that, in the judgment
of the Director of Public Works and/or an approved cross-connection control
device inspector, are not correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements which
make it impractical to determine whether or not cross- connections exist;
      (5)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross- connection survey; and
      (6)   Premises that have a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the State Plumbing Code and Agency
regulations. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer’s water system serving, but not
necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the Director
of Public Works determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply system exists:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
      (2)   Laboratories;
      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater
pumping stations;
      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants;
      (6)   Chemical plants;
      (7)   Metal plating industries;
      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
      (10)   Car washes;
      (11)   Pesticide or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks; or
      (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
   (D)   If in accordance with the State Plumbing Code or in the judgment of
the Director of Public Works, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Director of
Public Works will give notice to the water customer to install an approved
device. The water customer shall, at his or her own expense and within a period
of time as the Director of Public Works shall allow, install an approved device
at a location and in a manner in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and
all applicable ordinances of the village and shall have inspections and tests
made of the approved devices upon installation and periodically thereafter as
required by the State Plumbing Code and all applicable ordinances of the
village.
   (E)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, the pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less. It shall be the
duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cut-off device in
proper working order and to certify to the Director of Public Works, at least
once a year, that the device is operable.
(Ord. 785, passed 1-13-1992)
§ 54.06 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The type of protection required under §
54.05 shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows.
      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to
health.
   (B)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source;
      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or
      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into
the fire safety system.
   (C)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
(Ord. 785, passed 1-13-1992)
§ 54.07 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by this chapter
shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of
the University of Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers,
American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute or
certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with
applicable industry specifications.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device shall be performed. The manufacturer’s maintenance manual shall be
available on-site.
(Ord. 785, passed 1-13-1992)
§ 54.08 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by this chapter are installed to have inspections,
tests, maintenance and repairs made in accordance with the following schedule
or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer’s instructions.
      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours after inspection.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five days after inspection.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five
days after inspection.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      (3)   Test results;
      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by this section.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 785, passed 1-13-1992)
§ 54.09 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall deny or discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any backflow prevention device required by this chapter is not
installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the
Director of Public Works; or if it is found that the backflow prevention device
has been removed or bypassed; or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on
the premises; or if a low pressure cut-off required by this chapter is not
installed and maintained in working order. Immediate disconnection of water
service upon verbal notice to the consumer can be effected by the Director of
Public Works if the Director of Public Works is advised or determines that
imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water system exists.
This action shall be followed by written notice.
   (B)   Water service to the premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated the conditions or defects in conformance with this
chapter and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, and the
required reconnection fee of an amount as established in the annual fee
ordinance is paid by the consumer to the village.
   (C)   Neither the village, the Director of Public Works or their agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customers of the village for any injury, damages
or lost revenues which may result from termination of any customer’s water
supply in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether or not termination
of the water supply was with or without notice.
   (D)   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the public water system occurs through an
illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired
backflow prevention device, or a backflow prevention device which has been
bypassed, must bear the cost of clean-up of the public water system.
(Ord. 785, passed 1-13-1992)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 55: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
55.001   Supervision
   
55.002   Permit required
   
55.003   Application for permit
   
55.004   Deposits
   
55.005   Obstructions
   
55.006   Planter boxes
   
55.007   Burning leaves and the like; obstructing drains
   
55.008   Encroachments, poles and the like
   
55.009   Private use prohibited
   
55.010   Report on defects in sidewalks and the like
   
55.011   Playing in streets and the like
   
55.012   Use of skateboards
   
55.013   Article on windows
   
55.014   Openings in streets and the like
   
55.015   Scaffolds over streets and the like
   
55.016   Lawn sprinkling systems
   55.017 through 55.029   Reserved
Streets
   
55.030   Specifications for pavements
   
55.031   Alteration of village streets
   55.032 through 55.044   Reserved
Sidewalks
   
55.045   License required; fee and bond
   
55.046   Specifications
   
55.047   Name and year to be stamped on walk
   
55.048   Repair of walks; revocation of license
   
55.049   Injury to sidewalks; driving over prohibited
   
55.050   Carriage walks
   55.051 through 55.064   Reserved
Driveways
   
55.065   Permit required
   
55.066   Application; fee
   
55.067   Duty to keep driveway free of snow and the like
   55.068 through 55.079   Reserved
Fences
   
55.080   No division fence over six feet high
   55.081 through 55.094   Reserved
Street House Numbers
   
55.095   Numbering plan
   
55.096   Order of numbers
   
55.097   Village Manager to assign numbers and keep chart
   
55.098   Duty of owner or occupant to place number on buildings
   55.099 through 55.109   Reserved
House Movers
   
55.110   Permit required
   
55.111   Bond required
   55.112 through 55.124   Reserved
Excavations
   
55.125   Permit required
   
55.126   Application for permit; fee; deposit
   
55.127   Bond required
   
55.128   Barricades and lights required
   
55.129   Restoration after excavation
 
   
55.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 55.001 SUPERVISION.
   All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the village,
shall be under the supervision of the Village Manager, under the direction of
the Village Board. The Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall supervise
all work thereon, and the cleaning and lighting thereof, and is charged with
the enforcement of all provisions of this code and any other ordinances of the
village relating to them, except traffic ordinances.
(1959 Code, § 31-1) (Ord. 1174, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 55.002 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to pave, or construct any pavement, on
any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, or to excavate or to
construct any vault thereunder, without first obtaining a permit therefor; and
no person shall break into, tear up, raise or lower any pavement or sidewalk or
any part thereof, or remove any soil or turf from any public ground without a
permit so to do issued by authority of the Village Board. The permit will be
granted only upon deposit by the applicant thereof with the Village Treasurer
of a sufficient sum, but not less than an amount as established in the annual
fee ordinance, to secure the cost of restoring the pavement or sidewalk, soil
or turf, which deposit shall be returned to the person making it upon
restoration approved by the Village Manager; otherwise the deposit or so much
thereof as may be reasonably required, shall be used to make restoration and to
pay all costs and expenses connected therewith.
   (B)   All use, construction and excavation in the public rights-of-way by
utilities is governed by
Chapter 56.
(1959 Code, § 31-2) (Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 55.003 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Application for the permit required under this chapter shall be made to the
Village Manager, and shall show the location of the intended pavement or
repair, the extent thereof and the person who is to do the actual construction
work. Upon approval thereof the permit shall be issued by the Village Manager.
(1959 Code, § 31-3)
§ 55.004 DEPOSITS.
   It is unlawful for any person to deposit on any street, alley, sidewalk or
public way, any glass, substance, article or materials of any kind which may do
injury to any person, animal or property. Materials or articles other than
building materials, may be deposited in streets preparatory to delivery or use,
if the deposit does not reduce the usable width of the roadway at that point to
less than 16 feet, but those materials, other than building materials to be
used in actual building construction on adjoining premises, shall not be
permitted to remain on the street for more than three hours. Any articles or
materials remaining on any street after sunset shall be guarded by lights.
Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory to
delivery if the usable width of the walk is not reduced thereby to less than
four feet, but no articles shall remain on the walk for more than one-half
hour.
(1959 Code, § 31-4)
§ 55.005 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to place any building materials or any article
or thing whatsoever, on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or to
cause, create or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or
other public way, without first securing permission from the Village Manager or
Village Board.
(1959 Code, § 31-5)
§ 55.006 PLANTER BOXES.
   The Village Manager shall be authorized and empowered to issue a written
permit for the location of planter boxes on sidewalks in the business
districts, provided that each planter box shall not extend onto the sidewalk
more than 20 inches and shall be in a lighted area so that it can be seen at
night, and located flush against the outer wall of the building or in an
entrance way setback area so as not to create an obstruction or hazard to
pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 650, passed 3-13-1978)
§ 55.007 BURNING LEAVES AND THE LIKE; OBSTRUCTING DRAINS.
   It is unlawful for any person to burn leaves or materials of any kind in any
public street or alley or to obstruct any drain therein.
(1959 Code, § 31-6)
§ 55.008 ENCROACHMENTS, POLES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to erect, install or maintain, or to
permit the encroachment of any of the following, without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Village Manager or the Village Board:
      (1)   Building, fence or any structure upon any public street, sidewalk,
alley, public way or public property, provided:
         (a)   On streets where concrete curbs do not exist, decorative
elements bordering the street are permitted and are limited to boulders,
flagstone, or payers in a form and in a location approved by the Village
Manager. Decorative elements must be properly secured and not pose a hazard to
vehicles or pedestrians.
         (b)   Material color, shape, and size shall complement the existing
landscape.
      (2)   Tree, shrub or bush upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, public
way or public property;
      (3)   Any vegetation in excess of two and one-half feet in height upon
any public street, sidewalk, alley, public way or public property;
      (4)   Poles, ropes or wires on or over any public street, sidewalk,
alley, public property or public way;
      (5)   Pipes or conduits in or under any public street, sidewalk, alley,
public way or public property; or
      (6)   Any pump or tank or similar structure on any public street,
sidewalk, alley, public property or public way.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, trees, shrubs, bushes and other
vegetation may planted in public rights-of-way adjacent to public streets,
where no sidewalk exists, if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   No trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation planted in the public
right-of-way adjacent to public streets, where no sidewalk exists, shall be
permitted to encroach onto the public street;
      (2)   No shrubs, bushes or other vegetation (other than lawn grass or
turf less than six inches in height) shall be planted or allowed to grow closer
than three feet from the edge of the street;
      (3)   No tree shall be planted or allowed to grow closer than five feet
from the edge of the street;
      (4)   No trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation shall be permitted to
grow so as to impede materially the vision of drivers or other users of the
street between a height of two and one-half and ten feet above the centerline
grades of the adjacent street or for a distance of 20 feet in each direction
from the point of intersection of any street intersection; and
      (5)   In the event of a conflict among the requirements of this
subsection (B), the requirements providing the greatest protection to public
safety shall control.
   (C)   In the event the village requires access to the public right-of-way at
locations where trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation have been planted,
the village will not be responsible for the protection, preservation or
replacement of the trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation.
   (D)   The village may request property owners to trim, relocate or remove
trees, shrubs or other vegetation determined to materially impede vision. In
the event the property owner does not trim, relocate or remove trees, shrubs or
other property, the village may cause the trimming, relocation or removal to
occur and may charge the property owner the cost incurred to the village for
the trimming, relocation or removal.
(1959 Code, § 31-7) (Ord. 1009, passed 2-9-2009; Ord. 1384, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 55.009 PRIVATE USE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any street, alley, sidewalk, telephone
pole, tree, public place or public property for the display of any sign,
placard or any printed, painted or written matter for any purpose, or to write,
print, paint or mark any sign, word or figure on any street, alley, sidewalk,
telephone pole, tree, public place or public property, without obtaining a
permit therefor from the Village Manager or the Village Board.
(1959 Code, § 31-8)
§ 55.010 REPORT ON DEFECTS IN SIDEWALKS AND THE LIKE.
   It is the duty of every village officer and employee becoming cognizant of
any defect in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, or any
obstruction thereof, to report the defect without delay to the Village Manager,
and it shall be the duty of the Village Manager to cause dangerous defects to
be barricaded to prevent injury.
(1959 Code, § 31-9)
§ 55.011 PLAYING IN STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   It is unlawful for any person to play any game upon any street, alley or
sidewalk where the game interferes with traffic of vehicles or pedestrians or
causes unnecessary noise.
(1959 Code, § 31-10)
§ 55.012 USE OF SKATEBOARDS.
   It is unlawful to ride on or use a skateboard upon any street or alley other
than at a crosswalk.
(Ord. 651, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 55.013 ARTICLE ON WINDOWS.
   It is unlawful for any person to place any movable article on any window
ledge or other place abutting on any public street, alley, sidewalk or other
public way, at a height above four feet from the ground in a manner that the
article can be or is in danger of falling onto the street, sidewalk, alley or
public way.
(1959 Code, § 31-11)
§ 55.014 OPENINGS IN STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   It is unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or
stairway in any public sidewalk, street, alley or public way, without obtaining
a permit from the Village Manager or Village Board. All lawfully maintained
openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or a railing to be
approved by the Village Manager or Village Board.
(1959 Code, § 31-12)
§ 55.015 SCAFFOLDS OVER STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   It is unlawful for any person to place any scaffold or ladder in a position
which overhangs or can fall onto any public street, alley, sidewalk or other
public way unless the scaffold or ladder is firmly and properly constructed and
safeguarded; and unlawful for any person to place or leave any tool or article
on any scaffold or ladder in a manner that it may fall onto the street,
sidewalk, alley or other public way from a height greater than four feet.
(1959 Code, § 31-13)
§ 55.016 LAWN SPRINKLING SYSTEMS.
   No lawn sprinkling system shall be installed until plans have been submitted
to the Village Manager and approved by the Director of Public Works
Superintendent of Water, and a permit has been issued for the installation.
Where separate meters are to be furnished for the systems, the meters shall be
located in the public street right-of-way and shall be considered as separate
consumers. Shut-off valves shall be provided near the meter on the main
distributing pipe and also on each branch. All water distribution pipes shall
be laid to grade and shall drain to the main shut-off valve or shall be
equipped with automatic drain valves so that the entire system may be emptied.
Lawn sprinkling systems installed in the public parkway, whether permanent or
movable, shall be so placed and operated as not to interfere with the free use
of the parkway, street pavement or sidewalk for public purposes.
(1959 Code, § 38-24)
§§ 55.017 THROUGH 55.029 RESERVED.
STREETS
§ 55.030 SPECIFICATIONS FOR PAVEMENTS.
   All pavements in public streets and ways shall be made in conformity with
the current Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the
State of Illinois, unless otherwise authorized by the Village Manager.
(1959 Code, § 31-14)
§ 55.031 ALTERATION OF VILLAGE STREETS.
   (A)   Streets within the village are designed to function as transportation
corridors. Certain streets within the village have secondary functions,
including, but not limited to, service and facilities as a component of the
village’s stormwater management system.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any action which will
break, damage, injure, disturb, hinder, or otherwise alter any street within
the village, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Changing any street’s physical structure such as altering pavement
or any materials below the pavement; or
      (2)   Disrupting a street’s ability to function without obstruction.
   (C)   Any person who violates this section:
      (1)   Must cause the street to be restored to its previously unbroken,
undamaged, uninjured, undisturbed, unhindered, unaltered state, or otherwise to
the satisfaction of the Village Manager, in accordance with specifications
provided by the Village Manager or his or her designee; and
      (2)   May also be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 1175, passed 10-17-2016)
§§ 55.032 THROUGH 55.044 RESERVED.
SIDEWALKS
§ 55.045 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE AND BOND.
   No person shall engage in the business of constructing or repairing
sidewalks in any public street or place in the village without first having
obtained a license therefor; provided that this requirement shall not apply to
any person desiring to lay a sidewalk in front or at the side of property owned
by him or her. A fee as established in the annual fee ordinance shall be paid
by a person required by this subchapter to secure a license. The license shall
not issue until the person to be licensed shall deposit with the Village Clerk,
on a form furnished by the village, a bond in the penal sum of an amount as
established in the annual fee ordinance, with surety to be approved by the
Village Manager and conditioned to indemnify, save and keep harmless the
village from any and all loss, cost, expense or liability of any kind
whatsoever which it may suffer or be put to or which may be recovered from it
by reason of the issuance of the license or by reason of any act or thing done
or neglected to be done under or by virtue of the authority given to the
licensee.
(1959 Code, § 31-15)
§ 55.046 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All public sidewalks shall be of concrete and shall be laid in
sections or blocks of five feet in length and five and one-third feet in width,
with a slope of one-fourth of an inch to the foot toward the center of the
street adjacent to which they are laid, and with a space of 18 inches between
the inner edge of the sidewalk and the property line of lots on which they
abut. Unless otherwise ordered by the Director of Public Works, the surface of
the ground shall be graded by being excavated or filled as the case may require
so as to permit the walk to be laid to the grade established by the Director of
Public Works and shall be smoothed, thoroughly wetted and compacted at nine
inches below proposed grade of sidewalk. On ground thus prepared shall be
placed an insulating or drainage course of sand or washed pit run gravel
containing no pebbles larger than three-quarters of an inch in maximum
dimension, rolled or tamped to a compacted thickness of four inches. Over this
drainage course shall be placed a five inch thick slab of concrete as above
described.
   (B)   Concrete shall be a mixture of portland cement, fine and coarse
aggregates and clean water meeting requirements of the following current
specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials:
 
Portland cement  ASTM C-175, Type I-A (Air Entraining)
Fine aggregate   ASTM C-33
Coarse aggregate ASTM C-33, Size 57
 
   (C)   Water shall be clean, clear and free from acid, alkali, oil or organic
matter. Concrete shall be mixed in proportions of available aggregates,
cementitious material and water as will produce a concrete which will have a
compressive strength of 3,000# per square inch at 28 days when tested in
accordance with ASTM Specifications C-39, except that not less than five and
one-half sacks of cement be used per cubic yard of concrete. Water-cement ratio
shall be such that will produce a slump of not less than two inches nor more
than six inches when tested in accordance with ASTM C-143.
   (D)   Concrete shall be mixed for at least one and one-half minutes in
approved, batch type, mechanical mixing equipment with water measuring and
timing devices. Quantities placed in mixer shall be measured by equivalent
weight with due allowances for moisture in aggregates. Use of plant mixed
concrete, delivered to the job in revolving drum mixer trucks, will be
approved, if factual evidence is submitted establishing adequacy of proposed
plant’s equipment and facilities for consistent production of required
concretes. Factual evidence will also be required establishing producer’s
reputation for meeting specifications, for making prompt and timely deliveries
and for general reliability. Plant mixed concrete shall meet ASTM
Specifications C-94, except that revolving drum truck delivery will be
required.
   (E)   Concrete shall be placed not more than 30 minutes after discharge from
mixer, screeded off to proper slope and thickness and thoroughly worked with
floats. When concrete has reached proper hardness, it shall be troweled to a
true, smooth surface, free from unevenness of any kind.
   (F)   After troweling, surface of sidewalk shall be brushed or floated
lightly to ensure a non-slip surface.
   (G)   As soon as concrete has taken an initial set, sidewalks shall be given
a sprayed application of a membrane coating to prevent rapid evaporation of
water during curing period. Membrane coating shall meet requirements of ASTM
Specifications C-309, Type 1, containing a fugitive color. Apply membrane as
directed by manufacturer but at a rate of not less than one gallon to 200
square feet of surface.
(1959 Code, § 31-16)
§ 55.047 NAME AND YEAR TO BE STAMPED ON WALK.
   The person constructing a public cement sidewalk shall, before the cement
sets, stamp with a metal stamp, in letters and figures at least one-half inch
high and three-sixteenths of an inch in width, his or her name and the year of
construction, in all sidewalks laid by him or her.
(1959 Code, § 31-17)
§ 55.048 REPAIR OF WALKS; REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Every person so licensed shall maintain and keep in repair all sidewalks
constructed by him or her on public properties, for a period of five years from
the date of completion thereof, and failure to do so shall be sufficient cause
for revocation of his or her license by the President of the village; but no
requirement shall be made except as to repairs necessitated by faulty or
improper materials, poor workmanship or failure to properly protect the
sidewalk from damage by the elements.
(1959 Code, § 31-18)
§ 55.049 INJURY TO SIDEWALKS; DRIVING OVER PROHIBITED.
   Any person who breaks or otherwise damages any public sidewalk or causes or
permits the breaking or damage, shall forthwith cause the same to be well and
sufficiently repaired or replaced under the direction and to the satisfaction
of the Village Manager. No owner or occupant of any premises shall permit or
suffer any machinery or vehicle to be driven over or upon any sidewalk or
parkway, except where a driveway has been provided over the same, unless the
sidewalk or parkway is covered with suitable planking and there shall have been
deposited with the Village Treasurer the sum of an amount as established in the
annual fee ordinance to be held as security against injury to the sidewalk or
parkway, which deposit or so much thereof as shall not have been used to repair
any damage or restore the sidewalk or parkway and to pay all costs and expenses
in connection therewith, shall be returned to the person making the deposit.
(1959 Code, § 31-19)
§ 55.050 CARRIAGE WALKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to construct or maintain a carriage walk, or
walkway that connects a sidewalk to a curb, without first obtaining a permit
from the village. Such carriage walks and walkways shall be limited to
flagstone, payers, or concrete in accordance with the specifications outlined
in §
55.046. Material color shall complement the existing sidewalk and landscape.
(Ord. 1384, passed 4-21-2025)
§§ 55.051 THROUGH 55.064 RESERVED.
DRIVEWAYS
§ 55.065 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to construct or
maintain any driveway over or across any public sidewalk or connecting with any
public street in the village without obtaining a permit therefor from the
Building Commissioner.
   (B)   General requirements. Only one driveway for the crossing of a public
sidewalk and providing access to a public street shall be allowed for each lot
containing a single-family residential dwelling. A property owner may request
one additional driveway or curb cut by submitting in writing to the Building
Commissioner materials that demonstrate, by clear and convincing evidence,
that:
      (1)   Backing out from a single driveway on the property will cause a
safety hazard for pedestrians on the public sidewalk or for the operation of
motor vehicles on the public street; and
      (2)   There is no other configuration for the driveway, including
installation of a T or other turnaround on the property, that will eliminate or
minimize the safety hazard.
(1959 Code, § 31-22) (Ord. 958, passed 6-12-2006)
§ 55.066 APPLICATION; FEE.
   Application for a permit to construct a driveway over or across any public
sidewalk shall be filed with the Village Manager and shall state the size,
location and material to be used and the name and address of the person who
will construct the driveway. A fee as established in the annual fee ordinance
shall be paid for each driveway permit
(1959 Code, § 31-23)
§ 55.067 DUTY TO KEEP DRIVEWAY FREE OF SNOW AND THE LIKE.
   It is the duty of any person maintaining any driveway which is the subject
of this subchapter, to keep the same free from snow and ice and any obstruction
and to keep it in good repair where it crosses a public sidewalk.
(1959 Code, § 31-25)
§§ 55.068 THROUGH 55.079 RESERVED.
FENCES
§ 55.080 NO DIVISION FENCE OVER SIX FEET HIGH.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to erect and maintain any fence upon or
within any lot or parcel of ground within the village, without first obtaining
a permit therefor from the Building Commissioner. Application for a permit
shall be filed with the Village Manager and shall show the height, the
materials to be used, and be accompanied by a map or drawing showing the
location of the proposed fence and of structures on the premises. A fee of an
amount as established in the annual fee ordinance shall be paid for each permit
issued.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain upon the street
frontage line or lines of his or her lot or upon the side division line or
lines between his or her land or premises and the land or premises of another
and within the street frontage setback area required by the zoning regulations
of the village which is applicable to his or her premises, any fence unless the
fence is constructed with open areas of at least 30% of each square foot
thereof (exclusive of posts needed for structural strength) if constructed of
masonry, or unless the fence is constructed with open areas of at least 60% of
each square foot thereof (exclusive of posts needed for structural strength) if
constructed of wood, metal or material other than masonry, and no fence shall
exceed four feet in height; and unlawful for any person to erect or maintain
upon the side or rear division lines between his or her land or premises and
the land or premises of another within the village, or within the side or rear
setback areas required by the zoning regulations applicable to his or her
premises, any partition or other fence that shall exceed six feet in height.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) above, any person
whose property adjoins, on the rear or side division lines, property of the
village used for storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted to erect
any partition or other fence which does not exceed seven feet in height along
the side or division lines between his or her property and the village’s
property back of the street frontage setback area required by the zoning
regulations of the village applicable to his or her premises, or within the
side or rear setback areas required by the zoning regulations applicable to his
or her premises. The erection or maintaining of any partition or other fence in
violation of this section is subject to the penalties provided for in §
55.999.
(1959 Code, § 31-26) (Ord. 500, passed 11-9-1959; Ord. 526, passed 7-1-1963;
Ord. 607, passed 4-24-1972; Ord. 677, passed 11-9-1981; Ord. 700, passed 8-8-
1983)
§§ 55.081 THROUGH 55.094 RESERVED.
STREET HOUSE NUMBERS
§ 55.095 NUMBERING PLAN.
   All lots, buildings and structures in the village shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan.
   (A)   The base lines for numbers on streets, avenues and roads running north
and south, or northwesterly and southeasterly, shall be as follows:
      (1)   For numbers between 100 and 199, a line parallel with and 1,000
feet southeasterly from the northwesterly line and the northwesterly line
extended of Oxford Road;
      (2)   For numbers between 200 and 299, the northwesterly line and the
northwesterly line extended of Oxford Road;
      (3)   For numbers between 300 and 399, the northwesterly line and the
northwesterly line extended of Woodstock Avenue;
      (4)   For numbers between 400 and 499, the northwesterly line and the
northwesterly line extended of Kenilworth Avenue;
      (5)   For numbers between 500 and 599, the northwesterly line and the
northwesterly line extended of Melrose Avenue; and
      (6)   For numbers between 600 and 699, the northwesterly line of
Cumberland Avenue.
   (B)   The base lines for numbers on streets, avenues and roads running east
and west, or northeasterly and southwesterly, shall be as follows:
      (1)   For numbers between 0 and 99, a line parallel with and 800 feet
northeasterly of a line drawn from the point of intersection of the centerline
extended of Winnetka Avenue with the northeasterly line of Sheridan Road,
southeasterly parallel with the northeasterly line and the northeasterly line
extended of Raleigh Road, but no numbers included in this series shall be
assigned to points westerly of the southwesterly line of Sheridan Road;
      (2)   For numbers between 100 and 199, a line drawn from the point of
intersection of the southeasterly line of Oxford Road with the southwesterly
line of Sheridan Road, northwesterly parallel with the northeasterly line and
the northeasterly line extended of Raleigh Road, but no numbers included in
this series shall be assigned to points easterly of the northeasterly line of
Sheridan Road;
      (3)   For numbers between 200 and 299, the southwesterly lines and the
southwesterly lines extended of Leicester and Roslyn Roads;
      (4)   For numbers between 300 and 399, the southwesterly line and the
southwesterly line extended of Essex Road; and
      (5)   For numbers between 400 and 499, the southwesterly line of Cumnor
Road.
   (C)   The base lines for numbers on streets, avenues, courts and roads in
that part of the village lying westerly of the northeasterly line of the right-
of- way of the Chicago and North Western Railway, except in Block 36 in
Kenilworth subdivision thereof, shall be as follows:
      (1)   For numbers between 300 and 400 the north line of Greenwood Avenue
(formerly Southdean Road) extended;
      (2)   For numbers between 400 and 500 the north line of Kenilworth
Avenue;
      (3)   For numbers between 500 and 600 the north line of Melrose Avenue
(formerly Linden Avenue) extended;
      (4)   For numbers between 600 and 700 the north line of Roger Avenue
extended; and
      (5)   For numbers between 700 and 800 the north line of Maclean Avenue
extended, which shall control house numbers on Sterling Road.
   (D)   The base lines for numbers on streets, avenues, courts and roads
running east and west or easterly and westerly in that part of the village
lying westerly of the northeasterly line of the right-of-way of the Chicago and
North Western Railway, shall be as follows:
      (1)   For numbers between 500 and 600, the east line of the northwest
quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 28, Township 42 North, Range 13
East of the Third Principal Meridian (which is also the centerline of
Glendenning Road);
      (2)   For numbers between 600 and 700, the west line of Sterling Road
(formerly Maple Avenue) extended; and
      (3)   For numbers between 700 and 800, the west line of Brier Street
extended, which shall control house numbers on Kenilworth Avenue (formerly
Joseph Sears Road) and Earlston Road.
   (E)   (1)   On streets, avenues, courts and roads running due east and west
and those running due north and south (except those parts of Exmoor Road, Green
Bay Road, Brier Street and Ridge Road lying north of the 600 base line), in
that part of the village lying westerly of the Chicago and North Western
Railway, there shall be assigned one number for each 25 feet of frontage on
each side of the streets, avenues and roads;
      (2)   On streets, avenues, courts and roads in the area running
diagonally, there shall be assigned one number for each distance along the
property line which is the projection of corresponding 25 feet frontage lines
on due north and south and due east and west streets, avenues, courts and
roads, respectively; and
       (3)   On Exmoor Road, Green Bay Road, Brier Street and Ridge Road, north
of the 600 base line, there shall be assigned one number for each 26 feet on a
due north and south line or for the frontage represented by projections of the
lines, as is more fully described, represented and set forth on a map
designated House Number Map of Kenilworth, as amended April 13, 1925, on file
in the office of the Village Clerk, which map is hereby referred to and adopted
and made a part hereof as fully as if set forth in full herein.
   (F)   The 400 base line established in subsection (A) above and set forth on
the map referred to in subsection (E) above, is hereby made to terminate on the
westerly end at its point of intersection with the northeasterly line of the
right-of-way of the Chicago and North Western Railway and the house numbers
heretofore established for Lots 1 and 2 in Block 36 of Kenilworth Subdivision
are hereby changed from 400, 402, 404, 406 and 408 to 356, 358, 360, 362 and
364 Green Bay Road, respectively.
   (G)   (1)   On streets, avenues and roads running northwesterly and
southeasterly, or northeasterly and southwesterly, there shall be assigned one
number for each 25 feet on each side of each of the streets, avenues and roads.
      (2)   On streets, avenues and roads running north and south, or east and
west, there shall be assigned one number for each 40 feet on each side of each
of the streets, avenues and roads, so that the numbers on the streets, avenues
and roads shall conform to and be equalized with, as nearly as may be the
numbers on the streets, avenues and roads running northwesterly and
southeasterly, and northeasterly and southwesterly, as is more fully described,
represented and set forth in a street numbering map on file in the office of
the Village Clerk, which is hereby referred to and adopted and made a part
hereof as fully as if set forth in full herein.
(1959 Code, § 31-28)
§ 55.096 ORDER OF NUMBERS.
   The numbers on all streets, avenues and roads shall begin at each of the
base lines with the lowest numbers in each of the several series and shall
increase progressively toward the northwest or north, and toward the southwest
or west. Odd numbers shall be assigned to easterly, northeasterly and northerly
sides, and even numbers to westerly, southwesterly and southerly sides of all
streets, avenues and roads.
(1959 Code, § 31-29)
§ 55.097 VILLAGE MANAGER TO ASSIGN NUMBERS AND KEEP CHART.
   The Village Manager shall assign to each lot or house its proper number and
shall inform the owner, agent or person in possession of the premises as to the
number thereof at any time upon request, and he or she shall keep a chart
showing the proper street number of every lot in the village, which chart shall
be open to inspection by any person interested.
(1959 Code, § 31-30)
§ 55.098 DUTY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO PLACE NUMBER ON BUILDINGS.
   It is the duty of the owner or of the occupant of every building in the
village to place and maintain thereon in a place visible from the street,
figures at least three inches high, showing the street number of the building,
within 30 days after notice so to do.
(1959 Code, § 31-31)
§§ 55.099 THROUGH 55.109 RESERVED.
HOUSE MOVERS
§ 55.110 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to move a building on or over any public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public place in the village without obtaining
a permit from the Building Commissioner to so do.
(1959 Code, § 31-33)
§ 55.111 BOND REQUIRED.
   The permit required by this subchapter shall not issue until the owner of
the building, or the contractor who is to do the moving of the building on
behalf of the owner, files a bond conditioned to save the village harmless from
any loss, cost, damage or liability resulting from the moving of the building,
in the amount and with sureties to be approved by the Building Commissioner;
provided, however, that in lieu of the foregoing bond, the contractor may file
an annual bond.
(1959 Code, § 31-34)
§§ 55.112 THROUGH 55.124 RESERVED.
EXCAVATIONS
§ 55.125 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any street,
alley, sidewalk or public place or to tunnel under the same, except in case of
emergency and in that case after notification to the Police Department, without
obtaining a permit therefor and complying with the regulations contained in
this subchapter. In case of an emergency, a permit shall be secured within 24
hours from the time the emergency excavation or tunneling is commenced or the
next regular business day of the village.
   (B)   All construction and excavation in the public rights-of-way by
utilities is governed by
Chapter 56.
(1959 Code, § 31-35) (Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 55.126 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE; DEPOSIT.
   Application for the permit required under this subchapter shall be filed
with the Village Manager, and shall state the location of the intended
excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, the person doing
the actual excavating and the name of the person for whom the work is to be
done. The fee for the permit shall be for the amount established in the annual
fee ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 31-36)
§ 55.127 BOND REQUIRED.
   In addition to the deposit required in the preceding section to be made,
each applicant shall file with the application a surety or cash bond in a sum
to be fixed by the Village Manager and to be approved by him or her. The bond
shall be conditioned that the applicant will suitably guard and protect any
excavation or obstruction maintained or created and will save the village
harmless from any loss, cost, damage or liability resulting from injury to any
person or property caused by the excavation or obstruction or resulting from
acts or omissions of the applicant, or his or her employees, or any expense
incident to the enforcement of the bond.
(1959 Code, § 31-37)
§ 55.128 BARRICADES AND LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, alley, sidewalk or
other public place, or making or maintaining any excavation or opening therein,
shall maintain suitable barricades and lights to prevent injury to any person
or property by reason of the work. The barricades shall be protected by a light
at night, and it is unlawful for any person to disturb or interfere with any
barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or warn of any new pavement,
repair thereto, excavation or opening in any public street, alley, sidewalk or
public place.
(1959 Code, § 31-38)
§ 55.129 RESTORATION AFTER EXCAVATION.
   Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any street, alley,
sidewalk or public place in the village shall restore the street, alley,
sidewalk or public place to its original condition, except where the
resurfacing is to be done by the village at the cost of the person making the
excavation or tunnel. In case of unreasonable delay in so doing, the Village
Manager shall give notice to the person that, unless the excavation or tunnel
is refilled properly within ten days, the village will do the work and charge
the expense thereof to that person. If within the time stated the conditions of
the notice are not complied with, the work shall be done by the village, an
accurate account of the expense involved shall be kept and the total cost shall
be charged to the person who made or caused the excavation or tunnel to be
made.
(1959 Code, § 31-39)
§ 55.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 56: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
   
56.01   Purpose and scope
   
56.02   Definitions
   
56.03   Annual registration required
   
56.04   Permit required; application and fees
   
56.05   Action on permit applications
   
56.06   Effect of permit
   
56.07   Revised permit drawings
   
56.08   Insurance
   
56.09   Indemnification
   
56.10   Security
   
56.11   Permit suspension and revocation
   
56.12   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
   
56.13   General construction standards
   
56.14   Traffic control
   
56.15   Location of facilities
   
56.16   Construction methods and materials
   
56.17   Trees and vegetation
   
56.18   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities
   
56.19   Clean-up and restoration
   
56.20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
56.21   Variances
   
56.22   Right to appeal
   
56.23   Small wireless facilities
 
   
56.99   Penalty
§ 56.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village’s
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the village
rights-of-way and the village as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this subchapter, the village intends to exercise
its authority over the rights-of-way in the village and, in particular, the use
of the public ways and property by utilities by establishing uniform standards
to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without
limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the village’s residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Minimize visual impact and prevent visual blight from the
proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this subchapter. This subchapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-
way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this subchapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into an
agreement may request that the village enter into an agreement. In this
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this subchapter.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the village, the franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of the agreement and
any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of
any franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of the franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of the agreement and
any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other subchapters. This subchapter supersedes all
subchapters or parts of subchapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of the conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
subchapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter
to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or
regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this subchapter and may vary the standards,
conditions and requirements expressed in this subchapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 1214, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 56.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term
not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill.
Adm. Code Part 531.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this subchapter.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as
carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds and on
the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
    CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this subchapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. This work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, monopoles, towers,
utility polces, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances
thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-
of-way under this subchapter. For purposes of this subchapter, the term
FACILITY shall not include any village-owned infrastructure.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, vault, box, cabinet, equipment
enclosure, pedestal, transformer, pump, meter station, or facility located on a
pole.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Manager to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health
or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The State Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended
from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the State Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   MONOPOLE. A structure composed of a single spire, pole, or tower designed
and used to support antennas or related equipment, and that is not a utility
pole or village-owned infrastructure.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. The entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
56.04 and
56.05.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane or coal slurry.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PRIVATE LINE. A dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single
customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
communications channel, or a group of channels, from one or more specified
locations to one or more other specified locations.
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY.  A legal entity that constitutes, or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   ROADWAY. The part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one corporation to another corporation is not greater than the
gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for
sale.
   SECURITY FUND. The amount of security required pursuant to §
56.10.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY or SWF. A small wireless facility as defined in the
SWF Act.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The village’s Superintendent of Public Works or his or her
designee.
   SWF ACT. The Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, 50 ILCS 835/
1 et seq., as may be amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel
services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value
added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by the provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§
521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming
services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an
open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in making sales
of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self- supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, or monopole towers.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this subchapter.
   UTILITY POLE. An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables,
telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables, or to provide
lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in § 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
   VILLAGE. The Village of Kenilworth.
   VILLAGE-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE. Infrastructure owned, operated, or maintained
by the village including, but not limited to, street lights, traffic signals,
towers or buildings.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does
not include the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated or wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic
cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial,
or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any entity authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. An entity that provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 1214, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. 1224, passed 8-
20-2018)
Editor’s note:
   50 ILCS 835/1 et seq. was relocated to 50 ILCS 840/1 et seq. by Public Law
100-1129, § 98
§ 56.03 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies rights-of-way within the village shall register
on January 1 of each year with the Village Manager, providing the utility’s
name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of
one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection
with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-way and a
24-hour telephone number for each person, and evidence of insurance as required
in §
56.08 of this subchapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.04 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person shall construct any facility on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across or within any village right-of-way which:
         (a)   Changes the location of the facility;
         (b)   Adds a new facility;
         (c)   Disrupts the right-of-way; or
         (d)   Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way,
without first filing an application with the Superintendent (or, for small
wireless facilities, with the Village Manager) and obtaining a permit from the
village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
      (3)   Small wireless facilities shall also be subject to the permit
requirements of §
56.23.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
subchapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed
in the number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant
may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of the materials accordingly. Small
wireless facilities shall also be subject to the application requirements of §
56.23 .
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of the person or entity responsible for performing the proposed work;
the name, address and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of
the person or entity responsible for performing the restoration if different
from the person or entity responsible for the original work; and the names,
addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all
professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the
application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of the description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         (a)   If requested, a written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage
to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
         (b)   If requested, an emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by
the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village
and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public.
Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional
information or assurances are needed.
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that the drawings, plans and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations. The
drawings, plans and specifications shall include the following details, where
applicable, of the work to be performed: route location, method of
installation, all physical features and public utilities in the immediate area,
off-set distance from street edge, right-of-way lines and property lines;
      (7)   If the work is to be performed within an easement, the recording
document number assigned by the County Recorder’s office to the easement;
      (8)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
56.08 of this subchapter;
      (9)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
56.10 of this subchapter;
      (10)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
subchapter (see §
56.21); and
      (11)   Any additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of subsection (C) above, the permit application
shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that
is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public
convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
State Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have
been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the State Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District, have been satisfied;
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and the design
standard to be followed; or
      (6)   In the case of small wireless facilities, applications shall
address all items required by §
56.23.
   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application, including any
change in the actual locations of any facilities which deviates in any material
respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings or specification
submitted with the permit application, shall be submitted by the utility in
writing to the village within 30 days after the change necessitating the
amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this subchapter
shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of an amount as established in the
annual fee ordinance. No application fee is required to be paid by any
electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
Application fees for small wireless facilities shall also be subject to the
requirements of §
56.23 .
   (G)   Inspection fees. Any person obtaining a permit under this subchapter
for which inspections are performed by or on behalf of the village shall
reimburse the village for the actual cost of the inspections. The Village
Manager shall from time-to-time determine the actual per hour costs of village
employees for purposes of calculating the costs of the inspections. No
inspection fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying
the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 1224, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 56.05 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Village Manager
within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to
the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
the Village Manager shall reject the application in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. If the Village Manager is satisfied that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this subchapter and applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Village Manager shall issue a permit
therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Manager, that the
construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with
the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Additional village review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this subchapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. This notice shall consist of plans, specifications
and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the
village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work
requiring excavation. The Village Manager shall specify the portion of the
right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Village Manager fails to provide the
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either ten
days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer
in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or 25 days
after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may
commence work without obtaining a permit under this subchapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of the specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
56.04 of this subchapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. The
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) above.
   (C)   Additional village review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided
the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances and
regulations.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.06 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this subchapter on village rights-of- way, and
does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge
upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights- of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this subchapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion; provided, however,
that permits for small wireless facilities shall be subject to the duration
provided for SWF permits in §
56.23 .
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. Unless waived in writing by the
Village Manager, no construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under
this subchapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors
and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-
construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date,
time and place designated by the village with the village representatives in
attendance as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose
of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation,
presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their
locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-
way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent
property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 1224, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 56.07 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this subchapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with §
56.21 of this subchapter. If the village denies the request for a variance,
then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or
modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised
drawings or plans therefor.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.08 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in
the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in subparagraphs(A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) below:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly referred to as
“X,” “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each
person;
            2.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   If the utility is not providing the insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then the contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis so that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover the loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the village, by
registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written
notice addressed to the Village Manager of the intent to cancel or not to
renew.
      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of the notice, and in
no event later than ten days prior to the cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (A) above. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance,
to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under
subsection (A) above, or the requirements of subsections (B), (C) and (D)
above. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (A) above,
such as evidence that the utility is a “private self-insurer” under the
Worker’s Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by those insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.09 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnity and hold the village and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether the acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited
by this subchapter or by a franchise, license or similar agreement; provided,
however, that the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to
any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising
out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
subchapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.10 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this subchapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
subchapter; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this subchapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this subchapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this subchapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
state at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Village Manager, and may also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if
the permittee fails to perform the restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the village, with each phase consisting of construction of
facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where
construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Manager
may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single
amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction
under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall
be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this subsection (C) for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days’ advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that
the permittee has not reimbursed the village for the amount within the 14- day
notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2) Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this subchapter that the
village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the
permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in subsection
(C) above.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for the withdrawal to the village, provided that any
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection (C) above.
   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or that portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
subchapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the
permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall
become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any
reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of the
revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of the costs, loss or damage
shall be refunded to the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this subchapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to the Security Fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.11 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this subchapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Noncompliance with this subchapter;
      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
subchapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and
the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of the
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of the
removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
      (2)   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this subsection.
   (D)   Stop-work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop-work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (A)
above.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection (C) above, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village:
      (1)   Correct the deficiencies;
      (2)   Upon not less than 20 days’ notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or
      (3)   After not less than 30 days’ notice to the permittee of failure to
cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village. The
permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of
removal.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.12 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less
than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-
of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or
the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this subchapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village’s right-
of-way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.13 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   IDOT publications.
         (a)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
         (b)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
         (c)   Highway Design Manual;
         (d)   Highway Standards Manual;
         (e)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
         (f)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code Part 545);
         (g)   Flagger’s Handbook; and
         (h)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
      (2)   The tree preservation regulations set forth in Chapter 150 of this
code.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
subchapter, the Village Manager shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and the decision shall be final.
If requested, the Village Manager shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance or operation of a facility in the
future.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 1214, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 56.14 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of the work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
56.20, the utility shall provide notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the village.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.15 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      (1)   No interference with village facilities. No utility facilities
shall be placed in any location if the Village Manager determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
village’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village’s utility facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin the right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on the right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Cooperation. Any utility seeking to place a facility in the village
shall comply with the village’s reasonable requests to place facilities on
public property where possible, and shall comply with village direction with
respect to the location and screening of equipment and facilities.
      (6)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. The installation of new parallel
facilities is prohibited. Existing parallel facility may remain within the
right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Routine repair or maintenance of the existing overhead
facilities will not increase the capacity of the existing lines or add
additional overhead lines;
         (c)   The overhead parallel facility will not require the installation
of any new poles or lines; and
         (d)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot
(three-tenths meters) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (two and four-tenths meters) from and
parallel to the right- of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (one and one-half meters) from the right-of-way line and
any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (three-tenths
meters) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of the crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities.
      (3)   Ninety degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill.
Adm. Code Part 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (three-tenths meters) of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c) Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 C.F.R. § 192.707).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
      (3)   Freestanding facilities are prohibited in the following locations:
         (a)   On or above any sidewalk within the village;
         (b)   Within 20 feet of any tree located on a parkway; and
         (c)   Within the drip line of any tree on public or private property
that is considered a protected tree or heritage tree per tree preservation
regulations,
Chapter 150 of this code.
   (F)   Overhead facilities prohibited. Except as provided in this section, no
overhead facilities shall be installed, replaced or upgraded within the
village.
   (G)   Below ground installation. Below ground facilities may be installed
only if they are located a minimum of five feet, measured from outside edge to
outside edge, from any village-owned utility.
   (H)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities, including
but not limited to freestanding facilities, may be installed only if the
installation is approved by the Village Manager, in accordance with the
provisions of this division (H). Above ground facilities may be installed only
if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible;
      (3)   The proposed installation does not require the installation of a
new pole within the parkway, including, without limitation, a tower or utility
pole; provided, however, that the Village Manager may approve the proposed
installation of small wireless facilities on a utility pole to the extent
required by the SWF Act;
      (4)   The proposed installation does not require a pole extension or
attachment to a village street light; and
      (5)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and traffic standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (I)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and the installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (J)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   Unless otherwise authorized by the Village Manager, a freestanding
facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive
removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way
user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair
the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
      (3)   The village may require adequate visual screening of freestanding
facilities with approved materials and landscaping.
      (4)   The facilities shall be located and colored to minimize their
appearance to the greatest extent practicable.
   (K)   Small wireless facilities shall be subject to the additional
requirements of §
56.23.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 1214, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. 1224, passed 8-
20-2018)
§ 56.16 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village
Manager from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be
excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and
backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed.
While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades.
Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced and maintained so that it
will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it
during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches (fifteen hundredths meter) in diameter shall be accomplished with an
auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the
outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 millimeters).
         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree shall be bored under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Village Manager.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench, excavate, or
create bore pits within the drip line of any tree.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Village Manager, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and
properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk,
curbs and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Village Manager.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection is
permitted under §
56.21, the following requirements shall apply.
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Village Manager.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless the work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (three-tenths meters) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes
shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular
section of the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair; and
            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                        Minimum Cover
Communication, cable or video service   18 to 24 inches (0.46 meters to 0.6
lines                                   meters as determined by village)
Electric lines                          30 inches (0.8 m)
Gas or petroleum products               30 inches (0.8 meters)
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                    protection
Water line                              Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                        protection
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights- of-way shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the State Commerce Commission) entitled Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities.
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of “moles,” “whip
augers” or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
               b.   The installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of “moles,” “whip augers” or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192,
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. § 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      (6)   Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 millimeters) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Village Manager. With the approval of the
Village Manager, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be
painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the State
Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory
agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village Manager.
When storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms or other
materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from
the village.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights- of-way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when the operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and welfare. The operations may
also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that
construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Village Manager when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in Chapter 114 of this code.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence
and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the
rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying
possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220
ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 1214, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 56.17 TREES AND VEGETATION.
   (A)   Tree trimming approval required. Tree trimming shall not be considered
a normal maintenance operation, but shall require authorization by the Village
Manger and shall be in accordance with the tree preservation regulations set
forth in
Chapter 150 of this code.
   (B) Protected trees and heritage trees. The village may require that special
measures be taken to preserve protected trees and heritage trees, as defined in
§
150.156 of this code. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire, or a tree preservation plan in accordance with
the tree preservation regulations set forth in
Chapter 150 of this code.
   (C)   Location of utility poles and wires. To the extent possible, any
person given the right to maintain poles and wires in the streets, alleys or
other public places in the village shall keep wires and poles away from trees
and shrubs.
   (D)   Chemical use. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 1214, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 56.18 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that the removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of the facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this subchapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within 90
days. Following receipt of the notice the village may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility, at the utility’s cost, if the
Village Manager determines that the removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not
direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice
of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to
consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by
another utility or person.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.19 CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made
using materials and methods approved by the Village Manager. The cleanup and
repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the
Village Manager for good cause shown.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.20 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility’s expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized agent, of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.21 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this subchapter must do so in writing to the Village
Manager as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each
provision of this subchapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Village Manager shall decide whether
a variance is authorized for each provision of this subchapter identified in
the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Village Manager may authorize
a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Village Manager may require the utility requesting
the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this subchapter but which carry out the purposes of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 56.22 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination,
including denial of a variance, made by the Superintendent or the Village
Manager under the provisions of this subchapter may file a request to appeal
the order, requirement, decision, or determination with the Village Clerk
within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination. The appeal shall be made in writing and specifically state the
basis for the appeal, include references to the sections of the Village Code or
SWF Act thought to be improperly applies, along with other supporting
information. The appeal of a determination made by the Superintendent shall be
considered by the Village Manager. The Village Manager shall commence his or
her review of the appeal within ten business days and shall timely decide the
appeal. An appeal of a determination made by the Village Manager shall be
considered by the Village Board or a committee as the Village Board shall
designate from time to time based on the nature of the request for appeal. The
Village Board or the designated committee shall commence its consideration of
the appeal at the Board’s or committee’s next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The Board of
Trustees or the designated committee, as the case may be, shall timely decide
the appeal. The determination of the Board or designated committee shall be
final.
(Ord. 989, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 1224, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 56.23 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the
location, installation, and maintenance of small wireless facilities in
compliance with the SWF Act and village standards. Small wireless facilities
shall be subject to the requirements of this section, this chapter, and federal
law.
   (B)   Definitions. Words or phrases in this section that are not defined in
§
56.02 shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the SWF Act.
   (C)   Permit required. No SWF may be installed within the village unless a
permit is first obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Permit application. All applicants for a permit to install a SWF
within the village must submit a written permit application to the
Superintendent by personal delivery, on a form provided by the village. The
permit application must include the following information and the information
required by §
56.04, as applicable:
      (1)   Contact information. The names and contact information of the
wireless services provider and the wireless infrastructure provider if any.
      (2)   Description. A description and depiction of the wireless services
provider's existing SWFs located within the village.
      (3)   Location and photographs. The location at which each proposed SWF
or utility pole would be installed, including photographs of the location and
its surroundings, depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed SWF would be mounted or the location at which a utility pole would be
installed.
      (4)   Specifications and drawings. Specifications and drawings prepared
by a licensed professional structural engineer for each proposed SWF as it is
proposed to be installed, with a certification that each SWF complies with all
applicable size and location standards.
      (5)   Structural analysis. A site-specific structural analysis of each
proposed location, completed by a licensed professional engineer, that examines
the acceptability of the site for factors such as pole loading from existing
utility equipment and conductors as well as the SWF.
      (6)   Equipment and model numbers. The equipment type and model numbers
for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with each proposed
SWF.
      (7)   Number. The total number of SWFs the wireless services provider
estimates it will seek within the village.
      (8)   Schedule. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion
of each proposed SWF, if approved.
      (9)   Proof of insurance. Proof of insurance coverage of the types and
amount set forth in §
56.08.
      (10)   Certification of SWF Act compliance. A certification that the
proposed SWF complies with subsection 15(d)(6) of the SWF Act and this chapter.
      (11)   Application fees. An application fee in the amount established in
the annual fee ordinance.
      (12)   Owner and co-owner certification. A certification from the owner
or co-owner of the utility pole or wireless support structure that the owner or
co-owner has approved installation of a SWF on the utility pole or wireless
support structure.
   (E)   Review of application. Applications will be reviewed in accordance
with the following process, except that the Superintendent may alter the review
process for an application as appropriate based on the elements of that
application.
      (1)   Determination of completeness. Within 30 days after an application
is filed, the Superintendent will determine whether the application is
complete. The Superintendent will notify the applicant of his or her
determination. If an application is not complete, then the Superintendent will
identify the missing information.
      (2)   Processing time period. The Superintendent will process a complete
application to collocate (i) a SWF on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure within 90 days, and (ii) a SWF on a new utility pole within
120 days.
      (3)   Approvals; permits; duration. The Superintendent will approve an
application and issue a permit if it meets all requirements of the SWF Act and
applicable Village Code requirements. All collocation under the permit must be
completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless otherwise
mutually agreed or for reasons authorized under the SWF Act. A permit is valid
for five years.
      (4)   Renewal. When the permit expires, the village will renew the permit
except if the village determines the SWF does not conform to any application
federal, state, or local code or regulation. The wireless provider must provide
all reports, plans, and other documents and data necessary for the village to
determine conformance of the SWF.
      (5)   Denial. The Superintendent will deny an application if it does not
meet all requirements of the SWF Act and applicable requirements of the Village
Code. The Superintendent will notify the applicant of the denial and the reason
or reasons for the denial.
      (6)   Extensions of time. The time period for applications may be tolled
by express written agreement of the applicant and the village, or due to a
local, state, or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes
the delay.
   (F)   Guidance on SWF locations. Based on various factors including, among
others, public safety, existing utility poles and wireless facilities, and
potential adverse impacts, the applicant must consider collocation in the
following locations, with the items listed from most preferable to least
preferable:
      (1)   Public utilities' poles. Utility poles owned or maintained by ComEd
or other public utilities.
      (2)   Village poles. Village-owned utility poles other than streetlight
poles or standards (whether existing or to be installed) in the following order
of priority: (i) within an arterial street right-of-way; (ii) within a parking
lot or on other property related to a governmental or institutional use; and
(iii) within a collector street right-of-way.
      (3)   Privately-owned poles. Privately-owned utility poles, but only in
locations approved by the village.
      (4)   Village light poles. Village-owned streetlight poles or standards
(whether existing or to be installed) in the following priority: (i) within an
arterial street right-of-way: (ii) within a parking lot or on other property
related to a governmental or institutional use; and (iii) within a collector
street right-of-way.
      (5)   Other poles. Utility poles, regardless of ownership, located in a
rear yard (or abutting easement) of any residential dwelling.
   (G)   Decorative utility poles, concealment of SWF. If the Superintendent
determines that a SWF proposed by the applicant would have an unduly adverse
impact on the abutting area unless the SWF is collocated on a decorative pole
or is concealed, then the Superintendent may require, as a condition of
approval of that SWF, a decorative utility pole or concealment. The
Superintendent or a designee may meet with the applicant to determine the plans
for the SWF under that circumstance. If an agreement on plans cannot be
reached, then the Superintendent may deny the permit for that proposed SWF.
   (H)   Prohibited locations. SWFs are prohibited at the following locations
except as otherwise required by applicable law:
      (1)   Residential property. On any property classified in a residential
district under the village's Zoning Code.
      (2)   Private property. On any privately-owned property except with the
approval of the village.
      (3)   Government property. On any property owned or controlled by a unit
of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, except with the
permission of the local government and approval of the village.
      (4)   Poles with equipment. On any utility pole that includes equipment
such as capacitor banks, transformers, cable terminals, cable rises, fuses, or
disconnects.
   (I)   Size, height, and location of components.
      (1)   Volume. No element of a SWF may exceed six cubic feet in volume.
      (2)   Overall height. No element of a SWF may extend above 45 feet above
grade.
      (3)   Height above pole. No element of a SWF may extend more than ten
feet above a utility pole.
      (4)   Height of new utility pole or wireless support structure. A new or
replacement utility pole or a new wireless support structure on which a SWF
will be collocated may not exceed the higher of: (a) ten feet in height above
the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only
wireless facilities, that is in place as of the date the application is
submitted to the village, that is located within 300 feet of the new or
replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same
right-of-way within the village; or (b) 45 feet above ground level. No SWF
installed on a new utility pole or wireless support structure may extend above
that 45-foot height.
      (5)   New utility pole location. No new utility pole may be constructed
for a SWF within 100 feet of an existing utility pole that the applicant may
use on reasonable terms and conditions and without undue technical limits or
undue additional costs.
   (J)   Color. Antennas and equipment cabinets must be in colors harmonious
with, and that blend with, the utility pole or wireless support structure to
which they are attached, as well as with the natural features, buildings and
structures surrounding such antenna and supporting structures, as determined by
the Superintendent. Any wiring or cables must be covered with an appropriate
cover.
   (K)   Landscaping. The immediate area around any ground-mounted equipment or
cabinets must be landscaped in a manner that largely screens the equipment and
cabinets.
   (L)   Safety requirements.
      (1)   Mounting strength. The strength and sufficiency of the support
structure for the SWF, and the mounting of the antenna and related equipment,
must be verified and stamped by a licensed structural engineer on the drawing
required under division (D)(4) of this section.
      (2)   Guy wires prohibited. No guy wire or other support wires mav be
used in connection with a SWF antenna or its related equipment except for
preexisting guy wires or other support wires on a preexisting wireless support
structure.
      (3)   Grounding. A SWF antenna and related structure must be bonded to a
ground rod.
      (4)   Emergency disconnection. A SWF antenna must have an emergency
disconnect.
      (5)   Lighting. No SWF may be lighted unless required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other federal or state agency with jurisdiction and
authority.
      (6)   Signs and advertising. Unless required by federal or state law, or
by a rule of a federal or state regulatory agency with jurisdiction and
authority, no markings, signs, or advertising of any kind may be placed on any
SWF component except unobtrusive identification or location markings.
      (7)   Building codes and safety standards. A SWF must meet or exceed; (1)
all requirements of this chapter; (2) all other applicable local and state
building codes and electrical codes; (3) and industry standards as provided in
the SWF Act.
      (8)   Regulatory compliance. Each SWF and wireless facility must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, and any other federal or state
agency with jurisdiction and authority.
      (9)   Utility worker safety. Prior to the commencement of SWF
construction, the wireless provider must provide the village with any required
safety precautions for individuals working on or near the SWF. If refresher
training, personal protective equipment, or tools are required for safety
purposes related to a SWF collocated on a village-owned utility pole, then the
wireless services provider must reimburse the village for all of its actual
costs of those elements.
   (M)   IDOT and Cook County approvals. The applicant must provide proof of
concurrence of IDOT or Cook County for the use of traffic signals located on
state or county roads, as the case may be.
   (N)   Abandonment. Any SWF that has been abandoned or is being used for a
purpose other than its original purpose must be removed at the owner's expense.
Abandonment includes, without limitation, any SWF that is not operated for a
continuous period of 90 days, or is otherwise out of operation or repair for
any reason, or used for a purpose other than its original purpose. Notice to
the owner of the facility must be given in compliance with the requirements of
the SWF Act, and the owner must remove the facility within 90 days after the
date of such notice.
   (O)   Collocation on village utility poles.
      (1)   Rates and fees for use of village utility pole. The village will
set and charge nondiscriminatory rates and fees for collocation on village
utility poles. The village will keep a written schedule of rates and fees in
the office of the Village Clerk.
      (2)   Annual rate. In addition to the rates and fees for collocation,
each wireless services provider must pay an annual fee as established in the
annual fee ordinance for each SWF located on a village utility pole in right-
of-way or on village property not located in right-of-way.
      (3)   Operating agreement. Prior to commencement of SWF construction on a
village-owned utility poler the owner must develop an operating agreement
satisfactory to the Superintendent. The agreement must include protocols for
emergency response and for maintenance of the utility pole and include
emergency contacts, a contact for public inquires, the utility billing address,
and the legal address of the wireless services provider.
   (P)   SWF equipment replacement. The wireless provider must notify the
village at least ten days prior to a planned equipment replacement and provide
the equipment specifications. The replacement equipment must be the same color,
and the same size and/or smaller, than the original installation.
   (Q)   Right-of-way permit. The wireless provider must secure a permit for
any activities in the right-of-way that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures.
   (R)   General standards.
      (1)   No interference. Every wireless provider's operation of a wireless
facility must not interfere with the frequencies used by any public safety
agency for public safety communications. The wireless provider must install
SWFs of the type and frequency that will not cause interference with any public
safety agency's communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will be
determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's
regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or
any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
      (2)   Curing interference. If a SWF causes interference and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the village or
public safety agency, then the wireless provider, at its expense, must take all
reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference,
including, without limitation, powering down the SWF and later powering it up
for intermittent testing, if necessary. The village may terminate a permit for
a SWF based on interference if the wireless provider is not making a good faith
effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and
resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established
by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672
through 47 CFR 90.675.
      (3)   Compliance with contract terms. Every wireless provider must comply
with all requirements imposed by a contract between the village and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and to ground-mounted equipment located in right-of-way.
      (4)   Spacing. Every wireless provider must comply with spacing
requirements in this section or any other applicable village code or ordinance
concerning the location of around-mounted equipment located in the right-of-
way. A wireless provider may apply for a variation of a spacing requirement.
      (5)   Undergrounding. Every wireless provider must comply with all
village codes and regulations regarding undergrounding of utilities and
facilities that prohibit installation of new, or modification of existing,
utility poles in a right-of-way. A wireless provider may apply for a variation
of an undergrounding requirement.
      (6)   General village standards. Every wireless provider must comply with
generally applicable village standards for construction and public safety in
the rights-of-way, including, without limitation, wiring and cabling
requirements, grounding requirements, utility pole extension requirements, and
sign restrictions. Every wireless provider must comply with all village
regulations applicable to the location, size, surface area and height of
wireless facilities and the abandonment and removal of SWFs.
      (7)   Poles for electricity distribution. No wireless services provider
may collocate a SWF on a village utility pole that is part of an electricity
distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone
of the pole or the electric suppIv zone of the utility pole, except that the
antenna and support equipment of the SWF may be located in the communications
space on the village's utility pole and on the top of the utility pole if no
other utility pole is available and the wireless provider complies with
applicable codes for work involving the top of the utility pole. The terms
"communications space," "communication worker safety zone," and "electric
supply zone" shall have the meanings contained in the National Electric Safety
Code.
      (8)   Public safety codes. Every wireless provider must comply with all
applicable state, county, and village codes, ordinances, and regulations that
concern public safety.
      (9)   Decorative, stealth, and concealment standards. Every wireless
provider must comply with the village's generally applicable written standards
for decorative utility poles, and the village's generally applicable standards
regarding stealth, concealment, and aesthetics governing occupiers of the
right-of- way, including the village's design or concealment measures in an
historic district or regarding an historic landmark.
      (10)   Insurance. Every wireless provider must provide insurance as
provided in §
56.08.
      (11)   Indemnification. Every wireless provider must indemnify the
village as provided in §
56.09.
   (S)   Installation and maintenance of wireless facilities. Each wireless
provider must construct, install, and maintain all wireless facilities in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 1224, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 56.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 57: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
   
57.01   Planting, maintaining and removal
   
57.02   Injury; attaching wires or ropes
   
57.03   Excavations and gas pipes not to injure trees or shrubs
   
57.04   Trees and shrubs not to obstruct view at intersections
   
57.05   Removal of dangerous trees, limbs and the like
   
57.06   License required to engage in business of planting, removing and the
like; fee
 
   
57.99   Penalty
§ 57.01 PLANTING, MAINTAINING AND REMOVAL.
   It is unlawful for any person to plant, maintain or permit the existence, or
to cut down or remove any tree or shrub in a public street or other public
place, without obtaining a permit therefor from the Village Manager. All trees
and shrubs so planted or removed shall be placed or removed under the direction
and with the approval of the Village Manager.
(1959 Code, § 34-1)
§ 57.02 INJURY; ATTACHING WIRES OR ROPES.
   It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrub in any public
street, parkway or other public place, and unlawful for any person to attach
any wire or rope to any tree or shrub in any public street, parkway or other
public place without the permission of the Village Manager. Any person given
the right to maintain wires in the streets, alleys or other public places in
the village shall, in the absence of provisions in the franchise concerning the
subject, keep the wires and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs
in those places so far as may be possible, and shall keep all trees and shrubs
properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the Village Manager, so that no
injury shall be done to either shrubs or trees by contact with poles or wires.
(1959 Code, § 34-2)
§ 57.03 EXCAVATIONS AND GAS PIPES NOT TO INJURE TREES OR SHRUBS.
   In making excavations in streets, parkways or other public places, care
shall be taken to avoid injury to the trees, shrubs or roots thereof, and any
person maintaining any gas pipe in the village shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise or authority concerning the subject, keep the gas
pipe free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any tree or shrub.
(1959 Code, § 34-3)
§ 57.04 TREES AND SHRUBS NOT TO OBSTRUCT VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to plant, maintain or permit to exist any tree, shrub,
bush, vine, plant or vegetation within a triangle two sides of which are 40
feet in length measured along the street line and in no event shall these sides
of the triangle extend more than ten feet beyond the existing building setback
line at any intersection or the boundary line of two streets or of a street and
an alley, if the shrubbery is over four feet high measured from the grade of
the abutting street, and no branch of trees shall be permitted to remain within
the area at an intersection at a height lower than seven feet above the grade
of the street.
(1959 Code, § 34-4)
§ 57.05 REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS TREES, LIMBS AND THE LIKE.
   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place
in the village in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel
thereon, shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the
premises on which the tree or shrub grows or stands; and any tree or limb of a
tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall
be removed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the premises on which
the tree grows or stands. The Village Manager may cause to be trimmed any tree
or shrub or remove the same or any branch thereof so that the obstruction or
danger to traffic or passage is removed.
(1959 Code, § 34-5)
§ 57.06 LICENSE REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS OF PLANTING, REMOVING AND THE
LIKE; FEE.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of planting,
removing trimming, spraying or otherwise caring for trees in the village,
without obtaining a license therefor. Application for the license shall be made
to the Village Manager and an annual fee of an amount as established in the
annual fee ordinance shall be paid to the Village Clerk for the license. The
holding of a license shall not abrogate the necessity of securing the permit
required in §
57.01 of this subchapter.
(1959 Code, § 34-8)
§ 57.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   REGULATION OF TRAFFIC
      
72.   PARKING
      
73.   MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSES
      
74.   PARKING AND TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   70.02 through 70.14   Reserved
State Vehicle Code
   
70.15   Adoption of portions of Illinois Vehicle Code
   70.16 through 70.29   Reserved
Administration and Enforcement
   
70.30   Police officer to enforce
   
70.31   Obedience to regulations and police
   
70.32   Police to direct traffic; directing at fire
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   State Vehicle Code, see 625 ILCS 5
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms used in this title shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by the State Vehicle Code, as amended, except where otherwise set forth in
this title.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§§ 70.02 THROUGH 70.14 RESERVED.
STATE VEHICLE CODE
§ 70.15 ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE.
   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5, 1- 100 et seq., as may be amended
(“State Vehicle Code”), is hereby adopted in its entirety by reference.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991; Ord. 813, passed 5-9-1994; Ord. 826, passed 3-11-
1996; Ord. 1032, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 1197, passed 7-24-2017)
Statutory reference:
   State Vehicle Code, see 625 ILCS 5
§§ 70.16 THROUGH 70.29 RESERVED.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.30 POLICE OFFICER TO ENFORCE.
   Police officers of the village are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
in accordance with the provisions of this title or in emergencies or otherwise
as public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction
of a police officer.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 70.31 OBEDIENCE TO REGULATIONS AND POLICE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this title.
   (B)   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of any police officer or other person invested by law with
authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 70.32 POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC; DIRECTING AT FIRE.
   (A)   Officers of the Police Department or other persons as are assigned by
the Chief of Police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or
signal in conformance with the provisions of this title or otherwise as public
safety and convenience may require; provided, that in the event of a fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of
the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department or other emergency service personnel,
when at the scene of a fire or other emergency, may direct or assist the police
in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
   (C)   Except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 71: REGULATION OF TRAFFIC
Section
   
71.01   Through street stops
   
71.02   Obedience to no-turn signals and turning markers
   
71.03   Loud and unnecessary noise
   
71.04   Zone of quiet
   
71.05   Using vehicle for primary purpose of advertising prohibited
   
71.06   Compliance with schedules
   
71.07   Careless driving
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 THROUGH STREET STOPS.
   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate, with the approval of
the Board of Trustees, by proper official signs, any street or portion thereof
as a through highway and requiring that all vehicles stop before entering the
same, or designating any intersection as a stop intersection and requiring all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to the intersection. No vehicle shall
be driven into or upon streets or intersections where a sign has been erected,
without first being brought to a full stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection, or if there is no crosswalk, before entering the
intersection.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 71.02 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNALS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U
turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
sign, and when authorized marks, or other indications are placed within or near
any intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the
indications.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 71.03 LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle which causes unusually
loud or unnecessary noise sufficiently loud to disturb residents in their homes
or yards.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 71.04 ZONE OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any zone shall sound the horn or other noise
producing device of the vehicle except in an emergency.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 71.05 USING VEHICLE FOR PRIMARY PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall operate or park any vehicle on any street in the village for
the primary purpose of advertising.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 71.06 COMPLIANCE WITH SCHEDULES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle in violation of the
traffic schedules in Chapter 74 of this code.
§ 71.07 CARELESS DRIVING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon a
street or public way in the village in a careless manner so as to endanger any
person or property.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 72: PARKING
Section
Parking Generally
   
72.01   Driving and parking of vehicles generally
   
72.02   Manner of parking vehicles
   
72.03   Bus and taxicab stands
   
72.04   Unlawful parking
   
72.05   Parking in front of buildings and the like
   
72.06   All-night parking
   
72.07   Parking prohibited or limited in designated places
   
72.08   Signs
   
72.09   Registration
   72.10 through 72.19   Reserved
Permit Parking
   
72.20   Nonresident parking zones
   
72.21   Special permit parking
   
72.22   Daily permit parking
 
   
72.99   Penalty
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 72.01 DRIVING AND PARKING OF VEHICLES GENERALLY.
   No person shall drive, operate, stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, except
in compliance with the directions of a police officer, traffic control device
or official sign, in or upon any of the following places:
   (A)   Upon or within any park, parkway, school or other public ground areas
or sidewalks therein, except upon and within roadways and parking areas
provided for driving and parking therein;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway so as to block or impede
ingress and egress to a public street;
   (C)   Within an intersection or within 20 feet thereof unless a different
distance is indicated by signs or markings;
   (D)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant unless a different distance is
indicated by signs or markings;
   (E)   At or within any place where official signs prohibit parking; or
   (F)   In any parking area owned or maintained by the Kenilworth School
District on school days from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., unless there is displayed
in the rear window of a motor vehicle a currently valid school district parking
permit sticker properly issued by the Kenilworth School District.
   (G)   In any location at which parking is prohibited or restricted by the
parking schedules in Chapter 74 of this code.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991; Ord. 805, passed 10-12-1993)
§ 72.02 MANNER OF PARKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway shall be so stopped or
parked parallel with and within 12 inches of the adjacent curb, or, if there is
no curb, then within 12 inches of the edge of the paved portion of the roadway
or portion of the roadway provided for vehicular driving, except for angle
parking. Upon those streets and in those areas which have been marked or
designated by appropriate markings or signs for angle parking, vehicles shall
be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by markings or signs, with the
nearest corner of the front of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb or the
edge of the paved portion of the roadway or area or portion of the roadway or
area provided for vehicular driving or use.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in a manner or under conditions as to leave available less than
sufficient room for normal and free movement of vehicular traffic, except that
a driver may stop temporarily for a period in no event exceeding two minutes
during the actual loading or unloading of passengers, merchandise or materials
or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or
signals or a police officer.
   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a manner or under
conditions as to leave available less than sufficient room for normal and free
movement of vehicular traffic.
   (D)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to
stand unattended upon any street or alley without first stopping the engine,
locking the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 72.03 BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park upon any street
in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand
respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any
vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately indicated by signs, except that
the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose
of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when the
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter the zone.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 72.04 UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying it for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 72.05 PARKING IN FRONT OF BUILDINGS AND THE LIKE.
   When official signs are erected or placed giving notice thereof, no person
shall stand or park any vehicle longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers within a space designated by official signs along the adjacent curb
immediately in front of the entrance of any public building, hospital, hotel,
theater or church.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 72.06 ALL-NIGHT PARKING.
   No person shall park a vehicle on any street within the village between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day, except physicians and operators of
emergency vehicles on emergency calls.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 72.07 PARKING PROHIBITED OR LIMITED IN DESIGNATED PLACES.
   (A)   In addition to other prohibitions and limitations on stopping,
standing and parking, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to
designate and establish, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, zones or
areas in or upon streets within the village, prohibiting the parking of
vehicles therein or thereon, limiting the parking to “Resident Parking Only” or
“Handicapped Only,” and limiting and restricting the time within which vehicles
may be parked therein or thereon, and the Chief of Police, from time to time,
with the approval of the Board of Trustees, may add to, change or abandon the
parking zones or areas. In selecting, changing or abandoning the zones or
areas, the Chief of Police shall be guided and governed by location, amount of
traffic, the demand for parking space, the congestion of traffic, the use of
streets and all other traffic conditions which may exist.
   (B)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to procure and
cause to be erected adjacent to the zones or areas so designated, signs giving
notice that the parking in or upon zones or areas is prohibited or limited as
stated on signs, and no person owning, controlling, driving or operating any
vehicle shall cause, leave or permit the vehicle to be parked or left standing
at any time when or during which time the posted sign gives notice that the
parking in or upon the zones or areas is prohibited or limited as stated on the
signs.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991; Ord. 865, passed 11-8-1999; Ord. 986, passed 10-9-
2007)
Cross-reference:
   Parking prohibited or limited in designated places, see
Ch. 74, Sch. II
§ 72.08 SIGNS.
   The Chief of Police shall cause to be posted or erected new signs or
existing signs changed, so as to give notice of the parking regulations
provided in this chapter. No provision of this chapter for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place
of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 72.09 REGISTRATION.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a public area within the
corporate limits of the village, if the vehicle does not display a current
annual state registration sticker or current temporary permit pending
registration.
(Ord. 831, passed 1-13-1997)
§§ 72.10 THROUGH 72.19 RESERVED.
PERMIT PARKING
§ 72.20 NONRESIDENT PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   Any person desiring a permit for the parking within nonresident
parking zones shall file an application with the village, upon a form provided,
setting forth the name and address of the applicant, a description of the
vehicle for which the permit is desired and other information as may be
prescribed. No permits shall be issued in excess of the number of parking
spaces provided in the parking areas designated in this section. No person
shall be permitted to sell, transfer or assign any parking permit nor shall any
permit issued hereunder be displayed except on the vehicle for which the permit
is issued; provided, however, that the owner of any vehicle for which a permit
has been issued hereunder, may, upon payment of a transfer fee in an amount as
established in the annual fee ordinance, make application to the village for
transfer of the permit to any other vehicle owned by the person.
   (B)   The permit fee for the parking areas described in this section shall
be as established in the annual fee ordinance. Quarterly permits shall expire,
respectively, on the last day of March, June, September and December. Annual
permits shall expire on the last day of December. The holder of an existing
permit shall have first preference on the renewal thereof for the next
succeeding calendar quarter provided that the holder files an application for
renewal with the required permit fee on or before the fifteenth day of the
month in which the permit is scheduled to expire. Failure to comply with this
renewal provision shall cause loss of preferred status and, upon expiration of
the permit, it shall be assigned to the applicant having highest priority on
the aforesaid waiting list.
   (C)   Permits issued hereunder for a motor vehicle shall be in the form of a
decal or other form of sticker which shall be displayed, affixed and attached
on the lower inside left corner of the windshield of the motor vehicle for
which issued in a manner as not to obstruct the vision of the driver. Permits
issued hereunder for a motorcycle, motor driven cycle or pedalcycle shall be in
the form of a metal plate for attachment to the license plate required by the
State Vehicle Code. No motor vehicle shall be stopped, parked or left standing
in the parking areas designated in this section unless the permit is affixed
thereto in accordance with this section.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991; Ord. 811, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 837, passed 10-13-
1998; Ord. 904, passed 4-14-2003; Ord. 932, passed 4-11-2005; Ord. 1014, passed
5-11-2009)
Cross-reference:
   Nonresident parking zones, see
Ch. 74, Sch. III
§ 72.21 SPECIAL PERMIT PARKING.
   (A)   Any person desiring a special permit for reserved parking shall file
an application with the village upon a form provided, setting forth the name
and address of the applicant and any other information as may be prescribed. No
permits shall be issued in excess of the number of parking spaces provided in
the reserved areas. All applications shall be filed by the village on a waiting
list in the chronological order of their receipt by the village, and permits
shall be issued in the order that applications are on file, except that
preference shall be given to proprietors of business establishments in the
village and employees of those businesses. The holder of an existing permit
issued to a proprietor of a business in the village or an employee of the
business shall have first preference on the renewal thereof for the next
succeeding year; provided that the holder files an application for renewal with
the required permit fee at least 15 days before the date the permit is
scheduled to expire. Failure to comply with this renewal provision shall cause
loss of preferred status and, upon expiration of the permit, it shall be
assigned to the applicant having highest priority on the waiting list. No
application for which a permit is then available or for renewal of an existing
permit shall be accepted unless accompanied by the fee hereinafter provided
for. An application to be placed on the waiting list may be filed without
payment of fee at the time of filing; provided, however, that no application
shall be considered valid or binding unless the required fee is paid within 15
days after written notice is mailed to the applicant at the address shown on
the application advising that a permit is then available.
   (B)   No person shall be permitted to sell, transfer, or assign any reserved
space provided in this section or permit therefor except as provided in this
section. Permits issued pursuant to this section may be used only on any
vehicle owned or operated by the person in whose name the permit is issued; any
employee of the person in whose name the permit is issued; any employee of a
business establishment in the village that employs the person in whose name the
permit is issued; or any customer or client of a business establishment in the
village while patronizing such business.
   (C)   The permit fee for reserved space in the parking area designated in
this section shall be as established in the annual fee ordinance. Permits shall
expire on June 30 in each year, except for permits issued after June 30, 1999
and on or before December 31, 2000 which shall expire on December 31, 2000.
Permits issued on or after January 1, 2001 shall expire on December 31 in each
year.
   (D)   For those areas listed in
Chapter 74, Schedule V, church permit stickers, suitable for attaching to the
inside of the windshield of a car, shall be issued by the village to the Rector
of the Church of the Holy Comforter and to the Minister of the Kenilworth Union
Church in reasonable quantities as they each shall request. A fee as
established in the annual fee ordinance per year per sticker, to cover the cost
of the stickers and administrative costs of the village, shall be charged the
churches. The church sticker shall expire on the last day of June each year.
The stickers must be attached to the upper left rear window of a vehicle which
is parked in the church permit parking area.
   (E)   Permits issued hereunder shall be in the form of a decal or other
emblem which shall be hung from the interior rear view mirror of the vehicle
while parked in a reserved space provided in this section. No motor vehicle
shall be parked or left in the reserved space parking areas provided in this
section unless the permit is displayed therein in accordance with this section.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991; Ord. 857, passed 6-14-1999)
Cross-reference:
   Special permit parking, see
Ch. 74, Sch. IV
§ 72.22 DAILY PERMIT PARKING.
   There are hereby established and made available upon payment of a fee in the
amount set forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance, daily parking permits which, when
such permit is properly displayed on a motor vehicle being used in connection
with construction projects located in the village, or for special circumstances
approved in advance by the Village Manager or his or her designee, shall allow
the motor vehicle to occupy any automobile parking space for which parking is
otherwise limited pursuant to this code. Parking permits issued pursuant to
this §
72.22: (a) may only be purchased by the general contractor for an active
construction project in the village, or by a person authorized in advance by
the Village Manager or his or her designee; and (b) may only be used for
parking on the date, and in the location, specified in the permit. No vehicle
displaying a permit issued pursuant to this §
72.22 may occupy a parking space for which parking is prohibited pursuant to
this code.
(Ord. 1190, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 73: MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSES
Section
   
73.01   Motor vehicle licenses required
§ 73.01 MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person residing within the village, or any corporation,
partnership, association or other business entity having a place of business in
the village, shall pay to the village each year a tax or license fee and obtain
a vehicle license, as hereinafter provided, for the use of each motor vehicle
owned or leased by the person or business and used on any public street or
highway in the village during more than 30 days in the year, or principally
garaged or stored in the village. Registration with the office of the Secretary
of State from an address within the village shall be deemed prima facie
evidence that the vehicle requires a village vehicle license under this
section, unless rebutted by a showing that the vehicle is located or used in
the village less than 30 days in the year.
   (B)   Application for the license required under this section shall be made
upon a form prescribed by the village, setting forth the name and address of
the applicant, a description of the vehicle and any other information as may be
required on the form. The license required under this section shall be issued
only to persons residing within the village or corporations, partnerships,
associations or other business entities having a place of business in the
village for the use of the motor vehicle specified in the application that is
used on any public street or highway in the village more than 30 days in the
year or principally garaged or stored in the village. Upon payment of the
license fee provided in this section, the Village Clerk shall issue or cause to
be issued a license authorizing the use of the motor vehicle within the village
until the expiration of the license on the next succeeding June 30.
   (C)   (1)   The license fees established in the annual fee ordinance shall
be payable with respect to each license year commencing on July 1 of each year
and ending on the next succeeding June 30; provided, however, that in any
instance where a vehicle comes into possession of the owner after the
expiration of the first six months of the license year or the vehicle is
otherwise first required to be licensed after the expiration of the first six
months of the license year, the license fee shall be one-half of the annual fee
prescribed for the vehicle.
      (2)   The license fee shall be due and payable annually in advance of the
first day of the license year or, where applicable, on the day that the vehicle
is first required to be licensed during the license year. An additional license
fee equal to one-half of the applicable license fee shall be payable with
respect to any vehicle not licensed as herein provided within 15 days following
the first day of the license year or, where applicable, the day the vehicle is
first required to be licensed during the license year. For purposes of
determining fees applicable to a particular motor vehicle, gross weight and
other licensing factors shall be determined in the manner prescribed by statute
for determining those factors for the purpose of fixing state license fees.
   (D)   Green vehicle discount. If qualified, an applicant for a license
provided for in subsection (C) above shall be entitled to pay a discounted
license fee as established in the annual fee ordinance based on his or her
rating or score in the most recent United States Environmental Protection
Agency’s (USEPA) Green Vehicle Guide, as follows: vehicles manufactured after
model year 2006 rated SmartWay™ by USEPA, or for model years 2000 through 2005,
that received scores of at least six or higher on both the USEPA Air Pollution
and Greenhouse Gas Scores, and a combined score of at least 13.
   (E)   In administering the discounts provided for in subsection (D) above,
the Village Manager is authorized to promulgate application forms related
thereto and require the submission of such information as may be reasonably
necessary to ascertain the applicant’s or vehicles, as the case may be,
qualifications for the discount. It is the obligation of the vehicle license
applicant to supply information as may be reasonably required by the Village
Manager to determine eligibility for these discounts, and failure to submit the
information shall disqualify the applicant from receiving a discount.
   (F)   When a vehicle licensed hereunder is sold or disposed of during the
license year for which the license is issued and the former owner desires to
have a duplicate license issued for a new or substitute vehicle, he or she
shall remove the sticker or license plate, as the case may be, from the vehicle
sold or disposed of and present same to the village with an application for a
duplicate license upon a form prescribed by the village setting forth the name
and address of the applicant, a description of the newly acquired vehicle to
which the duplicate license is to be issued, and any other information as may
be required on the form. If the duplicate license is for a vehicle of the same
class as that for which the license was originally issued, the Village Clerk
shall issue the duplicate license for use upon the new or substitute vehicle
upon the payment of a fee. If the duplicate license is for a vehicle of a class
for which the payment of a greater fee is required by this section, the
applicant shall pay to the village in addition to the fee for the duplicate
license, the difference between the amount previously paid for the license for
the vehicle sold or disposed of and the amount that would be payable for a new
license for the new or substitute vehicle as of the time the new or substitute
vehicle is first required to be licensed during the license year. If the
duplicate license is for a vehicle of a class for which payment of a lesser fee
would be required by this section the village shall issued the duplicate
license for the new or substitute vehicle without the payment of any further
license fee other than the fee for the duplicate license. All fees under this
provision shall be as established in the annual fee ordinance.
   (G)   All revenues derived from vehicle license fees collected pursuant to
this section shall be used for the purpose of improving, paving, repairing or
maintaining the streets or other public roadways within the village, except
that the actual cost of collection of the fees and the disbursement thereof may
be deducted from the total amount collected.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991; Ord. 789, passed 4-13-1992; Ord. 811, passed 4-11-
1994; Ord. 837, passed 10-13-1998; Ord. 904, passed 4-14-2003; Ord. 932, passed
4-11-2005; Ord. 979, passed 5-14-2007; Ord. 1013, passed 5-11-2009; Ord. 1036,
passed 4-19-2010)
CHAPTER 74: PARKING AND TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking prohibited
      
II.   Parking prohibited or limited on designated streets
      
III.   Nonresident parking zones
      
IV.   Special permit parking
      
V.   Church permit parking
      
VI.   One-way traffic and entry prohibited in certain places
      
VII.   Speed restriction
      
VIII.   Trucks prohibited on certain streets
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to stop, stand, park or leave unattended at any
time any motor or other vehicle upon the following streets, or portions
thereof, within the village:
Location Prohibition Ord. Passage Date
Location                       Prohibition                    Ord. Passage Date
East side of the 600 block of
Abbotsford Road from the north No parking or standing except  1315 9-19-2022
village limits to Cumberland   Saturday and Sunday
Avenue
East side of Brier Street at a
point 30 feet northerly of
MacLean Avenue and a point 60  No parking between signs       1294 11-15-2021
feet northerly of MacLean
Avenue
West side of Brier Street at a
point 90 feet northerly of     No parking here to corner      1294 11-15-2021
MacLean Avenue
North side of Cumberland Ave.
between Abbotsford Rd. and     No parking                     1193 4-17-2017
Essex Rd.
                               No stopping, standing, parking
Cumnor Road                    or leaving unattended 200      986  10-9-2007
                               block east side
                               No stopping, standing, parking
Leicester Road                 or leaving unattended 200      1069 8-22-2011
                               block east side
South side of Melrose Avenue
between the driveways of 108   No parking between driveways   1119 12-16-2013
and 122 Melrose Avenue
South side of Roger Avenue at
a point 23 feet easterly of    No parking                     1294 11-15-2021
Sterling Road
Sheridan Road                  No stopping, standing, parking 780  7-8-1991
                               or leaving unattended
North side of Wayland Avenue
at a point 55 feet westerly of No parking here to alley       1236 2-19-2019
Green Bay Road
West side of Warwick Road
between 220 and 226 Warwick    No parking between driveways   1119 12-16-2013
Road
West side of Warwick Road
between 510 and 520 Warwick    No parking between driveways   1119 12-16-2013
Road
Winnetka Avenue                No stopping, standing, parking 780  7-8-1991
                               or leaving unattended
North side of Woodstock Avenue
between the driveways of 105   No parking between driveways   1119 12-16-2013
and 125 Woodstock Avenue
South side of Woodstock Avenue
between the driveways of 100   No parking between driveways   1119 12-16-2013
and 122 Woodstock Avenue
 
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to stop, stand, park or leave unattended at any
time any motor or other vehicle on any other streets or portions thereof on
which parking is prohibited as posted by official signs.
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991; Ord. 986, passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 1069, passed 8-22-
2011)
SCHEDULE II. PARKING PROHIBITED OR LIMITED ON DESIGNATED STREETS.
   In addition to the prohibitions and limitations established in §
72.07(A) and (B), it is unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or park any
time in any area designated as a no parking or limited no parking area as
listed below:
Location Restriction Ord. Passage Date
Location                       Restriction                    Ord. Passage Date
West side of the 500 block of
Abbotsford Road from 520       Loading zone, no parking 8:00  1315 9-19-2022
Abbotsford Road to 542         a.m. to 4:00 p.m. school days
Abbotsford Road
West side of the 600 block of
Abbotsford Road from 610       90 minute parking 8:00 a.m. to 1315 9-19-2022
Abbotsford to 638 Abbotsford   4:00 p.m. school days
Road
Cumnor Road, 200 block, west   Resident parking, 8:00 a.m. to 986  10-9-2007
side                           10:00 a.m. weekdays
West side of Green Bay Road
between a point 60 feet        30 minute parking 8:00 a.m. to
northerly of Park Avenue and a 5:00 p.m. except Sunday and    1120 1-27-2014
point 140 feet northerly of    holidays
Park Avenue
Kenilworth Avenue, between     Loading zone, no parking 8:30
Leicester and Warwick Roads,   a.m. to 9:00 a.m. school days  1103 6-17-2013
south side
Kenilworth Avenue, between a
point 44 feet easterly of      Loading zone, no parking 8:30
Warwick Road and a point 150   a.m. to 9:00 a.m. school days  1103 6-17-2013
feet easterly of Warwick Road,
north side
Kenilworth Avenue east of      Resident parking only 7:00     1130 8-18-2014
Sheridan Road                  a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
North side of Kenilworth
Avenue between a point 6 feet  No parking school days 8:00
easterly of Leicester Road and a.m. to 1:00 p.m.              1237 2-19-2019
a point 107 feet easterly of
Leicester Road
South side of Kenilworth
Avenue between a point 40 feet No parking school days 8:00
westerly of Warwick Road and a a.m. to 1:00 p.m.              1237 2-19-2019
point 219 feet westerly of
Warwick Road
Park Drive, 600 and 700        Resident parking, both sides
blocks, both sides             8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.        986  10-9-2007
                               weekdays
Richmond Lane                  Resident parking, 8:00 a.m. to 1002 8-8-2008
                               10:00 a.m. weekdays
Richmond Road, 400 block, east
side, one diagonal/front-in
parking space immediately
adjacent to and north of the   Handicapped accessible parking 996  5-20-2008
handicapped accessible
sidewalk apron serving 419
Richmond Road
Richmond Road, 400 block, east
side, six diagonal/front-in
parking spaces between the     30-minute parking              996  5-20-2008
handicapped accessible
sidewalk apron and the
driveway for 419 Richmond Road
Warwick Road, between a point
69 feet northerly of
Kenilworth Avenue and a point  Handicapped accessible parking 1103 6-17-2013
91 feet northerly of
Kenilworth Avenue, west side
 
Cross-reference:
   Parking prohibited or limited on designated streets, see §
72.08
SCHEDULE III. NONRESIDENT PARKING ZONES.
   Unless there is properly displayed on a vehicle a currently valid resident’s
vehicle sticker or nonresident’s parking permit issued by the village to the
owner of the vehicle, no person owning, controlling, driving or operating any
vehicle shall cause, leave or permit the vehicle to be parked or left standing
at any time during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
of each week, except New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, and any other days as may be officially
designated as holidays by the President or Congress of the United States of
America, or by the Governor or General Assembly of the state on any of the
following places or on any of the following streets or portions thereof within
the village:
Location Direction Ord. Passage Date
Location              Direction                   Ord. Passage Date
                      Northerly side between a
                      point 20 feet westerly of   780; 7-8-1991;
Ashland Avenue        Green Bay Road and a point  790  5-11-1992
                      20 feet easterly of
                      Glendenning Road
                      Westerly side between a
                      point 20 feet northerly of  780; 7-8-1991;
Cumnor Road           Kenilworth Avenue and a     790  5-11-1992
                      point 120 feet northerly of
                      Kenilworth Avenue
                      Westerly side between a
                      point 20 feet southerly of  780; 7-8-1991;
Cumnor Road           Melrose Avenue and a point  790  5-11-1992
                      200 feet southerly of
                      Melrose Avenue
                      Easterly side of between a
                      point 20 feet northerly of  780;
Glendenning Road      Ashland Avenue and a point  790  7-8-1991; 5-11-1992
                      20 feet southerly of
                      Kenilworth Avenue
                      Northerly side between a
Kenilworth Avenue     point 30 feet westerly of   780; 7-8-1991;
                      Green Bay Road and a point  790  5-11-1992
                      110 feet westerly
                      Southerly side between a
                      point 30 feet westerly of   780; 7-8-1991;
Kenilworth Avenue     Green Bay Road and a point  790  5-11-1992
                      20 feet easterly of
                      Glendenning Road
                      Easterly side between a
                      point 20 feet northerly of  780; 7-8-1991;
Richmond Road         Kenilworth Avenue and a     790  5-11-1992
                      point 80 feet northerly of
                      the point
                      Easterly side between a
                      point 20 feet southerly of  780; 7-8-1991;
Richmond Road         Kenilworth Avenue and a     790  5-11-1992
                      point 80 feet southerly of
                      the point
                      Westerly side between a
Richmond Road         point 132 feet northerly of 780; 7-8-1991;
                      Kenilworth Avenue and the   790  5-11-1992
                      north end of Richmond Road
                      Westerly side between a
                      point 20 feet southerly of  780; 7-8-1991;
Richmond Road         Kenilworth Avenue and a     790  5-11-1992
                      point 200 feet southerly of
                      the point
                      Easterly of and adjacent to
Vehicle parking areas Green Bay Road, lying       780; 7-8-1991;
owned by the village  northerly and southerly of  790  5-11-1992
                      Kenilworth Avenue
 
Cross-reference:
   Nonresident parking zones, see §
72.20
SCHEDULE IV. SPECIAL PERMIT PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any
vehicle in or upon the following streets on any day between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:45 a.m. unless a parking permit issued by the village is displayed
on the vehicle; provided, however, that no permit shall be required for parking
in the areas on Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, and any other days as may be
officially designated as a holiday by the President or Congress of the United
States of America, or by the Governor or General Assembly of the state.
 
Location       Direction                                      Ord. Passage Date
Green Bay Road East side from Melrose Avenue north to a point 780; 7-8-1991
               230 feet north of Wayland Avenue               857  6-14-1999
 
Cross-reference:
   Special permit parking, see §
72.21
SCHEDULE V. CHURCH PERMIT PARKING.
   Parking adjacent to the church properties in the village, where designated
by official signs, shall be by permit only during the hours 8:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon on school days.
 
Location          Restriction                                Ord. Passage Date
Kenilworth Avenue Along both sides of between Warwick Road   780  7-8-1991
                  and Leicester Road
                  Parking along the easterly side north of
Warwick Road      Kenilworth Avenue and the westerly side of 780  7-8-1991
                  Leicester Road
 
(Ord. 780, passed 7-8-1991)
SCHEDULE VI. ONE-WAY TRAFFIC AND ENTRY PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   In the following locations, vehicular traffic shall move only in the
direction indicated. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate
these locations with all proper and necessary traffic control signs and
devices. It is unlawful for any vehicular traffic to disobey any sign posted
pursuant to these regulations.
Location Restriction Traffic Control Signs/Devices Authorized Ord. Passage Date
                                         Traffic Control
Location            Restriction          Signs/Devices        Ord. Passage Date
                                         Authorized
Abbotsford Road at  Northerly traffic    Sign: do not enter
intersection with   prohibited during    school days 7:30     1068 8-22-2011
Kenilworth Avenue   specific times       a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
Abbotsford Road at  Northerly traffic    Sign: do not enter
intersection with   prohibited during    school days 7:30     1068 8-22-2011
Melrose Avenue      specific times       a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
Northbound traffic  Do not enter during  Sign: do not enter
on Essex Road at    specific times       7:30 a.m. to 8:30    1316 9-19-2022
Cumberland Avenue                        a.m. on school days
Northbound traffic  Do not enter during  Sign: do not enter
on Warwick Road at  specific times       7:30 a.m. to 8:30    1316 9-19-2022
Cumberland Avenue                        a.m. on school days
Northbound traffic  Do not enter during  Sign: do not enter
on Abbotsford Road  specific times       7:30 a.m. to 8:30    1316 9-19-2022
at Ivy Court                             a.m. on school days
                    One way in an
Alley in the block  easterly direction
bounded by Park     from Sterling Road
Drive on the south, to a point 113.5     Signs: one-way, stop
Sterling Road on    feet west of the     and do not enter     795  11-9-1992
the west, Melrose   centerline of the
Avenue on the north alley behind the 400
                    block of Green Bay
                    Road
Alley in the block
bounded by Green                         Speed breaking bumps
Bay Road on the     One way in a         and stop signs at
east, Wayland       northerly direction  locations as shall   780  7-8-1991
Avenue on the south from Wayland Avenue  be specified by the
and Sterling Road                        Chief of Police
on the west
Cumberland Road at  Easterly traffic     Sign: do not enter
intersection with   prohibited during    school days 7:30     1068 8-22-2011
Abbotsford Road     specific times       a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
Sterling Road at    Southerly traffic    Sign: do not enter
intersection with   prohibited during    school days 7:30     1068 8-22-2011
Roger Road and      specific times       a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
Green Bay Road
 
(Ord. 1068, passed 8-22-2011)
SCHEDULE VII. SPEED RESTRICTION.
   (A)   (1)   A maximum speed of 25 mph is fixed for the following streets, or
portions thereof, in the village (unless otherwise posted):
Location Direction Ord. Passage Date
Location          Direction                                   Ord. Passage Date
Abingdon Avenue   Between Sheridan Road and Warwick Lane      780; 7-8-1991;
                                                              1049 11-15-2010
Earlston Road     Between Park Drive and Sterling Road        780; 7-8-1991;
                                                              1049 11-15-2010
Exmoor Road       North of Roger Avenue                       780; 7-8-1991;
                                                              1049 11-15-2010
Greenwood Avenue  The portion between Kenilworth Avenue and   780; 7-8-1991;
                  Glendenning Road                            1049 11-15-2010
Kenilworth Avenue Between Sheridan Road and Ridge Road        780; 7-8-1991;
                                                              1049 11-15-2010
Park Drive        Between Ridge Avenue and Green Bay Road     780; 7-8-1991;
                                                              1049 11-15-2010
Roger Avenue      Between Ridge Road and Green Bay Road       780; 7-8-1991;
                                                              1049 11-15-2010
                  Portion running southwesterly from Sheridan 780; 7-8-1991;
Tenth Street      Road, extending to the village boundary     1049 11-15-2010
                  with Wilmette
Winnetka Avenue   The portion between Sheridan Road and Essex 780; 7-8-1991;
                  Road                                        1049 11-15-2010
 
      (2)   Other streets or portions thereof as shall be specified by the
Chief of Police, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, and designated by
official signs shall have a maximum speed of 25 mph.
   (B)   (1)   A maximum speed of 20 mph (on school days between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. when children are present) is hereby fixed for all
streets, or portions thereof, in the village that are designated by official
signs as school zones.
      (2)   On any day when children are present and within 50 feet of
motorized traffic, any driver traveling on a park zone street, as defined by
the State Vehicle Code, may not drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of
20 mph or any lower posted speed or fail to come to a complete stop at a stop
sign or red light.
         (a)   This section does not apply unless official signs are posted
giving proper due warning that a park zone is being approached.
         (b)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in violation of
this section (B)(2) upon the following streets, or portions thereof, within the
village:
 
Location       Direction                                      Ord. Passage Date
Alley          West of Green Bay Road between Wayland Avenue  1049 11-15-2010
               and Sterling Road
Sterling Road  From Wayland Avenue north to the alley west of 1049 11-15-2010
               Green Bay Road
Wayland Avenue From Sterling Road east to the alley west of   1049 11-15-2010
               Green Bay Road
 
Cross-reference:
   School zones, see §
71.06
SCHEDULE VIII. TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   In accordance with 625 ILCS 5/15-316(c), it shall be unlawful to
operate any truck weighing 24,000 pounds or more on Kenilworth Avenue east of
Green Bay Road, except for the purpose of servicing residents or businesses
within the corporate limits of the village or within one-fourth mile of the
corporate limits of the village, except to cross Kenilworth Avenue at an
intersection of Kenilworth Avenue with another street.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, SERVICING means delivering or picking up
material or goods to and from residents or businesses on Kenilworth Avenue,
provided that vehicles shall enter or leave Kenilworth Avenue from the closest
and most direct route from and to another street.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to governmental vehicles in the
performance of governmental functions, public utility vehicles in the
performance of utility activities, public transportation vehicles duly
authorized by the village to use any streets otherwise prohibited, and private
construction vehicles performing work under a government contract upon
Kenilworth Avenue or serving residents along Kenilworth Avenue.
(Ord. 834, passed 9-9-1998)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ALARMS
      
91.   ANIMAL CONTROL
      
92.   REFUSE AND RECYCLING
      
93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
94.   NUISANCES
      
95.   PARKS, BEACHES, WATERS AND PUBLIC PLACES
      
96.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
CHAPTER 90: ALARMS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Permit required; conditions of permit
   
90.03   Fees
   
90.04   False alarms
   
90.05   Prohibited alarm equipment; conditions of operation
   
90.06   Exemptions
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM. Any device or group of devices, installed in a residence, building or
other structure or premises with a fixed location, for the purpose of
monitoring events or conditions and sounding an alarm or other signal, audible
or detectable outside the premises, to warn of unauthorized entry, breakage,
robbery, burglary, fire or similar emergency.
   CENTRAL STATION ALARM. An alarm that, when activated, causes a signal at the
alarm monitoring board located in the Village Police Department or at the fire
alarm board located in the Winnetka Public Safety Building.
   LOCAL ALARM. An alarm that, when activated, sounds audibly on the premises
protected by the alarm and is not connected to any central location.
   PRIVATE STATION ALARM. An alarm that, when activated, causes a signal in a
private central location, resulting in the central station operator telephoning
and advising the desk operator at the Village Police Department of the site of
the alarm activation.
(Ord. 808, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 90.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or other organization shall install,
maintain or operate an alarm at any residence, building or other structure or
premises with a fixed location within the village without obtaining a permit
from the village for the installation and registration thereof and annual
permits from the village for the maintenance and operation thereof as
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   No alarm permit shall be issued except on written application in the
form prescribed by the village and payment of the applicable fee provided in
the annual fee ordinance.
   (C)   Each applicant for an alarm permit, who is or will be the owner or an
occupant of the premises protected by the alarm, must agree:
      (1)   To provide the Police Department with access to the premises
protected by the alarm at all times to investigate emergency calls;
      (2)   The village shall not be liable for any failure of service or any
damage that might result from the installation or operation of, or response to,
the alarm;
      (3)   The necessary maintenance for the alarm system will be provided 24
hours each day, seven days a week; and
      (4)   To pay all charges and fees payable under this chapter by reason of
the operation of the alarm and all costs and expenses of the village in
collecting the charges and fees, including court costs and attorney’s fees.
   (D)   Each application for the installation and registration of an alarm
shall be co-signed by each person, firm, corporation or other organization
providing installation and/or related services in connection therewith, but the
person, firm, corporation or other organization shall not, by reason of joining
in the application, be responsible to the village for the undertakings provided
in subsection (C) above.
(Ord. 808, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 90.03 FEES.
   (A)   A fee as established in the annual fee ordinance shall be paid to the
village for a permit issued upon application received by the village for the
initial installation and registration of each alarm as installed within the
village. Any renewal application that is filed after January 1 of the year for
which the applicant seeks to renew their alarm, the village shall charge such
applicant a late renewal application fee as set forth in the annual fee
schedule.
   (B)   A fee as established in the annual fee ordinance shall be paid to the
village on or before January 1 of each year for the required annual permit to
maintain or operate an alarm within the village at any time during the ensuing
period from January 1 through the succeeding December 31. No annual fee shall
be payable for the 12-month period during which the installation fee required
by subsection (A) above is paid. If the fee payable by reason of this
subsection is not paid within 60 days after the date upon which the fee is due,
the village may, upon 30 days prior written notice mailed to the person in the
case of a central station alarm, disconnect the alarm from the alarm monitoring
board located in the Village Police Department. Any alarm for which the fee
required by this subsection is not paid within 60 days after the date upon
which the fee is due shall not be maintained or operated within the village
unless and until a permit shall thereafter be issued by the village for the
alarm as would be required for a permit for the initial installation thereof.
(Ord. 808, passed 3-14-1994; Ord. 861, passed 6-14-1999; Ord. 1396, passed 12-
9-2025)
§ 90.04 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   The owner or user of an alarm shall be assessed a fee as established
in the annual fee ordinance, for each false alarm signal in excess of one false
alarm per calendar year.
   (B)   Fees for false alarm charges shall be billed to the person responsible
for the payment thereof and shall be billed at intervals as shall be determined
by the village. Bills for fees for false alarm charges shall be paid by the
person responsible for the payment thereof within 60 days after receipt
thereof. If any bill for fees for false alarm charges is not paid by the person
responsible for payment thereof within 60 days after receipt of the bill
therefor, the village may revoke the permit for the alarm upon 30 days prior
written notice mailed to the person at the address of the premises protected by
the alarm, as indicated on records maintained by the village, and, in the case
of a central station alarm, disconnect the alarm from the alarm monitoring
board located in the Village Police Department. Any alarm for which a permit is
revoked shall not be maintained or operated within the village unless and until
a permit shall thereafter be issued by the village for the alarm as would be
required for a permit for the initial installation thereof.
(Ord. 808, passed 3-14-1994; Ord. 819, passed 6-12-1995; Ord. 910, passed 7-14-
2003)
§ 90.05 PROHIBITED ALARM EQUIPMENT; CONDITIONS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or other organization shall use or cause
or permit to be used, or engage in the business of providing, any alarm or
telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects a public
telephone trunk line at the Village Police Department or the Winnetka Public
Safety Building, and then reproduces a prerecorded voice message to report any
robbery, burglary, fire or other emergency.
   (B)   No alarm shall emit any sound similar to that of sirens on emergency
vehicles or similar to civil defense warning systems.
   (C)   After June 30, 1994, no alarm shall emit a signal that is audible to
neighbors for a period of more than ten minutes before an automatic shut-off
device shall stop the audible signal until a time as the alarm detects a
subsequent unauthorized entry, breakage, robbery, burglary, fire or similar
emergency.
   (D)   Any alarm device, attachment or line termination to which the device
or attachment is connected that is prohibited by this chapter, or that is not
operated or maintained in accordance with this chapter, is hereby declared a
nuisance and shall be abated, as provided in Chapter 95 of this code.
(Ord. 808, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 90.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   The village school district, the village park district and any other
municipal corporation or unit of local government with taxing powers, having an
office or building in the village, are exempted from the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 808, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 91: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Definitions
   
91.002   Animals as nuisances
   
91.003   Hunting; cruelty
   
91.004   Diseased animals
   
91.005   Abatement of nuisances
   
91.006   Enforcement
   91.007 through 91.019   Reserved
Dogs
   
91.020   License tag required; fee
   
91.021   Record to be kept
   
91.022   Dog tags to be issued and attached to collar
   
91.023   Keeping more than three dogs a nuisance
   
91.024   Dogs running at large and in public places deemed a nuisance; damage
to property; female dog in heat
   91.025 through 91.034   Reserved
Cats
   
91.035   Inoculations
   
91.036   Keeping more than four cats a nuisance
   91.037 through 91.049   Reserved
Other Animals
   
91.050   Certain animals prohibited
   
91.051   Confinement of small domesticated animals
   
91.052   Inoculations
   
91.053   Running at large prohibited
   
91.054   Keeping more than one small domesticated animal a nuisance
   
91.055   Exceptions
   91.056 through 91.059   Reserved
Dangerous Animals
   
91.060   Fierce, vicious and dangerous animals
   
91.061   Duty of owner of animal which has bitten person or animal
   
91.062   Report of rabies
   
91.063   Animals biting other animals
   
91.064   Authority of officer to enter premises to seize animals
   
91.065   Procedure for warrant
   
91.066   Dangerous animals not to run at large
   91.067 through 91.079   Reserved
Impoundment of Animals
   
91.080   Chief of Police ex officio poundmaster
   
91.081   Duty to impound animals and give notice
   
91.082   Poundmaster; register and notice of owners
   
91.083   Redemption from pound; impounding fees
   
91.084   Disposition of unredeemed impounded animals
 
   
91.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. A dog, cat, fowl, reptile or other living creature commonly
understood to be an animal.
   AT LARGE. To be off the premises of the owner, not under the control of the
owner or a member of the owner’s immediate family over the age of 12 years,
either by leash or otherwise; but an animal confined within the motor vehicle
of its owner shall be deemed upon the owner’s premises.
   CAT. All domesticated members of the feline species, male or female.
   DOG. All domesticated members of the canine species, male or female.
   FOWL. Chickens, geese, ducks, pigeons, birds or other species commonly
understood to be fowl, but does not include a household pet.
   HOUSEHOLD PET. Any animal harbored or kept exclusively within the residence
of its owner, except for occasional and temporary periods outside the residence
of its owner in connection with the transportation of the animal to and from
the premises of the owner during which time the animal is kept in a cage or
similar enclosure in the immediate custody, control and supervision of its
owner.
   LEASH. A cord, thong or chain by which an animal is directly and effectively
controlled by the person accompanying it.
   OWNER OF AN ANIMAL. Any person owning, harboring or keeping or having the
care or custody of the animal; the occupant of any premises on which the animal
remains or to which it customarily returns daily for a period of ten days is
presumed to be harboring or keeping the animal within the meaning of this
chapter.
   SMALL DOMESTICATED ANIMAL. An animal, other than a dog, cat or fowl, which
is domesticated in its natural state and propagated and kept as a domestic pet
and which, at maturity, will not exceed a weight of 75 pounds and which is not
prohibited by this chapter.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.002 ANIMALS AS NUISANCES.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal which disturbs
the peace by loud noises or offensive odors at any time in the day or night.
The harboring or keeping of any noisy or offensive smelling animal shall
constitute and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Any person creating or
permitting the nuisance to exist, having the right and power to abate the same,
shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.003 HUNTING; CRUELTY.
   No person shall willfully shoot, poison, keep or ill-treat any animal, the
owner of which has complied with the provisions of this chapter. It is unlawful
for any person to hunt or to engage in killing (except as permitted or required
by this chapter), or to inhumanely beat, underfeed, overload, abandon or
cruelly treat any animal within the village.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.004 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   No animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed
to run at large within the village or be exposed in any public place or kept on
any private premises within the village whereby the health of man or beast may
be affected, nor shall the diseased animal be shipped or removed from the
premises of its owner, except in compliance with this chapter and under the
supervision of a licensed veterinarian.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.005 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   Whenever any nuisance exists under this chapter contrary to the provisions
thereof, in addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, the
President of the village is hereby authorized in his or her discretion to cause
the same to be summarily abated in a manner as he or she may direct, at the
expense of the party permitting or maintaining the nuisance. Action on the part
of the President shall not affect the right of the village to enforce any other
penalty provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.006 ENFORCEMENT.
   No person shall hinder or molest any officer or person duly authorized
hereunder while engaged in the performance of any duty imposed by the
provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or
permit any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§§ 91.007 THROUGH 91.019 RESERVED.
DOGS
§ 91.020 LICENSE TAG REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a dog within the
village at any time before January 1, 2000 unless the person applies for and
obtains a license on or before July 1 in each year for each dog so harbored or
kept, except for a dog first brought into the village after that day or less
than four months old on that day, in which case a license shall be applied for
and obtained for the dog when it is first brought into the village or attains
that age. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a dog within
the village at any time on or after January 1, 2000 unless the person applies
for and obtains a license on or before January 1 in each year for each dog so
harbored or kept, except for a dog first brought into the village after that
day or less than four months old on that day, in which case a license shall be
applied for and obtained for the dog when it is first brought into the village
or attains that age.
   (B)   Application for a license shall be made to the Village Collector, the
application showing the name and address of the owner, the sex, color, breed of
the dog, age and name, the date of the most recent rabies vaccination,
inoculation number and name and address of the licensed veterinarian who
performed the vaccination.
   (C)   Every owner of a dog harbored or kept within the village shall pay an
annual license fee of an amount as established in the annual fee ordinance for
each dog he or she harbors or keeps within the village. Every owner harboring
or keeping a dog born or brought into the village after January 1 in any year
shall pay on or before the date upon which it is brought into the village or
attains the age of four months a license fee for the remaining months of the
year in which the dog is brought into the village or attains that age. Upon the
filing of an application for the license required by this section and providing
proof of a certificate of inoculation as herein required by this section, the
Village Collector shall issue to the owner a license tag conforming to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Whenever the ownership of a dog shall change, the new owner shall
notify the Village Collector and pay the Village Collector a fee to change the
record of ownership accordingly.
   (E)   If the license tag issued to the owner of a dog is lost or stolen, the
Village Clerk shall issue to the licensee upon application therefor a duplicate
license tag upon payment to the Village Clerk of a fee.
   (F)   Any unlicensed dog harbored or kept within the village in violation of
this section shall be impounded. A dog so impounded may be redeemed as provided
in this chapter upon compliance with this section.
   (G)   All fees required by this section shall be as established in the
annual fee ordinance
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994; Ord. 859, passed 6-14-1999; Ord. 903, passed 4-14-
2003; Ord. 1015, passed 5-11-2009)
§ 91.021 RECORD TO BE KEPT.
   The Village Collector shall keep a complete registry in a book for that
purpose of all licensed dogs, describing same by name, breed, color and sex,
and shall also enter the name and address of the owner or keeper as given and
the number of the license tag issued.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.022 DOG TAGS TO BE ISSUED AND ATTACHED TO COLLAR.
   The Village Collector shall provide each year the number of metal tags as
may be necessary, the shape to be changed each year, having stamped thereon the
year for which the tax is paid, the words “Kenilworth Dog Tax,” and also the
number of the tag, and it shall be the duty of the Village Collector to issue
one of the metal tags to the person having paid the tax upon each dog harbored
or kept by the person, the number of the tag to correspond with the number of
the registry of the dog. Every person harboring or keeping any dog within the
village shall keep the current license tag attached to a collar made of metal,
leather or other substantial material and securely placed and kept about the
neck of the dog.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.023 KEEPING MORE THAN THREE DOGS A NUISANCE.
   No person shall keep or allow to be kept upon the premises occupied or used
by that person within the village, more than three dogs of the age of six
months or over, at any one time, and for any person to keep or use any yard,
pen, place or premises within the village, in or upon which more than three
dogs shall be harbored or kept at any one time, shall constitute and is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. Any person creating or permitting a nuisance to
exist, having the right and power to abate the same, shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.024 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE AND IN PUBLIC PLACES DEEMED A NUISANCE; DAMAGE
TO PROPERTY; FEMALE DOG IN HEAT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dog to cause or permit it to
run at large within the village, and any dog so running at large shall be
deemed a public nuisance and may be impounded. A dog so impounded may be
redeemed as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person having a dog in his or her custody
or control to permit the dog to enter upon the private property of another
within the village, without the consent of the owner of the private property,
or to permit any dog in his or her custody or control to deposit any excreta of
its body or to defecate on any private property. A dog so entering upon the
premises of another or depositing any excreta or defecating upon private
property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be impounded. A dog
so impounded may be redeemed as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person having a dog in his or her custody
or control to permit the dog to defecate on any lands or properties owned by
the village or the Kenilworth Park District, including, without limitation, any
street, sidewalk, parkway, park, conveyance or other public place or facility,
unless the excrement is immediately and effectively removed from the property
for proper disposal. A dog so defecating upon any lands or properties owned by
the village or the Kenilworth Park District is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and may be impounded. A dog so impounded may be redeemed as provided
in this chapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having control of any dog
to knowingly cause or permit the dog to be on any lands or properties owned by
the village or the Kenilworth Park District including without limitation any
street, sidewalk, parkway, park, conveyance or other public place or facility,
unless the person has in his or her immediate possession a device for the
removal, and a depository for the transportation, of animal excrement from the
property.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person having custody or control of any
dog while causing or permitting the dog to be on any lands or properties owned
by the village or the Kenilworth Park District to knowingly fail to remove from
the property excrement left by the dog.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person having a dog in his or her custody
or control to take or permit the dog, even though on a leash, upon any school,
public playground, public bathing beach or public park premises within the
village, or upon a path or sidewalk extending through or within any premises,
and unlawful for any person to take or permit the dog, even though on a leash,
to enter or be upon any premises where food is sold or offered for sale or
consumed by the public anywhere within the village during the time any premises
are open for use by the public or persons entitled to use the same; provided,
however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs leading
blind persons and dogs on school or Kenilworth Park District property as
authorized in connection with a school or Kenilworth Park District program. A
dog so entering upon the premises, path, sidewalk or place, is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and may be impounded. A dog so impounded may be redeemed as
provided in this chapter.
   (G)   It is unlawful for the owner of any female dog to permit the dog, even
though on a leash, to be upon any street or other public place or on any
private premises without the express consent of the owner or lawful occupant
thereof, while the dog is in heat, and the owner of any dog shall at all times
confine the dog either by a fence or by a leash adequate to restrain it upon
the premises on which it is permitted to be kept. Any dog not so restrained is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be impounded while it is in
heat at the cost of the owner. A dog so impounded may be redeemed as provided
in this chapter.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§§ 91.025 THROUGH 91.034 RESERVED.
CATS
§ 91.035 INOCULATIONS.
   The owner of any cat harbored or kept within the village shall cause the cat
to be inoculated for rabies and other diseases as and when required by state
law. Evidence of the required inoculations shall be presented by the owner of
the cat upon request of the Chief of Police or other authorized officer or
agent of the village.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.036 KEEPING MORE THAN FOUR CATS A NUISANCE.
   No person shall harbor or keep or allow to be harbored or kept upon the
premises occupied or used by the person within the village, more than four cats
of the age of six months or over at any one time, and for any person to keep or
use any premises within the village in or upon which more than four cats as
aforesaid shall be harbored or kept at any one time, shall constitute and is
hereby declared to be a nuisance. Any person creating or permitting a nuisance
to exist, having the right and power to abate the same, shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§§ 91.037 THROUGH 91.049 RESERVED.
OTHER ANIMALS
§ 91.050 CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep or allow to be
harbored or kept within the village any animal other than dogs, cats and
household pets kept in accordance with this chapter, and one small domesticated
animal kept in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.051 CONFINEMENT OF SMALL DOMESTICATED ANIMALS.
   A small domesticated animal shall be kept primarily inside the residence of
its owner. When not confined in the residence of its owner, a small
domesticated animal not prohibited by this chapter may be kept on the premises
of its owner outside the residence if kept in a cage or a fenced or enclosed
area or other secure restraint on the premises, the cage or fence to be erected
and maintained in accordance with applicable village building and zoning
ordinances and kept securely latched or fastened so as to prevent the escape of
the animal. Any enclosure or restraint shall confine the animal to the rear
yard of the premises, and the area in which the animal is confined shall be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free of offensive odors.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.052 INOCULATIONS.
   The owner of any household pet or small domesticated animal harbored or kept
within the village shall cause the animal to be inoculated for rabies and other
diseases as and when required by state law. Evidence of the required
inoculations shall be presented by the owner of the animal upon request of the
Chief of Police or other authorized officer or agent.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.053 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to permit any animal of any kind, other than a
cat, to run at large within the village, and any animal running at large within
the village shall be impounded by the Chief of Police or other authorized
officer or agent of the village.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.054 KEEPING MORE THAN ONE SMALL DOMESTICATED ANIMAL A NUISANCE.
   No person shall harbor or keep or allow to be harbored or kept upon the
premises occupied or used by the person within the village, any animal
prohibited by this chapter or more than one small domesticated animal other
than household pets of any age and dogs and cats of the age of six months or
over at any one time, and for any person to keep or use any premises within the
village in or upon which any animal prohibited by this chapter or more than one
small domesticated animal as aforesaid shall be harbored or kept at any one
time, shall constitute and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Any person
creating or permitting a nuisance to exist, having the right and power to abate
the same, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.055 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to rabbits harbored
or kept on any premises within the village for noncommercial purposes, provided
that all rabbits not kept as household pets shall be kept in a cage or similar
enclosure as would be required for a small domesticated animal, and further
provided that no more than ten rabbits of the age six months or over at any one
time shall be harbored or kept on any premises within the village.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to animals harbored
or kept within the village on a temporary basis in connection with a circus,
animal exhibition, petting zoo or similar event conducted in accordance with
all other applicable village ordinances.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§§ 91.056 THROUGH 91.059 RESERVED.
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
§ 91.060 FIERCE, VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   No fierce, vicious or dangerous animal shall be harbored or kept within the
village, and any unspayed female dog not confined in a manner as to positively
prevent it from coming in contact with other dogs or with a person not
trespassing upon the person or property of the owner of the animal, and any
animal which shall bite a person or another animal or so injure a person or
animal as to cause an abrasion of the skin, whether or not the injured person
or animal was trespassing upon the person or property of the owner of the
animal, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be impounded. An animal is
declared to be fierce, vicious or dangerous within the meaning of this section
when it shows a propensity to attack or bite human beings or animals or which
causes reasonable fear of bodily injury to any person by attacking or
threatening to attack the person.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.061 DUTY OF OWNER OF ANIMAL WHICH HAS BITTEN PERSON OR ANIMAL.
   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal, having knowledge that an animal
has bitten any person or animal, or so injured any person or animal as to cause
an abrasion of the skin, to sell or give away the animal, or to allow the
animal to be taken beyond the limits of the village, except for the purpose
hereinafter provided. It shall be the duty of the owner to place the animal in
a recognised veterinary hospital acceptable to the village, and under the
supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of time as the village
deems necessary in order to determine whether it has rabies.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.062 REPORT OF RABIES.
   Every veterinarian or other person discovering any animal suffering from
rabies, shall immediately report that fact to the Chief of Police and shall
give the name, if known, and the place of residence of the owner of the animal,
the place where the animal can be found, and (in the case of a dog) the license
number of the animal, if known. The animal shall be immediately taken up and
placed in a licensed veterinary hospital if not already therein, where it shall
be observed by a licensed veterinarian until the time of its death or recovery.
In the event of its death, suitable pathological examination of the brain shall
be carried out to determine whether or not the animal died of rabies.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.063 ANIMALS BITING OTHER ANIMALS.
   Any animal which has rabies, and any animal bitten by an animal having
rabies, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the animal may be impounded
and quarantined. It shall be the duty of the person owning or in possession or
custody of the animal to surrender it to any police officer or other authorized
officer or agent of the village upon demand. Any animal which has rabies may be
put to death at the direction of the Chief of Police. In the event any animal
which has been bitten by another is impounded as provided in this section, that
animal may be quarantined for a period of time as the Chief of Police deems
necessary in order to determine whether it has rabies.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.064 AUTHORITY OF OFFICER TO ENTER PREMISES TO SEIZE ANIMALS.
   Any police officer or other authorized officer or agent of the village may
enter upon the premises of an owner of any dangerous, mad, fierce or vicious
animal, or any animal suffering from rabies, or any animal bitten by another
animal afflicted with rabies, for the purpose of seizing it, and if after
request therefor the owner of the animal or an immediate member of the owner’s
family over 16 years of age shall refuse to deliver the animal to the officer
and the officer cannot with reasonable effort catch the animal, he or she may
kill it. Knowledge by the officer of one or more of the facts, the affidavit of
a citizen of the village stating same, or evidence from a licensed veterinarian
that the animal is suffering from rabies, shall authorize the officer to enter
the premises and either impound the animal or kill it if not delivered to the
officer as set forth herein.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.065 PROCEDURE FOR WARRANT.
   Whenever a complaint shall be made under oath and filed with the Chief of
Police setting forth that any animal has disturbed the quiet of any person or
neighborhood, has emitted offensive odors or has bitten any person not
trespassing upon the person or property of the owner of the animal, the Chief
of Police shall issue a warrant against the owner or keeper of the animal and
if upon return of the warrant shall be adjudged guilty of the complaint
charged, the owner of the animal shall be ordered to have it killed or removed
from within the village within 24 hours after the time of receiving a copy of
the order. Any person who within 24 hours after having received a copy of the
order shall refuse or neglect to remove or kill or cause the animal to be
removed from within the village or killed, shall be fined subject to the
general penalty provisions of this code for every 24-hour period thereafter
until the animal is removed or killed; and it shall be the duty of any police
officer to seize the animal for the purpose of its destruction whenever it
shall be found at large within the village after 24 hours after the time a copy
of the order shall have been served upon or received by the owner of the
animal.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.066 DANGEROUS ANIMALS NOT TO RUN AT LARGE.
   No person shall knowingly suffer or permit any dangerous, unruly, fierce or
mischievous animal, being the owner or keeper thereof, to run or be at large,
to the danger, annoyance or damage of any other person.
(1995 Code, § 27-2)
§§ 91.067 THROUGH 91.079 RESERVED.
IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS
§ 91.080 CHIEF OF POLICE EX OFFICIO POUNDMASTER.
   The Chief of Police of the village shall be ex officio poundmaster for the
village and he or she shall appoint deputy poundmasters from among the Police
Department as may be necessary, or the Board of Trustees may appoint a person
as poundmaster or deputy as it deems necessary.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.081 DUTY TO IMPOUND ANIMALS AND GIVE NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the poundmaster and his or her deputy and of the
Police Department or other person as may be designated by the Board of Trustees
to take up and impound in the place designated by the Board, any animal found
running at large within the village contrary to the provisions of this
subchapter, and if the animal shall not be redeemed as hereinafter provided
within five days after notice is given as hereinafter provided, it shall be the
duty of the poundmaster or Police Department to cause the animal to be killed
or otherwise disposed of under the direction of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.082 POUNDMASTER; REGISTER AND NOTICE OF OWNERS.
   Immediately upon receiving any animal at the pound, the poundmaster shall
make a registry of the same and enter the breed, color and sex, whether
licensed or not, and the name and address of the owner of the animal if known
or the same can be ascertained; and the poundmaster shall forthwith give notice
to the owner if known or if the owner’s identity can be ascertained, by
registered mail, of the impounding of the animal. If the owner of the animal is
unknown and cannot be ascertained, then the poundmaster shall give notice by
advertising the same in the next ensuing issue of any newspaper in general
circulation in the village or posting public notice thereof at the office of
the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.083 REDEMPTION FROM POUND; IMPOUNDING FEES.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of any animal which is impounded pursuant to this
chapter may redeem the animal unless it is found to be suffering from rabies or
is otherwise required to remain impounded. The poundmaster shall collect from
the owner or keeper of an impounded animal:
      (1)   An amount as established in the annual fee ordinance for the cost
of impounding for the first offense in any period of 12 consecutive calendar
months, an amount as established in the annual fee ordinance for the second
offense in any period of 12 consecutive calendar months, an amount as
established in the annual fee ordinance for the third offense in any period of
12 consecutive calendar months, in an amount as established in the annual fee
ordinance for the fourth offense in any period of 12 consecutive calendar
months and an amount as established in the annual fee ordinance for each and
every additional offense occurring within 12 consecutive calendar months after
a first or previous offense;
      (2)   The amount of the license fee, if any, for the current year, if the
fee has not previously been paid; and
      (3)   The cost of impoundment services and the cost of caring for the
animal during the time it is impounded.
   (B)   The poundmaster shall account for and pay to the Village Collector all
moneys received under this chapter and shall receive no compensation unless
otherwise provided by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.084 DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   Any animal not redeemed within seven days after the date when it might be
redeemed may thereafter be put to death in a humane manner, or otherwise
disposed of under the direction of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 812, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 92: REFUSE AND RECYCLING
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Duty of owners and the like to keep premises clean; to provide
containers and deposit therein certain refuse materials between collections
   
92.03   Materials, construction, capacity and location of containers
   
92.04   Depositing waste materials in streets and the like
   
92.05   Removal of refuse materials; right to discontinue
   
92.06   License required
   
92.07   Removal fees; schedule
   
92.08   Occupant may elect to remove refuse; notice
   
92.09   Abatement
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook County.
   GARBAGE. Any rejected or waste organic matter attending or resulting from
the preparation or use of food, with the paper or other materials necessarily
used for wrapping thereof, and any accumulation of rejected waste, animal,
fruit or vegetable matter which is subject to decay, putrefaction or the
generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors or which, during or after
decay, may serve as a breeding place or feeding material for flies, other
insects or rodents.
   HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH. Includes inorganic incombustible waste such as metal
cans, metalware, bottles, plastic, glass, crockery, stoneware and similar
refuse resulting from the regular operation of a household, not classed as
garbage or miscellaneous rubbish.
   MISCELLANEOUS RUBBISH. Includes incombustible rubbish materials such as
boxes or any waste resulting from the operation of a domestic or business
establishment, such as discarded equipment, but not including large equipment
such as refrigerators, stoves or furniture which cannot be placed in containers
of 40 gallons or less capacity.
   PROJECT USE AGREEMENT. The 1992 Project Use Agreement between the Agency and
the village, as amended from time to time.
   RECYCLABLES. Includes the following if separated from other types of refuse:
      (1)   Newspapers (excluding magazines and other publications not printed
on common newsprint paper);
      (2)   Clear and colored glass bottles, rinsed and with lids removed;
      (3)   Aluminum cans rinsed and flattened;
      (4)   Opaque plastic one-gallon milk and water containers rinsed and with
lids removed; and
      (5)   Other refuse as shall be classified by the village as recyclables
pursuant to rules and regulations in effect from time to time.
   REFUSE. All garbage, household rubbish, miscellaneous rubbish and
recyclables.
   SPECIAL WASTE.
      (1)   All refuse originating from any residential property in quantities
exceeding three 40- gallon containers for one scheduled collection day or
exceeding six 40-gallon containers per week;
      (2)   Refuse materials too large or bulky to be placed in 40-gallon
containers;
      (3)   Construction and similar debris;
      (4)   Rock, stone, gravel or other similar materials;
      (5)   All tree and shrub branches exceeding 36 inches in length or three
and one-half inches in diameter; and
      (6)   Tree and shrub branches bundled as provided in §
92.03(A)(2) exceeding one bundle on each scheduled collection day.
   SYSTEM WASTE. The following types of waste originating from within the
corporate limits of the village and collected by the village contractor or
other licensed person:
      (1)   Garbage, household rubbish and miscellaneous rubbish originating
from residences within the village;
      (2)   Other garbage, household rubbish and miscellaneous rubbish that the
village contractor or other licensed person delivers to the Agency;
      (3)   Recyclables that the village contractor or other licensed person
delivers to the Agency;
      (4)   Yard waste that the village contractor or other licensed person
delivers to the Agency; and
      (5)   Construction and demolition waste that the village contractor or
other licensed person delivers to the Agency.
   VILLAGE WASTE SYSTEM. The waste collection, transportation and disposal
system of the village operated by the village contractor and all other waste
collection, transportation and disposal systems operating within the village
under license from the village pursuant to §
92.07, including all physical assets of the village used for the collection,
transportation and disposal of system waste, all amounts on deposit in the
village waste system fund established pursuant to §
92.06, and all amounts collected on account of rates and charges imposed for
the collection and removal of system waste.
   YARD WASTE. Grass and shrub clippings, weeds, small tree trimmings, twigs,
leaves and general organic yard and garden waste materials, provided that yard
waste shall not include shrub or tree branches exceeding 36 inches in length or
three and one-half inches in diameter or rock, stone, gravel or other similar
materials.
(Ord. 538, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. 747, passed 8-8-1988; Ord. 763, passed 6-12-
1990; Ord. 786, passed 3-9-1992)
§ 92.02 DUTY OF OWNERS AND THE LIKE TO KEEP PREMISES CLEAN; TO PROVIDE
CONTAINERS AND DEPOSIT THEREIN CERTAIN REFUSE MATERIALS BETWEEN COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, or his or her agent, and of the
occupant or lessee of any house, place of business or premises within the
corporate limits of the village, to keep the premises owned, leased, controlled
or occupied by him or her clear of any accumulation of refuse materials, and to
provide or cause to be provided and maintained clean and in good repair,
containers, as specified in §
92.03, and to deposit and keep deposited therein between collections, all
garbage, household and miscellaneous rubbish.
   (B)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, every owner,
or his or her agent, and every occupant or lessee of any house, place of
business or premises within the corporate limits of the village shall dispose
of system waste through the village waste system. All system waste shall be
collected by or on behalf of the village pursuant to the terms of this chapter
and shall be delivered to a transfer station as directed by the Agency or the
village or as otherwise agreed to by the Agency or the village under the
project use agreement.
   (C)   No owner, or his or her agent or occupant or lessee of any house,
place of business, or premises within the corporate limits of the village,
shall dispose of system waste through the village waste system unless the
system waste complies with all rules and regulations applicable thereto and
established from time to time by the village or the Agency.
(Ord. 538, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. 747, passed 8-8-1988; Ord. 763, passed 6-12-
1990; Ord. 786, passed 3-9-1992)
§ 92.03 MATERIALS, CONSTRUCTION, CAPACITY AND LOCATION OF CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Separate containers, adequate in number and readily accessible outside
of any building upon the premises, shall be provided and maintained on each
occupied premises within the village, and shall be of the following materials,
construction and capacity.
      (1)   Containers for garbage, household rubbish and miscellaneous rubbish
shall be of metal or other durable material, shall have a capacity of not less
than 20 nor more than 40 gallons, and shall be provided with close fitting
covers and with handles for carrying.
      (2)   Except as hereinafter provided, containers for yard waste shall be
disposable, biodegradable, 30-gallon, two-ply, 50 pound super wet strength
paper bags. Branches smaller than 36 inches in length and three and one-half
inches in diameter shall be packaged in bundles measuring no larger than 12
inches in diameter and securely tied with twine or other biodegradable
material.
      (3)   Containers for recyclables shall be as approved by the village from
time to time.
   (B)   An enclosure may be used to hide and protect the containers, provided
it is unlocked and accessible at all times to the person employed or licensed
to remove the contents of the containers, and provided that containers for yard
waste are placed at the appropriate collection point (curbside or alley) at the
time specified in §
92.05(B).
(Ord. 538, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. 747, passed 8-8-1988; Ord. 763, passed 6-12-
1990; Ord. 786, passed 3-9-1992)
§ 92.04 DEPOSITING WASTE MATERIALS IN STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section or in rules and regulations in
effect from time to time, no garbage, household rubbish, miscellaneous rubbish,
recyclables or yard waste materials of any kind shall be deposited or permitted
to be placed in any street, alley or public way, or in or on any vacant lot,
and all refuse and yard waste materials shall be so placed on the owner’s or
occupant’s premises so that they cannot be blown or scattered about. Yard
waste, placed in containers or bundled as provided in §
92.03(A)(2), may be placed along alleys and the public ways temporarily pending
removal, subject to rules and regulations in effect from time to time.
(Ord. 538, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. 747, passed 8-8-1988; Ord. 763, passed 6-12-
1990; Ord. 786, passed 3-9-1992)
§ 92.05 REMOVAL OF REFUSE MATERIALS; RIGHT TO DISCONTINUE.
   (A)   The village may collect, remove and dispose of all refuse materials
and yard waste, at intervals of time as shall be designated by the village
through contract for the removal thereof, and in accordance with this chapter
and additional rules and regulations as to service, rate of charge and other
matters as may be in effect from time to time. No owner, occupant or lessee of
any premises in the village shall be entitled to service by the village who has
not complied fully with all the provisions of this chapter and with the rules
and regulations in effect from time to time.
   (B)   Subject to rules and regulations in effect from time to time, refuse,
other than yard waste, placed in containers conforming to §
92.03 shall be placed by the owner, occupant or lessee for collection in the
rear or side yard of the premises, except for any premises served by an alley,
in which case refuse placed in containers conforming to §
92.03 shall be placed for collection adjacent to the alley serving the
premises. Subject to rules and regulations in effect from time to time, yard
waste, placed in containers conforming to §
92.03 shall be placed for collection at curbside (no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on
the day preceding the scheduled collection and no later than 7:00 a.m. on the
scheduled collection day), except for any premises served by an alley, in which
case yard waste, placed in containers conforming to §
92.03 shall be placed for collection adjacent to the alley serving the
premises.
   (C)   The village contractor will not collect special waste unless special
arrangements for the collection thereof shall be made with the village
contractor by the owner or occupant of the residence, place of business or
other premises from which the special waste originated.
   (D)   Where, in the judgment of the village, the removal by the village of
refuse materials or yard waste entails the use of an extraordinary amount of
labor or costs, or for any reason cannot be accomplished without disrupting the
orderly operation of the facilities of the village or its contractor for
removing refuse materials or yard waste, the village may decline to remove or
contract for the removal thereof, and the village shall have the right, at its
option, with or without cause, to refuse to continue to collect, remove and
dispose of refuse materials or yard waste at any time it shall elect so to do.
   (E)   If the village elects not to collect, remove and dispose of refuse
materials or yard waste, it shall be the duty of the owner, or his or her
agent, or the occupant of the premises, to cause the materials to be removed at
least once each week and more often if necessary to prevent a nuisance, and
removal shall be accomplished in a manner as not to create a nuisance.
(Ord. 538, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. 747, passed 8-8-1988; Ord. 763, passed 6-12-
1990; Ord. 786, passed 3-9-1992)
§ 92.06 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   No person, except the village contractor employed for that
purpose, shall engage in the business of removing refuse materials, other than
yard waste and special waste, as defined in this chapter from residences within
the village, without first having obtained a license to do so. The license may
be granted upon application to the village and upon evidence satisfactory to it
that proper equipment is to be provided and will be maintained. Each applicant
for a license to remove refuse materials from within the village may be
required, as a condition to the granting of the license requested, that system
waste be transported to and disposed at a waste disposal site specified by the
village or the Agency.
      (2)   The fee as established in the annual fee ordinance.
   (B)   Any person holding a license to collect, transport or dispose of
system waste shall comply with the following conditions.
      (1)   The licensee shall comply with all the laws ordinances, rules and
regulations pertaining to the collection, transportation and disposal of system
waste as may be enacted from time to time by any lawful authority, including
the state, the Agency and the village.
      (2)   The licensee shall deliver all system waste to the transfer station
designated by the Agency and the village.
      (3)   The licensee shall maintain all equipment used to collect,
transport and dispose of system waste in good repair and working order and
operated efficiently and effectively.
      (4)   The licensee shall collect as agent for and promptly pay to the
village all rates and charges imposed by the village for use of the municipal
waste system.
      (5)   The licensee shall maintain accurate books and records and make
them available to the village upon demand.
(Ord. 538, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. 747, passed 8-8-1988; Ord. 763, passed 6-12-
1990; Ord. 786, passed 3-9-1992)
§ 92.07 REMOVAL FEES; SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Fees shall be charged and collected for the removal of refuse
materials and yard waste by the village, in addition to amounts payable as a
garbage tax which the village is authorized to impose under the statutes of the
state, in amounts as the village shall establish from time to time by
resolution and shall be payable each year at the times the owner or occupant of
the property is required by the village to pay for water service.
   (B)   If the village elects to discontinue collection and removal of refuse
materials and yard waste other than by reason of the failure of an owner or
occupant to comply with this chapter, the portion of the fee which has been
collected and which covers a period for which collection and removal of refuse
materials and yard waste is not rendered, shall be rebated to the person who
paid the fee.
   (C)   The fees shall be adjusted from time to time by the Village Board of
Trustees as necessary to pay the costs of the village for removal,
transportation and disposal of refuse and to make payments of all amounts that
the village may be required to pay under the interim project use agreement
dated as of May 2, 1988 between the village and the Solid Waste Agency of
Northern Cook County, as that agreement may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   The rates and charges imposed for use of the village waste system
shall be sufficient, after taking into account moneys then on hand in the
village waste system fund and the proceeds of taxes levied and to be collected
which have been assigned and pledged to the village waste system fund to:
      (1)   Pay all operation and maintenance expenses of the village waste
system, including all obligations to the Agency under the project use
agreement;
      (2)   Pay as they come due interest on and principal of any revenue bonds
or other obligations payable from revenues of the village waste system;
      (3)   Provide for all unpaid claims; and
      (4)   Provide adequate depreciation and reserve funds for the village
waste system, including reserves for uncollected charges.
   (E)   Any person disposing of system waste through the village waste system
shall pay the rates and charges established by the village pursuant to the
provisions of this section for use of the village waste system. The owners and
occupants of real estate within the village served by the village waste system
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay all rates and charges imposed by
the village pursuant to the provisions of this section. Any person responsible
for the payment of rates and charges imposed by the village pursuant to this
section who shall fail to pay those rates and charges within 30 days after the
rates and charges shall have become due and payable, shall be responsible for
payment of the costs incurred by the village, including the fees and costs of
any attorney and/or collection agency retained by the village for the purpose
of seeking collection of the rates and charges, whether or not suit is
instituted, in addition to all other rates, charges, fines and penalties then
due and payable.
   (F)   There is hereby created and established an enterprise fund of the
village known as the village waste system fund, which shall be separate and
apart from all other funds and accounts of the village as provided below. All
amounts collected from rates and charges imposed under this section shall be
deposited in the village waste system fund, and, together with all other
amounts deposited in the village waste system fund, shall be separate and apart
from all other moneys of the village, except that amounts deposited in the
village waste system fund may be invested together with other funds of the
village.
(Ord. 538, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. 649, passed 2-13-1978; Ord. 665, passed 11-13-
1979; Ord. 680, passed 12-14-1981; Ord. 706, passed 2-13-1984; Ord. 734, passed
1-12-1987; Ord. 738, passed 12-14-1987; Ord. 747, passed 8-8-1988; Ord. 763,
passed 6-12-1990; Ord. 786, passed 3-9-1992; Ord. 818, passed 6-12-1995; Ord.
860, passed 6-14-1999; Ord. 905, passed 4-14-2003; Ord. 933, passed 4-11-2005;
Ord. 1022, passed 7-13-2009)
§ 92.08 OCCUPANT MAY ELECT TO REMOVE REFUSE; NOTICE.
   (A)   If the occupant or owner, on or before March 1 in any year, shall
elect to remove refuse materials in a manner satisfactory to the village, then
the materials as shall accumulate upon the premises of the occupant or owner
shall not be removed by the village or its contractor and the occupant or owner
shall thereupon be relieved from the obligation for the charges herein
specified other than charges for use of the village waste system, but shall be
obligated to have refuse materials (other than yard waste and special waste)
removed by a person licensed to do so in accordance with §
92.06 and shall be subject to all penalties provided by ordinance for failure
to remove refuse materials. Notice of the election, describing the premises so
occupied or owned and the licensed person who will remove the refuse materials
therefrom, shall be filed with the Village Manager on or before March 1 in
order to relieve the person from the charge for service for the succeeding 12
months.
   (B)   Any occupant or owner who does not, on or before March 1 in any year,
elect to remove all refuse materials from the premises occupied or owned by him
or her, shall be conclusively presumed to have elected that the village shall
remove the same in accordance with this chapter and shall pay the charge
provided herein to the village at the time and in the manner herein specified.
(Ord. 538, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. 747, passed 8-8-1988; Ord. 763, passed 6-12-
1990; Ord. 786, passed 3-9-1992)
§ 92.09 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If any owner, or his or her agent, or any occupant of any premises in
the village shall fail to keep the premises clear of any accumulation of refuse
materials, the Village Manager shall notify, in writing, the owner, or his or
her agent or the occupant of the premises on which the refuse has accumulated.
   (B)   In case any owner, or his or her agent ,or any occupant of the
premises shall fail to dispose of the accumulation of refuse within ten days
after receipt of the notice, the Village Manager or the Village Manager’s
representative is authorized to enter upon the premises and dispose of the
refuse or cause disposal thereof to be made.
   (C)   Any expense incurred by the village shall be paid by the owner of the
premises, and the village shall have a lien against the premises for the
expenses, which lien shall be enforced in the manner provided by law for the
enforcement thereof.
   (D)   Any owner, or his or her agent, or any occupant of any premises upon
which there shall be an accumulation of refuse shall be subject to the
penalties provided for violation of this code.
(Ord. 766, passed 9-10-1990)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
   
93.01   Burials prohibited; exception
§ 93.01 BURIALS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   It is unlawful for any person to establish a cemetery, or to bury any dead
person within the village limits, without a permit therefor from the Board.
(1959 Code, § 16-3)
CHAPTER 94: NUISANCES
Section
   
94.01   Barbed wire fence prohibited
§ 94.01 BARBED WIRE FENCE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within the village,
any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire.
(1959 Code, § 31-27)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS, BEACHES, WATERS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Section
   
95.01   Hours of use of parks, beaches and waters
   
95.02   Clothing to be worn in parks and on beaches and waters
   
95.03   Conduct in parks and upon beaches, adjoining waters and public premises
   
95.04   Depositing refuse materials prohibited
   
95.05   Fires in parks and on beaches
   
95.06   Animals prohibited in parks, on beaches and waters
   
95.07   Limitation of use of waters adjacent to beaches
   
95.08   Enforcement
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 HOURS OF USE OF PARKS, BEACHES AND WATERS.
   (A)   The park of the village known as Mahoney Park shall be open for use by
the public between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. only from April 1 to
and including October 31 in each year, and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. only, from November 1 to and including March 31 in each year.
   (B)   No person shall swim or bathe in the waters adjoining Mahoney Park, at
any time.
   (C)   The beach at and adjoining the water works plant of the village,
hereinafter referred to as the Kenilworth Avenue beach, shall be open for
swimming and bathing between the official hour of sunrise and sunset only, or
as hereafter may be otherwise posted at the entry way at the easterly end of
the Kenilworth Avenue entrance thereto, and swimming and bathing at all times
other than between those hours is hereby prohibited. When, in the judgment of
the Chief of Police, the gate attendant or lifeguard while stationed at the
beach, the water is too rough or too cold for swimming or bathing and notice
thereof is given by them, or any or either of them, to any person on the beach
or using the waters adjacent thereto, or notice is posted thereof at the beach
entrance prohibiting swimming or bathing, swimming or bathing is prohibited
while the conditions last. The village assumes no liability for any accident
occurring upon the beach or for any accident or drowning in the adjoining
waters.
   (D)   No person shall swim or bathe in the waters adjoining the Kenilworth
Avenue beach of the village unless the person shall first have paid the charge
which may from time to time be fixed by the Village Board and of which notice
is given by posting at the Kenilworth Avenue entrance to the beach.
   (E)   The Kenilworth Avenue beach of the village, but not the waters
adjacent thereto, shall be open for use by the public between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m., only from and including April 1 to and including October
31 in each year, and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., only from
and including November 1 to and including March 31, in each year.
   (F)   Any person going in or upon Mahoney Park or the beach thereof, or in
or upon the Kenilworth Avenue beach, or into or swimming or bathing in the
water adjacent thereto, during the hours when the park or beach is officially
closed, or who fails to promptly leave the parks, beaches or waters after
notice to so do, shall be deemed a trespasser and be subject to prosecution as
a trespasser.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-2-1965)
§ 95.02 CLOTHING TO BE WORN IN PARKS AND ON BEACHES AND WATERS.
   No person shall appear in a state of nudity, nor shall any person make any
indecent exposure of his or her person in any park or upon any bathing beach or
in the waters adjacent to any beach.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-2-1965)
§ 95.03 CONDUCT IN PARKS AND UPON BEACHES, ADJOINING WATERS AND PUBLIC
PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall use profane, offensive or vulgar language, or conduct
himself or herself in a rough, boisterous or offensive manner, while in any
park, upon any beach or bathhouse in, upon or adjacent to the beach, or while
in or upon the waters adjoining the park or beach or other public premises
within the village.
   (B)   No person shall have in his or her possession or consume any
intoxicating liquors while in any park, beach or other public property within
the village, and the possession or consumption of any intoxicating liquor by
any person while on any public property within the village is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and any person possessing or consuming any intoxicating
liquor while on any public property within the village shall be deemed guilty
of a violation of this code; provided, that the possession, service or
consumption of intoxicating liquors in any park, beach or other public property
within the village shall not be deemed a public nuisance and shall not be
unlawful if: (1) the possession, service and consumption of intoxicating
liquors is at a particular event held on or within the property known as the
Kenilworth Assembly Hall, located at 410 Kenilworth Avenue, as long as the
property is owned and operated by the Kenilworth Park District and the service
of intoxicating liquors at that particular event is approved in advance by the
Kenilworth Park District Board of Commissioners and is performed by persons or
entities holding a liquor license from the state authorizing such persons or
entities to serve intoxicating liquors; or (2) the possession, service and
consumption of intoxicating liquors in the park, beach or other public property
within the village shall be expressly permitted upon the approval of the Board
of Trustees in the specific case for the particular location and event in
connection with charitable activities or fund raising for charitable or other
similar not-for-profit purposes. Application for the permit shall be filed with
the Village Manager. If and when approved by the Board of Trustees, the permit
shall be issued by the Village Manager or Village Clerk acting at the direction
of the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may impose conditions and
limitations as the Board of Trustees deems necessary or desirable in connection
with any permit.
   (C)   No person suffering from a fever, cough, inflamed eyes, loathsome,
contagious or infectious disease or skin eruption, shall swim, bathe or go into
the waters adjacent to any park or beach within the village.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-2-1965; Ord. 806, passed 10-12-1993; Ord. 1172, passed 7-
18-2016)
§ 95.04 DEPOSITING REFUSE MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deposit, dump, throw, cast, lay or place any glass, metal,
can, ashes, dust, manure, paper, garbage, rubbish or refuse material or
obstruction of any kind, in or upon any park or beach, or in or upon the waters
adjoining the same, or any public premises within the village; provided,
however, that any materials may be placed in containers which may be provided
for that purpose.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-2-1965)
§ 95.05 FIRES IN PARKS AND ON BEACHES.
   No person shall light, make or use any fire in or upon any park or beach
unless authorized by permit issued by the Village Manager.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-2-1965)
§ 95.06 ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN PARKS, ON BEACHES AND WATERS.
   No person, being the owner of or in control of any animal, other than an
authorized service animal, shall bring, drive, lead or permit the animal to go
upon any public premises, park or beach within the village, or in or upon the
waters adjoining the same, and the person shall be deemed guilty of trespass.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-2-1965)
§ 95.07 LIMITATION OF USE OF WATERS ADJACENT TO BEACHES.
   No person shall bring any motorized boat, float, raft or other watercraft
into or upon the waters of Lake Michigan within 300 feet of any bathing beach
within the village; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall
prevent going into or upon the waters in watercraft for the purpose of saving
human life or property, and provided further, that this prohibition shall not
interfere with navigation upon the waters of Lake Michigan.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-2-1965)
§ 95.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   The lifeguards, attendants and police officers of the village are empowered
to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to regulate the conduct of
persons using Mahoney Park, the beach and waters adjoining the park, the
Kenilworth Avenue beach and the waters adjoining the beach, and all other
public premises within the village, and persons disobeying the directions and
commands of any lifeguard, attendant or police officer, shall be deemed guilty
of disorderly conduct and subject to prosecution for the conduct.
(Ord. 539, passed 8-2-1965)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 96: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   Declaration of civil emergency
   
96.03   Orders by the Village President
   
96.04   Notice
   
96.05   Term; extension; termination
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All words
or phrases not defined in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, as amended (20 ILCS 3305/1 et
seq.).
   CIVIL EMERGENCY. A “disaster” as defined in the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency Act, as amended. Specifically, and without limitation of the
foregoing, a CIVIL EMERGENCY includes the appearance of a novel or previously
controlled or eradicated infectious agent or biological toxin.
(Ord. 1259, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 96.02 DECLARATION OF CIVIL EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted by state law, including, without
limitation, § 11-1-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code, whenever the Village
President determines that a civil emergency exists in
the village, the Village President shall have the extraordinary power and
authority to exercise by executive order all such powers of the corporate
authorities and other officers of the village as may be reasonably necessary or
appropriate to eliminate or minimize the dangers arising from such civil
emergency and for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of
the public; provided, however, that prior to exercising any such extraordinary
power and authority, the Village President shall have executed under oath a
written declaration of civil emergency containing the following:
      (1)   An express declaration that a civil emergency exists; and
      (2)   A statement of facts known to the Village President, either
directly or upon information and belief, which describes the nature of the
civil emergency and substantiates the finding that a civil emergency exists.
   (B)   Unless expressly stated otherwise, a declaration issued pursuant to
this section shall be considered a local disaster declaration made pursuant to
§ 11 of the Emergency Management Agency Act.
(Ord. 1259, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 96.03 ORDERS BY THE VILLAGE PRESIDENT.
   The Village President may, upon the issuance of a declaration of civil
emergency in accordance with §
96.02 of this code, issue orders to implement any or all of the following:
   (A)   The imposition of a curfew applicable to such geographical areas of
the village or to the village as whole, as deemed advisable by the Village
President, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as deemed
necessary by the Village President in the interest of the public safety and
welfare;
   (B)   The discontinuance of selling, distributing, or giving away of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
   (C)   The closure of any business establishment anywhere within the village
for the period of civil emergency, including, without limitation, businesses
selling intoxicating liquors, gasoline, or firearms;
   (D)   The closure of any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking
areas to vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic;
   (E)   The calling upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations without or within the village to assist in preserving and keeping
the peace within the village;
   (F)   The authorization of the Village President, the Village Manager, or
the ESDA Coordinator to enter into contracts for the procurement of supplies
and services necessary to address the civil emergency that would normally
require the approval of the full Board of Trustees;
   (G)   The incurrence of obligations, the appropriation of funds, and the
provision of emergency assistance reasonably necessary to respond to or
mitigate the civil emergency;
   (H)   The prohibition of increases in the prices of goods and services sold
within the village; and
   (I)   Any other actions reasonably necessary to address the civil emergency
and protect life and property.
(Ord. 1259, passed 4-20-2020) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.04 NOTICE.
   A declaration of civil emergency shall be: (i) filed with the Village Clerk
as soon as practicable; (ii) promptly disseminated to the news media; and (iii)
promptly posted at the Village Hall, the post office, and on the village’s
social media pages and website.
(Ord. 1259, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 96.05 TERM; EXTENSION; TERMINATION.
   (A)   Term. A declaration of civil emergency shall expire and automatically
terminate, if not extended pursuant to division (B) below, not later than: (i)
the adjournment of the first regular or special meeting of the Board of
Trustees; or (ii) seven days after the declaration is issued, whichever occurs
first.
   (B)   Extension. The Board of Trustees may by motion extend the initial
duration of a declaration of civil emergency and any orders issued by the
Village President in connection therewith. The extension shall be for the
duration necessary and in the best interest of the village and the public to
address the continuing civil emergency as determined by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Termination by the Village President. A declaration of civil emergency
may be otherwise terminated at any time in writing and executed by the Village
President.
(Ord. 1259, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or of any order issued
pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
(Ord. 1259, passed 4-20-2020)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSES AND PERMITS
      
111.   AMUSEMENTS
      
112.   CANVASSERS, SOLICITORS AND AUCTIONEERS
      
113.   CIGARETTE, TOBACCO AND SMOKE FREE REGULATIONS
      
114.   FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
      
115.   FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
      
116.   INTOXICATING LIQUORS
      
117.   JUNK DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND STORES
      
118.   VACANT GROUND FLOOR STOREFRONTS
CHAPTER 110: LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section
   
110.01   Applications
   
110.02   Investigations
   
110.03   Fees and bond
   
110.04   Issuance
   
110.05   Pro-rating fee; rebates
   
110.06   Condition of premises
   
110.07   Validity
   
110.08   Transfer
   
110.09   Change of location
   
110.10   Frontage consents
   
110.11   Record
   
110.12   Inspection of premises and the like; nuisances
   
110.13   Termination and notice
   
110.14   Posting required
   
110.15   Revocation
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for all licenses and permits required by the provisions of this
code or any other ordinance of the village, shall be made in writing to the
Village Manager, unless express provision to the contrary is made, on forms
provided by the village, and shall state the name of the applicant, the permit
or license desired, the location to be used if any, the time covered and the
fee to be paid and any additional information as is required by this chapter or
any other ordinance applicable.
(1959 Code, § 21-1)
§ 110.02 INVESTIGATIONS.
   Where the provisions of this code or any other ordinance of the village
necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of a permit or
license, the person to whom the application is made shall make or cause to be
made by the officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or
inspection, such investigation or inspection, to determine or report whether
the permit or license should be issued. No permit or license shall be issued
until the applicant has furnished all information requested by the Village
Manager or other village official and it is found that all provisions of this
code or other village ordinances with respect thereto have been complied with.
(1959 Code, § 21-2)
§ 110.03 FEES AND BOND.
   All fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the
time of application. Except where expressly provided that but one fee or charge
shall be paid, renewal fees shall be due and payable on the first business day
of the year succeeding the year during which the license or permit is issued.
In case a bond is required for the license or permit, the bond must be a surety
company bond to be approved by the Village Manager and must be filed with the
Manager or other official by whom the permit or license is to be issued.
(1959 Code, § 21-3)
§ 110.04 ISSUANCE.
   In all cases where a license or permit is required by this code or other
ordinance of the village, the license or permit shall be issued by the Village
Manager, except where otherwise required.
(1959 Code, § 21-4)
§ 110.05 PRO-RATING FEE; REBATES.
   In case application for any license or permit is made after the expiration
of six months of the current license year, it shall be issued upon payment of
one-half the annual fee. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any
license or permit fee or part thereof, by reason of the non-use of the license
or permit, the death or a change of location or occupation of the licensee.
(1959 Code, § 21-5)
§ 110.06 CONDITION OF PREMISES.
   No license for carrying on any business or occupation shall issue when it
appears that the premises or building on or in which the business or occupation
is to be conducted does not comply with the requirements of this code or other
applicable ordinance of the village.
(1959 Code, § 21-6)
§ 110.07 VALIDITY.
   No license or permit, even though issued, shall under any circumstances, be
valid or of any binding force or effect unless issued in strict compliance with
all ordinances in force at the time of issuance; and any license or permit
hereafter issued shall become null and void and of no effect whatsoever if at
any time it contravenes any ordinance passed subsequent to the issuance
thereof.
(1959 Code, § 21-7)
§ 110.08 TRANSFER.
   No license or permit granted or issued may be assigned or transferred,
except as specifically provided, nor shall any license or permit authorize any
other than the person named therein to do business or act thereunder.
(1959 Code, § 21-8)
§ 110.09 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted
act, may be changed with the approval first had and obtained of the Village
Board in the absence of any provision to the contrary.
(1959 Code, § 21-9)
§ 110.10 FRONTAGE CONSENTS.
   Whenever frontage consents are required for the carrying on of any business
or use of premises, the consents must be obtained in writing and be filed with
the Village Manager at the time application for the license or permit is made.
No renewal of frontage consents shall be necessary for the renewing of any
license or permit. Frontage consents once given may not be withdrawn by any
person who has given his or her consent after issuance of the license or
permit.
(1959 Code, § 21-10)
§ 110.11 RECORD.
   The Village Manager shall cause to be kept a record showing every license
and permit issued, the purpose for which it is issued, the location where the
license or permit privilege is to be exercised, the name of the licensee or
person receiving the permit and the amount of the fee paid. The record shall be
open to public inspection.
(1959 Code, § 21-11)
§ 110.12 INSPECTION OF PREMISES AND THE LIKE; NUISANCES.
   Any duly authorized village official shall have the right and power at any
and all reasonable times to inspect the premises or equipment used for which a
license is required under this code or any other ordinance of the village, for
the purpose of determining whether or not the ordinances regulating the
business, premises or equipment are being complied with. No business, whether
licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance
in fact.
(1959 Code, § 21-12)
§ 110.13 TERMINATION AND NOTICE.
   (A)   All annual licenses terminate on December 31 of each year unless
issued for a period less than one year or no provision to the contrary is made.
   (B)   The Village Manager shall, not less than ten days prior to the
termination of the license or permit period, except in case of dog and vehicle
licenses and licenses or permits for one month or less, cause a written notice
to be mailed to each licensee and person to whom a permit has issued, of the
time of expiration of the license or permit held. Failure to send out the
notice, or of the licensee or person to whom the permit is issued, to receive
the notice, shall not waive the requirement that a new license or permit be
procured, nor constitute a renewal or waive the requirement for renewal, nor
shall it constitute a defense in an action instituted for operating without a
license.
(1959 Code, § 21-13)
§ 110.14 POSTING REQUIRED.
   It is the duty of every person conducting a licensed business or occupation
in the village to keep the license posted at all times in a conspicuous place
on the premises used for that business or occupation; and it is the duty of
every person to remove the license from the place of posting upon its
expiration.
(1959 Code, § 21-14)
§ 110.15 REVOCATION.
   Any license or permit, excepting permits for building construction, may be
revoked by any officer authorized to issue same for any violation of the terms
and conditions upon which it is issued, or of the provisions of this code or of
any ordinance relating to the license or permit; and it shall be unlawful to
continue to operate any business, trade or occupation, or to continue to
exercise any privilege or authority granted by any license or permit after the
period for which it was issued has expired or after any license or permit has
been revoked.
(1959 Code, § 21-15)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   License required
   
111.002   Application for license
   
111.003   Indecent shows; exhibition of criminals
   
111.004   Riots and disturbances
   
111.005   Exits; lighting; obstructions
   
111.006   Inspections
   111.007 through 111.019   Reserved
Billiard and Pool Rooms
   
111.020   License required
   
111.021   Application for license
   
111.022   License fee
   
111.023   Hours of operation
   
111.024   Minors
   
111.025   Inspections
   111.026 through 111.059   Reserved
Circuses and Carnivals
   
111.060   License required
   
111.061   Application for license
   
111.062   License fee
   
111.063   Bond required
   
111.064   Hours
   
111.065   Inspections
   111.066 through 111.079   Reserved
Use of Public Property
   
111.080   Supervision
   
111.081   Permit required
   
111.082   Application for permit
   
111.083   Contents of permit application
   
111.084   Submission of permit application
   
111.085   Effect and duration of permit
   
111.086   Application fees and costs
   
111.087   Damage deposit
   
111.088   Certificate of insurance
   
111.089   Hold harmless agreement
   
111.090   Building and construction
   
111.091   Rights of the village
   111.092 through 111.114   Reserved
Theatrical and Other Public Amusements
   
111.115   License required
   
111.116   Application for license
   
111.117   License fees
   
111.118   Theatricals in non-licensed premises
   
111.119   Prohibited theatricals
   
111.120   Obstructing view; overcrowding
   
111.121   Scenery to be fireproof
   
111.122   Building and ventilation requirements
   
111.123   Aisles, corridors and exits not to be obstructed
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct or operate any amusement in the village which is
open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged without
obtaining a license therefor; provided, however, that neither this section nor
any other of this subchapter shall apply to exhibitions conducted by religious,
educational, philanthropic or other public or quasi-public organizations where
the exhibition is not given for profit. Unless otherwise provided in a
specified instance, it shall be unlawful for any person to open for business or
conduct or operate on a Sunday any amusement for which a license is required.
(1959 Code, § 4-1)
§ 111.002 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for licenses required shall be made to the Village Clerk and
shall comply with §
110.01 of this code as well as with other requirements specified in any section
of this chapter. No license required by this chapter shall be issued to any
person who is not a person of good moral character or to a corporation or
organization which is not represented in the village by a person of good moral
character.
(1959 Code, § 4-2)
§ 111.003 INDECENT SHOWS; EXHIBITION OF CRIMINALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit or conduct any
indecent exhibition or amusement of any kind, or to exhibit in any theatrical,
exhibit or other public amusement in the village, a criminal or the body of any
criminal or person who is notorious because of the commission of crime.
(1959 Code, § 4-3)
§ 111.004 RIOTS AND DISTURBANCES.
   It shall be unlawful to present public amusements or shows of any kind which
tend to or are calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance; and it
shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance in any audience or to
permit or gather a crowd to witness or participate in any amusement as to
create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risks.
(1959 Code, § 4-4)
§ 111.005 EXITS; LIGHTING; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   All stairways and corridors in every building or structure in which
theatricals, shows or amusements are offered, operated, presented or exhibited
for gain, shall be supplied with a supplemental lighting system of electricity,
gas or sperm oil, and the system shall be independent of all other lights in
the building or structure and shall be in operation during the entire period
that the building or structure is open to the public and until the entire
audience has left the building. The word “Exit” shall appear in letters at
least six inches high over the opening of every means of egress from the
building or structure, and a red light shall be kept burning over the sign at
all times at which the building is open to the public. No exit door or gates
shall be locked or fastened in any manner during the entire time that the
building or structure is open to the public. All aisles, passageways, corridors
and exits of the buildings or structures shall be kept free from obstructions
of any kind during any time the building or structure is open to the public.
(1959 Code, § 4-5)
§ 111.006 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and/or Fire Marshal to see that
every exhibition amusement, theatrical or other public show or amusement is
inspected, periodically if necessary, by a member of the Police and/or Fire
Department, to ensure conformity with fire regulations and all applicable
ordinances and laws.
(1959 Code, § 4-6)
§§ 111.007 THROUGH 111.019 RESERVED.
BILLIARD AND POOL ROOMS
§ 111.020 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate, maintain or conduct within the village a billiard
table, pool table or any similar gaming table open to the public without first
obtaining a license therefor as herein provided.
(1959 Code, § 4-7)
§ 111.021 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for a license required by §
111.020 shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk and shall state the
matters specified in §
110.01 of this code as well as the intended location of the place of business
and the number of tables to be used therein. No license shall be issued to any
person who is not a person of good moral character.
(1959 Code, § 4-8)
§ 111.022 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for the license required by this subchapter is in an amount
as established in the annual fee ordinance for each billiard, pool or other
table with which the room or place is equipped.
(1959 Code, § 4-9)
§ 111.023 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No person shall keep open, operate or use any pool or billiard room at any
time on Sunday, or on any other day between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 9:
00 a.m.
(1959 Code, § 4-10)
§ 111.024 MINORS.
   Minors under the age of 18 years shall not frequent, loiter, go to or remain
in any room or place licensed under this subchapter at any time, unless it be
upon some lawful errand sent by the direction and with the consent and
knowledge of the parent, guardian or other person having the lawful custody of
the minor; and it shall be unlawful for the proprietor or operator of any room
or place so licensed to allow or permit any minor to frequent, loiter or remain
within the room or place in violation of this section.
(1959 Code, § 4-11)
§ 111.025 INSPECTIONS.
   Any officer or employee of the village shall have free access to all parts
of any premises used for a billiard, pool or similar gaming table open to the
public, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspections to see
to the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter.
(1959 Code, § 4-13)
§§ 111.026 THROUGH 111.059 RESERVED.
CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
§ 111.060 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct or operate a circus, carnival or similar amusement
in the village without first obtaining a license therefor as herein provided.
(1959 Code, § 4-21)
§ 111.061 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   The application for the license required by §
111.060 shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall state the matters
specified in §
110.01 of this code and shall specify the place in or on which the amusement is
to be operated.
(1959 Code, § 4-22)
§ 111.062 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for licenses required under this subchapter shall be in an amount as
established in the annual fee ordinance for each day during which the circus,
carnival or similar amusement is conducted or open to the public.
(1959 Code, § 4-23)
§ 111.063 BOND REQUIRED.
   Before any license shall issue, the applicant shall furnish a surety bond to
be approved by the Village Manager, in the penal sum of an amount as
established in the annual fee ordinance, conditioned upon the proper compliance
by the applicant with all ordinances of the village relating to the conduct of
the amusement to be licensed and also conditioned upon the payment of all
damages to person or property occasioned or caused by the amusement or any
equipment or device operated or used in connection therewith, and upon the
payment by the applicant and licensee of all fines and penalties which may be
imposed for the violation of any ordinance of the village concerning the
amusement to be licensed.
(1959 Code, § 4-24)
§ 111.064 HOURS.
   No person shall operate a circus, carnival or similar amusement in the
village at any time on Sunday, or on any other day between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 9:00 a.m.
(1959 Code, § 4-25)
§ 111.065 INSPECTIONS.
   Any officer or employee of the village shall have free access to all parts
of any premises used for amusement, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of
making inspections to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
subchapter and of all applicable ordinances and laws.
(1959 Code, § 4-26)
§§ 111.066 THROUGH 111.079 RESERVED.
USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 111.080 SUPERVISION.
   All public streets, public ways and other municipal property in the village
shall be under the supervision of the Village Manager, under the direction of
the Village Board. The Village Manager shall supervise all proposed commercial
and non-commercial private activities, events and other uses of such municipal
properties that may disrupt the ordinary and safe public use of such street or
other property. In this capacity, the Village Manager is charged with the
enforcement of all provisions of this code and any other related ordinances
except traffic ordinances.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.081 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person or group of persons shall use any street, public way, public
building, public equipment or personnel, or other municipal property within the
village for any commercial or non-commercial private event or activity that may
disrupt the ordinary and safe public use of such street or other property
without first having obtained a permit from the Village Manager or the Village
Manager’s designee.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.082 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   A person seeking issuance of a permit pursuant to this subchapter shall file
an application with the Village Manager or the Village Manager’s designee, in
the manner prescribed by the Village Manager.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.083 CONTENTS OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application required by §
111.082 shall be submitted on the form or forms, if any, designated by the
Village Manger and shall include all information and supplemental documentation
required by the Village Manager in accordance with this subchapter. All
applications shall, at a minimum, include:
      (1)   A description of proposed event;
      (2)   The location of the proposed event, including any requested closure
of streets or other public rights-of-way;
      (3)   The date, time and duration of the proposed event;
      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and a
secondary contact person.
   (B)   The Village Manager is authorized to require an applicant to provide
additional information that the Village Manager deems appropriate in light of
the size, time, duration, location or nature of the proposed event. Such
information may include, but is not limited to, information relating to the
effect of the event on traffic and neighboring property owners, parking and
shuttle services, security and emergency services, venue and staging
requirements, food and beverage service, use of vehicles or equipment, use of
public buildings or facilities, use of animals, sanitation and waste removal,
and proof of compliance with applicable licensing or certification requirements
for personnel or vendors.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.084 SUBMISSION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) , a completed permit application
must be submitted to the Village Manager or the Village Manager’s designee at
least 30 days prior to the date of the proposed event.
   (B)   An application for a permit to hold a community block party on a
residential street must be submitted to the Village Manager or the Village
Manager’s designee at least 14 days prior to the date of the proposed event.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.085 EFFECT AND DURATION OF PERMIT.
   The authorization granted pursuant to and in accordance with the permit
application shall be limited to the time period therein stated and shall be
subject to any terms and conditions stated in the permit or application
approval. A permittee shall fully comply with all applicable ordinances as if
the same were fully set forth in the permit.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.086 APPLICATION FEES AND COSTS.
   (A)   The applicant must pay a nonrefundable permit fee in an amount to be
established by resolution of the Village Board from time to time. Payments must
be made by check or money order payable to the village.
   (B)   In addition to the nonrefundable permit fee required pursuant to
subsection (A), the applicant shall reimburse the village for all fees, costs
and expenses incurred by the village as a result of the review, issuance and
enforcement of the permit or in connection with the permitted event or
activity, including costs associated with the use of village property,
equipment or personnel as well as engineering and legal fees. Rates for the use
of village personnel, equipment and property may be established by resolution
of the Village Board from time to time, or shall be determined by the Village
Manager based on the actual or estimated costs incurred by the village.
Payments must be made by check or money order payable to the village, or by
electronic funds transfer.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.087 DAMAGE DEPOSIT.
   The village may require the applicant to provide a damage deposit or other
security prior to the commencement of the permitted event or activity, the
amount of which shall be determined by the Village Manager in light of the
nature of the event, activities, persons, property and risks involved.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.088 CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE.
   Upon request of the Village Manager, the applicant shall provide a
certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000, or such greater amount as
the Village Manager deems necessary in light of the nature of the event,
activities, persons, property and risks involved, as evidence of general
liability coverage including bodily injury and property damage, and automobile
liability, if applicable. Such certificate shall name the village and its
corporate authorities, officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees,
attorneys, agents and representatives as additional insureds with respect to
any and all claims which arise out of, or are related to, the applicant’s
activities related to the permit. Upon request of the Village Manager, the
applicant will also provide proof that worker’s compensation and employer's
liability insurance have been provided for any and all employees of the
applicant.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.089 HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.
   Upon request of the Village Manager, the applicant shall execute an
agreement stating that the applicant holds the village harmless from any and
all claims that may arise from the applicant’s use of the designated public
right-of-way, property, building, or equipment in connection with the permitted
event or activity.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.090 BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION.
   The construction, erection, modification or demolition of any permanent or
temporary structure in relation to a special event or use of public property
for which a permit is issued under this subchapter shall be governed by all
applicable building and construction regulations and permitting requirements.
No permit issued pursuant to this subchapter shall authorize building and
construction activities in lieu of any other required permit, authorization or
approval.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§ 111.091 RIGHTS OF THE VILLAGE.
   As a condition of any permit granted pursuant to this subchapter, the
applicant shall agree that the village may, in its discretion:
   (A)   Exercise control over or otherwise regulate or restrict the use of
public streets, rights-of-way and buildings of the village during the permitted
event or activity;
   (B)   Exercise control over or otherwise regulate or restrict the hours and
general location of the permitted event or activity;
   (C)   Prohibit or order the cessation of any or all permitted activities, or
revoke any permit, if the permitted event or activity is determined to be
hazardous to the public, health, safety or welfare or upon a finding of
violation of any ordinance or any condition or provision of the permit; and
   (D)   Have full and complete access to the permitted event or activity and
permission to inspect all structures, devices, and equipment to be used in
connection with the permitted event or activity.
(Ord. 1056, passed 1-18-2011)
§§ 111.092 THROUGH 111.114 RESERVED.
THEATRICAL AND OTHER PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
§ 111.115 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to conduct or operate within the village any
theatrical performance, exhibition, carnival, game for hire or other public
amusement, with the exception of motion pictures or other performances
specifically licensed by the provisions of this chapter, or any other ordinance
of the village, to which an admission fee is charged, and which is not
conducted solely under the auspices of a religious, educational, social or
charitable organization, without obtaining a license therefor.
(1959 Code, § 4-41)
§ 111.116 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   The application for the license required by §
111.115 shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall state the matters
specified in §
110.01 of this code as well as the seating capacity of the place of any
intended performance where patrons are commonly seated and whether an annual
license or a license other than annual is desired.
(1959 Code, § 4-42)
§ 111.117 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Any person securing an annual license for theatricals, exhibitions,
carnivals, games for hire or other public amusements, naming a specific place
or building in which the performances are to be presented, may present therein
any number of performances or theatricals, including motion pictures, during
the year for which the license is secured, without paying an additional fee.
   (B)   The fee for the annual license is in an amount as established in the
annual fee ordinance. The fee for the license other than annual is in an amount
as established in the annual fee ordinance per day.
(1959 Code, § 4-43)
§ 111.118 THEATRICALS IN NON-LICENSED PREMISES.
   No theatrical performance, exhibition, carnival, game for hire or other
public amusement shall be presented on or upon any premises or in any building
which does not fully comply with the requirements of this code or any other
ordinances of the village relating to buildings to be used for theatrical
performances, exhibitions, carnivals, games for hire or other public
amusements.
(1959 Code, § 4-44)
§ 111.119 PROHIBITED THEATRICALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to offer or present any theatrical,
exhibition, carnival, game for hire or other public amusement which has a
tendency to cause a riot or disturbance of the peace; or any immoral, indecent
or blasphemous plays, performances or other theatricals which might suggest or
incite to crime. It is also unlawful for any person to exhibit any posters or
advertisements of any theatrical, performance, exhibition, carnival, game for
hire or other public amusement.
(1959 Code, § 4-45)
§ 111.120 OBSTRUCTING VIEW; OVERCROWDING.
   It is unlawful to permit any person, except ushers or other employees, to
remain standing in a hall or room in which a theatrical performance or other
public amusement for which the patrons are commonly seated is presented, during
the time of the performance, or to permit any person to remain standing therein
at that time. It is also unlawful for any person to admit into any place more
persons than can be accommodated by the seating arrangements therein.
(1959 Code, § 4-46)
§ 111.121 SCENERY TO BE FIREPROOF.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any scenery in any theater or other
public amusement place other than noninflammable scenery or such as has been
rendered noninflammable by application of a fire- preventative coating.
(1959 Code, § 4-47)
§ 111.122 BUILDING AND VENTILATION REQUIREMENTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to present any public theatrical, exhibition,
carnival, game for hire or other public amusement in any building or structure
which does not contain the number of exits required for buildings or places
intended for those performances or amusements by the provisions of this code or
any other ordinances of the village; or in any premises in which the electrical
wiring does not comply with those provisions or ordinances. All places used for
the exhibition of theatricals or other amusements described in this subchapter
must be kept adequately ventilated during each performance and for so long a
time as the audience remains therein.
(1959 Code, § 4-48)
§ 111.123 AISLES, CORRIDORS AND EXITS NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any
aisles, corridors or exits leading from any enclosure or room in which a
theatrical performance or other amusement named in this subchapter is being
given.
(1959 Code, § 4-49)
CHAPTER 112: CANVASSERS, SOLICITORS AND AUCTIONEERS
Section
Canvassers and Solicitors
   
112.01   Permit required
   
112.02   Application for permit; contents
   
112.03   Issuance of permit; expiration
   
112.04   Permit to be carried on person; exhibition
   
112.05   Revocation of permit
   
112.06   Actions in violation of posted notices
   
112.07   Restrictions on time of activity
   112.08 through 112.19   Reserved
Peddlers, Hawkers and Itinerant Merchants
   
112.20   License required
   
112.21   License application; contents
   
112.22   License fee
   
112.23   Limitation on licensee
   
112.24   Exceptions as to provisions
   112.25 through 112.34   Reserved
Charitable and Political Solicitations
   
112.35   Permit required
   
112.36   Permit application and issuance
   
112.37   Revocation of permit
   
112.38   Review of denial or revocation
   112.39 through 112.49   Reserved
Auctioneers
   
112.50   License required
   
112.51   License fee
   
112.52   Auctions in streets prohibited
   
112.53   Exemptions
CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
§ 112.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to go in or upon any private residence,
apartment or premises in the village, without first having been invited to do
so by the owner or an occupant thereof, for the purpose of soliciting from the
occupants thereof orders for goods, wares, merchandise or services of any
character or description, or for the purpose of offering to give or furnish or
giving or furnishing any goods, wares, merchandise or services to any
occupants, or to induce, invite, receive or accept orders, or to otherwise
solicit, receive or accept the payment or contribution of money or a pledge of
financial support, without obtaining from the Chief of Police a solicitor’s
permit so to do.
(1959 Code, § 7-1) (Ord. 899, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 112.02 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; CONTENTS.
   (A)   Any person desiring to secure a solicitor’s permit shall apply
therefor in writing over his or her signature to the Chief of Police on forms
provided by the village. The application shall state:
      (1) The name and home address of the applicant;
      (2)   The name and address of the person, company or organization by whom
the applicant is employed or for whom the applicant is acting;
      (3)   The length of service of the applicant with that employer;
      (4)   The place of residence and nature of the employment of the
applicant during the last preceding year;
      (5)   The nature or character of the goods, wares, merchandise or
services to be offered by the applicant, or his or her employer;
      (6)   The purpose or purposes for which the payment or contribution of
money or the pledge of financial support will be solicited or accepted if other
than in exchange for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise or services;
      (7)   The proposed dates on which the soliciting activity will take place
within the village; and
      (8)   The personal description of the applicant.
   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by credentials and other evidence
of the identity of the applicant and the employer or other organization for
whom the applicant is acting as are reasonably required by the Chief of Police
as necessary to verify the identity of the applicant and reasonably and
accurately describe the nature of the applicant’s activity within the village.
(1959 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. 690, passed 1-10-1983; Ord. 899, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 112.03 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; EXPIRATION.
   (A)   If the Chief of Police determines after reasonable investigation that
the applicant proposes to engage in a lawful and legitimate commercial or
professional enterprise or fund-raising activity, he or she shall issue the
permit required by §
112.01 of this code. An application for permit may be denied for any one or
more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to provide complete and accurate information in the
application;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made by the applicant
in the course of conducting any solicitation activity;
      (3)   Violation of village ordinances or laws of the state in the course
of conducting any solicitation activity; or
      (4)   Conduct of solicitation or other activity in a manner as to
constitute a trespass upon private property within the village.
   (B)   Each permit shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is
issued.
(1959 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 690, passed 1-10-1983; Ord. 899, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 112.04 PERMIT TO BE CARRIED ON PERSON; EXHIBITION.
   The permit required by §
112.01 of this code shall be carried at all times by the applicant, when
soliciting within the village, and shall be exhibited by the applicant whenever
the applicant is requested so to do by any police officer or any person
solicited.
(1959 Code, § 7-4) (Ord. 899, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 112.05 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The permit issued pursuant to this subchapter may be revoked by the Chief of
Police for violations by the holder thereof of any of the provisions of this
code, ordinances of the village or of any state or federal law, or whenever the
holder of the permit, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, engages in an
activity that would constitute grounds for denial of a permit or otherwise
ceases to possess the qualifications required by this chapter for the issuance
of the permit.
(1959 Code, § 7-5) (Ord. 899, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 112.06 ACTIONS IN VIOLATION OF POSTED NOTICES.
   It is unlawful for any person to go in or upon, or remain in or upon, any
private residence, apartment or premises in the village, without first having
been invited to do so by the owner or occupant thereof, for the purpose of
soliciting from the occupants thereof or to canvass for orders for goods,
wares, merchandise or services of any character or description, or for the
purpose of offering to give or furnish or giving or furnishing any goods,
wares, merchandise or services to any occupants, or to induce, invite, receive
or accept orders, or to otherwise solicit, receive or accept the payment or
contribution of money or a pledge of financial support, or to distribute any
pamphlet, leaflet, book, brochure or other literature of any commercial,
political, religious or other nature, or to canvass for or otherwise advertise,
advocate or promote any commercial, political, religious or other cause, or to
conduct any survey or poll, if the premises is posted with a “No Trespassing”
or “No Solicitation” or “No Solicitors” or similar notice in a location that is
reasonably visible to persons who enter or intend to enter upon the property.
(Ord. 899, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 112.07 RESTRICTIONS ON TIME OF ACTIVITY.
   It is unlawful for any person to go in or upon any private residence,
apartment or premises in the village, without first having been invited to do
so by the owner or occupant thereof, for the purpose of soliciting from the
occupants thereof or to canvass for orders for goods, wares, merchandise or
services of any character or description, or for the purpose of offering to
give or furnish or giving or furnishing any goods, wares, merchandise or
services to any occupants, or to induce, invite, receive or accept orders, or
to otherwise solicit, receive or accept the payment or contribution of money or
a pledge of financial support, or to distribute any pamphlet, leaflet, book,
brochure or other literature of any commercial, political, religious or other
nature, or to canvass for or otherwise advertise, advocate or promote any
commercial, political, religious or other cause, or to conduct any survey or
poll, on any day after the hour of 8:00 p.m. and before the hour of 7:00 a.m.
on the following day.
(Ord. 899, passed 10-21-2002)
§§ 112.08 THROUGH 112.19 RESERVED.
PEDDLERS, HAWKERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
§ 112.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of an itinerant
merchant, peddler or hawker in the village without obtaining a license
therefor.
(1959 Code, § 26-1)
§ 112.21 LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
   The application for the license for itinerant merchants, peddlers and
hawkers shall be made to the Village Manager, and shall state the matters
specified in §
110.01 of this code as well as the number of vehicles, if any, intended to be
operated, the kind of article or merchandise to be peddled or sold and the
permanent address of the applicant.
(1959 Code, § 26-2)
§ 112.22 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee for an itinerant merchant, peddler or hawker shall be
established in the annual fee ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 26-3)
§ 112.23 LIMITATION ON LICENSEE.
   No licensee under this chapter shall:
   (A)   Cheating or defrauding. Cheat or defraud any person in the village;
   (B)   False representations. Make any false representations to any person in
the village;
   (C)   Bartering, selling goods other than specified in application. Barter,
sell or peddle any goods, wares or merchandise other than those specified in
his or her application for a license;
   (D)   Noise. Make, cause, permit or allow to be made, while upon streets,
sidewalks and public places, any noise of any kind by crying, calling or
shouting or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum,
horn or similar device, for the purpose of advertising or of attracting the
attention or inviting the patronage of any person; and
   (E)   Sale of goods upon streets, sidewalks and the like. Except as
hereinafter provided, sell, or offer for sale, any goods, wares or merchandise
in or upon any street, sidewalk or public place within the village.
(1959 Code, § 26-4)
§ 112.24 EXCEPTIONS AS TO PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of the preceding section providing for the sale of goods,
wares or merchandise in or upon any street, sidewalk or public place do not
apply to magazines, books, newspapers, pamphlets or other written or printed
matter which the village cannot, as a matter of law, prohibit the sale of in or
upon those places.
(1959 Code, § 26-5)
§§ 112.25 THROUGH 112.34 RESERVED.
CHARITABLE AND POLITICAL SOLICITATIONS
§ 112.35 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or direct anyone
to solicit on that person’s behalf within the village, by telephone or in
person, for any charitable purpose or charitable organization or for any
political purpose or political organization without having first applied for
and received from the Village Manager a permit for the solicitation.
      (2)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         CHARITABLE PURPOSE or CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. The same meaning as
those terms are defined in 225 ILCS 460/1.
         COST OF SOLICITATION. The total amount spent on solicitation,
including, without limitation, expenditures for salaries, commissions and
employee benefits for solicitors, the cost of any item distributed to persons
solicited in connection with the solicitation, advertising and promotions costs
and other overhead costs.
          DIRECT CHARGE. The authority to determine the methods that individual
solicitors will use in soliciting and accounting for solicited contributions,
stop a solicitation or revoke an individual solicitor’s authority to solicit
for the applicant
         POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. An organization that expends more than 50% of
its budget for political purposes.
         POLITICAL PURPOSE. Any design to influence the policy, actions or
staffing of any governmental body.
       PROMOTER. Any person who manages, supervises or organizes a campaign of
solicitation.
         SOLICIT or SOLICITATION. Any attempt to obtain a contribution of money
or anything of value by any method, including, without limitation, the sale of
merchandise or services, or requests for gifts, donations, loans, pledges,
advances or promises to pay.
         SOLICITOR. A person who solicits and includes persons who supervise or
direct solicitation.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any applicant for a permit under this section
to knowingly make an untrue statement on the application.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person who solicits for any charitable
purpose or charitable organization or for any political purpose or political
organization to knowingly mislead any person who the solicitor or the holder of
a permit solicits, with respect to:
      (1)   The use of the solicited contribution;
      (2)   The activities and purposes of the organization for which the
contribution is solicited; or
      (3)   The cost of solicitation.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any individual that solicits by authority of
a permit granted pursuant to this section to expend for the individual’s
personal use the contributions solicited, except for contributions received in
the form of salary, commissions or employee benefits which were fixed before
the solicitation began.
   (E)   Subsections(A), (B) and (D) above of this section do not apply to:
      (1)   Solicitation only from people who are on the soliciting
organization’s membership list and had consented to be members of the
organization before the solicitation began; and
      (2)   Solicitation only on the solicitor’s property and not involving
entry onto public streets or sidewalks or other public property or the property
of another and not involving solicitation by telephone.
(Ord. 689, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 112.36 PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   An application for a permit to solicit shall be made to the Village
Manager upon forms provided by the village. The application shall be sworn to
and filed with the Village Manager at least 15 days prior to the time the
applicant intends to begin solicitation.
   (B)   The form shall ask the applicant to provide the following information:
      (1)   Names and addresses of persons who will be in direct charge of
conducting the solicitation;
      (2)   Names and addresses of promoters connected with the proposed
solicitation;
      (3)   The purpose or purposes for which the solicited contributions are
to be used;
      (4) The maximum number of solicitors the applicant expects to be active
at one time;
      (5)   The state registration number assigned by the Attorney General
pursuant to 225 ILCS 460/2, if the applicant has a number; and
      (6)   The applicant’s best estimate of the cost of solicitation. The
applicant may pro-rate the salaries, commissions, employees’ benefits or other
remuneration paid to anyone who performs functions in addition to being a
solicitor and provide only the pro-rated portion of that expenditure on the
form provided for in this section.
   (C)   The Village Manager shall have the authority to demand from the
applicant any other information, provided the demanded information is necessary
to determine whether the applicant meets the criteria specified in paragraphs
(B)(1) through (B)(6) above.
   (D)   While an application is pending or during the term of any permit, if
there is any change in the information given in the application, the applicant
shall notify the Village Manager in writing thereof within 24 hours after the
change.
   (E)   The Village Manager shall, within 15 days after the date of the
application, issue a permit unless the Village Manager finds that:
      (1)   Any statement made in the application is untrue;
      (2)   The applicant or any solicitor has, within the last year, engaged
in fraud in connection with a solicitation, or been convicted of crime
involving dishonesty or false statement;
      (3)   The persons soliciting under the direct charge of the applicant or
the applicant will do any of the following:
         (a)   Use a method of solicitation which will violate any other
village ordinance or any federal or state law;
         (b)   Unreasonably impede the passage of pedestrians or vehicles along
public sidewalks or streets or other public property;
         (c)   Intentionally make physical contact with others without their
consent;
         (d)   Solicit at times during which soliciting has been prohibited by
village ordinance; or
         (e)   Solicit without agreeing to clean up or pay the cost of clean-up
of litter in the streets or public places if the litter results from the
solicitation.
      (4)   Within the last 90 days the applicant has had a permit issued to it
under this section revoked.
   (F)   A permit issued under subsection (E) above shall be effective for six
months after the effective date.
   (G)   The Village Manager may grant a permit that limits the number of
solicitors that an organization may use so that there will be no more than ten
solicitors active in the village at one time from all soliciting organizations
combined.
   (H)   The Village Manager shall have the power to prescribe a form of
identification for solicitors. The Village Manager may require solicitors to
carry and produce the identification upon request of the police, any village
official or any person solicited by that solicitor.
(Ord. 689, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 112.37 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit to solicit issued pursuant to §
112.36 of this code may be revoked by the Village Manager whenever the holder
of the permit shall cease to possess the qualifications or to meet the criteria
provided for in that section as requisite to the issuance of the permit, or
violates any of the provisions of this code or any ordinance of the village or
state law. Revocation of a permit under this section may be in addition to a
fine imposed by violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance of the
village.
(Ord. 689, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 112.38 REVIEW OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   The denial or revocation of a permit to solicit may be appealed to the
Village Board if written notice of the appeal is given within 30 days. The
appeal must be decided by the Village Board within 40 days from the time the
applicant files the notice of appeal.
(Ord. 689, passed 1-10-1983)
§§ 112.39 THROUGH 112.49 RESERVED.
AUCTIONEERS
§ 112.50 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct a public auction or do business as a public
auctioneer in the village without first obtaining a license therefor as herein
provided.
(1959 Code, § 6-1)
§ 112.51 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee, payable in advance, for public auctioneers shall be established in
the annual fee ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 6-2)
§ 112.52 AUCTIONS IN STREETS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell or attempt to sell or cry for sale at public auction
any goods, chattels or personal or real property of any kind upon the streets
or sidewalks or other public places in the village.
(1959 Code, § 6-3)
§ 112.53 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any public auction or sale made or
conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order or process or by
virtue of any power or authority contained in a mortgage or trust deed.
(1959 Code, § 6-4)
CHAPTER 113: CIGARETTE, TOBACCO AND SMOKE FREE REGULATIONS
Section
   
113.01   License required
   
113.02   License application; investigation
   
113.03   License fee
   
113.04   Sanitary requirements
   
113.05   Sale, possession and use of tobacco products by minors
   
113.06   Smoke free regulations
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the retail sale of cigarettes
without obtaining a license therefor.
(1959 Code, § 8-1)
§ 113.02 LICENSE APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.
   The application for the license required by §
113.01 shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall state the matters specified
in §
110.01 of this code. The Village Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief
of Police. The Chief of Police or a member of the Police Department designated
by him or her shall investigate the character of the applicant. The Chief of
Police shall make a recommendation as to whether the license shall issue, and
no license shall issue unless he or she recommends it. No license shall be
issued to any person who is not a person of good character.
(1959 Code, § 8-2)
§ 113.03 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee shall be an amount established in the annual fee ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 8-3)
§ 113.04 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   The premises or building used for the purpose of the sale of cigarettes must
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It is the duty of the Chief of
Police to make, or cause to be made, inspections as are necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1959 Code, § 8-4)
§ 113.05 SALE, POSSESSION AND USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. All terms, phrases, and words used in this chapter but not
defined in this section shall have meaning given to them elsewhere in the
village code.
      MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
      TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any item, project or substance containing or made from
tobacco leaf, including specifically, but without limitation cigarettes,
cigars, snuff and pipe, chewing or dipping tobacco.
   (B)   Sale by minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to sell, dispense,
furnish or otherwise distribute any tobacco product to any person or business
within the corporate limits of the village.
   (C)   Sale to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give,
dispense, furnish or otherwise distribute tobacco product to any minor within
the corporate limits of the village.
   (D)   Purchase by minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase or
otherwise acquire any tobacco product within the corporate limits of the
village.
   (E)   Possession and use by minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to
possess or use a tobacco product within the corporate limits of the village;
provided, however, that the possession or use of any tobacco product by any
minor under the direct supervision and control of the parent or guardian of any
minor in the privacy of the parent’s or guardian’s home shall not be unlawful.
   (F)   Sale of cigarettes containing harmful drugs prohibited. It is unlawful
for any person to sell or offer for sale any cigarette containing any harmful
drugs other than tobacco.
(1959 Code, §§ 8-5 and 8-6) (Ord. 1003, passed 9-8-2008)
§ 113.06 SMOKE FREE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Background. Smoking creates the hazard of injury to the personal
health of those in the environment of smoke as well as the potential damage to
property which may result from the combustible nature of the substance. It has
been determined that breathing ambient smoke is a health hazard to both smokers
and nonsmokers. Cigarette smoking also produces several substances that are
considered hazardous to health including carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide,
nitrous oxide and formaldehyde. Secondhand smoke (68% of the smoke produced by
a cigarette) affects the health of a bystander, interfering with respiratory
tract defenses, often causing nonsmokers to have allergic or irritative
reactions, and is a known cause of lung cancer. Because the hazards of smoking
have a potentially harmful effect, material and direct, on the public health,
safety, welfare, comfort and property of residents of the village, it is,
therefore, necessary and desirable to establish regulations that prohibit
smoking in enclosed public places and places of employment.
   (B)   Purpose. This section may be cited as the “Kenilworth Smoke Free
Ordinance,” the purpose of which is to protect the public health, comfort and
environment by prohibiting smoking in enclosed public places and places of
employment, in order to ensure that nonsmokers may breathe air free from the
hazardous effects of secondhand smoke.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. If a word or phrase is not specifically defined in this
section it shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Smoke Free Illinois
Act.
      ENTRANCE.
         (a)   The doorway or other entrance to a public place that is open to,
and intended for the use by, the general public for ingress and egress to the
public place; and
         (b)   The doorway or other entrance to a place of employment that is
open to, and intended for use by, the general public or business invitees for
ingress and egress to a place of employment, or where employees are required or
permitted to enter or exit.
      PUBLIC PLACE. The portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to
the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or
in part by private persons or entities, or any public entity and regardless of
whether a fee is charged for admission, including a minimum distance, as set
forth in the Smoke Free Illinois Act, of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows
that open and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited. A PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence unless the
private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care or
similar social service care on the premises.
      SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT. The Smoke Free Illinois Act, 410 ILCS 82/1 et
seq., as it may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Acknowledgment of applicability of the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
      (1)   Applicability of the Smoke Free Illinois Act. The village hereby
acknowledges that the Smoke Free Illinois Act is applicable, and is in full
force and effect, within the village. No person shall smoke in any place in the
village where smoking is prohibited pursuant to the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
      (2)   Most restrictive provision controls. In the event of a conflict
between the Smoke Free Illinois Act and the provisions of this section, the
most restrictive provision shall control.
   (E)   Prohibitions; smoking in public places, places of employment and
governmental vehicles prohibited. No person shall smoke in a public place or in
any place of employment or within 15 feet of any entrance to a public place or
place of employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased or
operated by the state or a political subdivision of the state. Smoking is
prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless specifically exempted
by the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
   (F)   Signs and ashtrays. Each owner, operator, manager or other person in
control of any place within which smoking is prohibited pursuant to this
section shall:
      (1)   Conspicuously post signs indicating that smoking is prohibited in
the same manner as is provided in §§ 20(a) and 20(b) of the Smoke Free Illinois
Act, 410 ILCS 82/20(a) and 20(b); provided, however, that in the event that
there is no clearly defined entrance to a place within which smoking is
prohibited pursuant to this section, the signs shall be posted on or adjacent
to an existing identification sign located on the property; and
      (2)    Remove all ashtrays from the place within which smoking is
prohibited, in the same manner as provided in § 20(c) of the Smoke Free
Illinois Act, 410 ILCS 82/20(c).
   (G)   Owner and occupant responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any person
who is the owner, occupant or lessee of any place where smoking is prohibited
pursuant to this section to permit smoking in that place.
(Ord. 1003, passed 9-8-2008)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 114: FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Definition of food
   
114.02   Application for license
   
114.03   Double licensing
   
114.04   Revocation of licenses
   
114.05   Unwholesome food
   
114.06   Adulteration
   
114.07   Sanitary regulations
   
114.08   Flies, rodents and vermin
   
114.09   Employees and the like to keep clean and free from disease;
examination
   
114.10   Inspections
   
114.11   Adoption of the Illinois Food Code
   114.12 through 114.19   Reserved
Restaurants
   
114.20   Definition
   
114.21   License required
   
114.22   Reserved
   
114.23   Issuance and investigation prerequisite
   
114.24   Fee
   
114.25   Posting
   
114.26   Revocation
   
114.27   Sanitation requirements
   
114.28   Inspections
   
114.29   Adoption of the Illinois Food Code
   
114.30   Grades of restaurants; failure to qualify
   
114.31   Reserved
 
   
114.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 DEFINITION OF FOOD.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD. Includes any edible or beverage used or intended for human
consumption.
(1959 Code, § 13-1)
§ 114.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Each application for a license to conduct a business connected with the
storage, handling, sale or preparation of food or drink intended for human
consumption shall be in writing and shall be referred to the Health Officer,
who shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the premises to be used,
and report his or her findings thereon, recommending or advising against the
issuance of the license.
(1959 Code, § 13-2)
§ 114.03 DOUBLE LICENSING.
   Any person licensed to sell any of the foods or beverages for the sale of
which a license is required by the provisions of this chapter, or licensed to
conduct any business licensed by the terms of this chapter, may conduct on the
same premises and in connection with the licensed business any other business
mentioned in this chapter without paying any additional fee therefor; provided,
that the fee is paid for the other business so conducted. This section does not
relieve any applicant from the regulatory requirements applicable to either
business.
(1959 Code, § 13-3)
§ 114.04 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   Any food dealer’s license may be revoked by the Health Officer for
violations of the provisions of this chapter, or for any violations of any
other ordinances of the village or provisions of this code relating to the
conduct of the business, the condition of the premises or the licensee.
(1959 Code, § 13-4) (Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 114.05 UNWHOLESOME FOOD.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale or keep for the purpose of
selling or offering for sale any food of any kind intended for human
consumption which is spoiled or tainted or is unwholesome and unfit for human
consumption for any reason.
   (B)   All tainted or unwholesome food intended for human consumption may be
condemned by the Health Officer and shall thereupon be seized and destroyed by
him, her or any police officer.
(1959 Code, § 13-5)
§ 114.06 ADULTERATION.
   It is unlawful to sell, offer for sale or keep for any purpose, any food or
drink intended for human consumption, which has been adulterated by any
material harmful in any way, or which does not comply with the state federal,
or local statutes, regulations, or laws governing the same.
(1959 Code, § 13-6) (Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 114.07 SANITARY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Premises. The premises, building and vending machines used for the
sale of food intended for human consumption must be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. It is unlawful to permit any accumulation of refuse or
waste of any kind, any decaying animal or plant matter, to remain thereon or
therein.
   (B)   Unwrapped food. No unwrapped food shall be displayed or stored in any
food dealer’s establishment unless the same is effectually screened, protected
against insects and rodents and otherwise protected from outside contamination.
   (C)   Display outside building. No foods shall be displayed outside the
doors of any building unless they be enclosed in a glass case or container
impervious to insect bites, animals or other outside contamination.
   (D)   Keeping in open shelves and the like. No foods shall be kept in open
shelves or display cases nor exposed less than 18 inches above the floor.
   (E)   Sleeping in room used to store or keep. No person shall be allowed to
sleep in any room used to store or keep food intended for sale for human
consumption.
   (F)   Expectorating. It is unlawful for any person to expectorate on the
floor, walls, furniture, equipment or appliances of any food establishment.
(1959 Code, § 13-7)
§ 114.08 FLIES, RODENTS AND VERMIN.
   Premises used for the storage of food intended for human consumption shall
be kept free from flies, rodents and vermin of all kinds.
(1959 Code, § 13-8)
§ 114.09 EMPLOYEES AND THE LIKE TO KEEP CLEAN AND FREE FROM DISEASE;
EXAMINATION.
   (A)   All persons engaged in handling or coming in contact with food
intended for human consumption shall keep themselves clean, both as to person
and clothing, and shall not have any contagious or infectious diseases while
preparing or serving food that could be passed to those who consume or handle
the food.
   (B)   The Health Officer may require any person engaged in handling or
coming in contact with foods to submit to an examination or produce a
certificate from a reputable physician showing that the provisions of this
section are being complied with.
(1959 Code, § 13-9) (Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 114.10 INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Officer or the Health Officer's designee shall make inspections
and recommendations as are necessary to carry out the regulations of this
chapter.
(1959 Code, § 13-10) (Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 114.11 ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS FOOD CODE.
   The "Food Service Sanitation Code", 77 Ill. Admin. Code 750, as may be
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set
forth herein, except where it is in direct conflict with other sections of this
code, and any further amendments to said rules and regulations shall be
automatically adopted, and such regulations shall apply to all establishments
in the village that engage in storage, handling, sale or preparation of food or
drink intended for human consumption.
(Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§§ 114.12 THROUGH 114.19 RESERVED
RESTAURANTS
§ 114.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESTAURANT. A place, house or room where meals, short-order lunches,
sandwiches or prepared foods are sold for public consumption, on or off the
premises.
(1959 Code, § 13-46)
§ 114.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the village without
obtaining a license therefor.
(1959 Code, § 13-47)
§ 114.22 RESERVED.
§ 114.23 ISSUANCE AND INVESTIGATION PREREQUISITE.
   (A)   The Health Officer shall from time to time issue licenses authorizing
the operating of restaurants within the village, in the following manner and
not otherwise.
   (B)   Any person desiring a license to operate a restaurant shall make a
written application for that purpose to the Health Officer. The application
shall be accompanied by evidence that the applicant, if an individual, all the
members of a firm, if a co-partnership, and the persons in charge of the
business, if a corporation, is or are persons of good character and reputation,
and also that the premises where the restaurant is proposed to be operated are
proper and suitable for that purpose from a hygienic and sanitary standpoint.
   (C)   If the Health Officer is satisfied that an applicant is of good
character and reputation, and suitable to be authorized to operate a
restaurant, and that the premises where it is proposed to operate the
restaurant are proper and suitable for the purpose from a hygienic and sanitary
standpoint, the Health Officer shall issue or cause to be issued a license in
accordance with the application
(1959 Code, § 13-49) (Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 114.24 FEE.
   The annual license fee for licenses issued under this subchapter is in an
amount as established in the annual fee ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 13-50)
§ 114.25 POSTING.
   Every person licensed to operate a restaurant shall immediately post the
license required by this subchapter or cause it to be posted in a conspicuous
place within the premises where the restaurant is authorized to be operated.
Any person who violates the provisions of this section, or who, not being
properly licensed, shall cause or permit any paper or document purporting to be
a license to be or remain posted shall, on conviction, be punished as provided
in §
114.99 of this code.
(1959 Code, § 13-51)
§ 114.26 REVOCATION.
   Any license issued under this subchapter may be revoked by the Board of
Trustees by notice in writing, whenever it shall appear to its satisfaction
that the person so licensed has violated the provisions of any law of the
state, this code or any ordinance of the village relative to the keeping of
restaurants.
(1959 Code, § 13-52) (Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 114.27 SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is the duty of every keeper of a restaurant to at all times keep
the premises wherein the restaurant is located clean and in a proper hygienic
and sanitary condition. All utensils, appliances, vessels, receptacles,
refrigerators, pantries, rooms and any other place or thing whatsoever, which
is used for the purpose of storage, preparation, cooking or serving of foods,
must at all times be kept in a clean, wholesome and sanitary condition. No
decayed, decaying, unwholesome or impure food of any kind whatsoever shall be
kept, sold, offered for sale or served in any restaurant. No person shall
reside in any room in which food is prepared or served, nor in any room
connecting directly by a door with a room in which food is prepared or served.
   (B)   Every person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in §
114.99 of this code.
(1959 Code, § 13-53)
§ 114.28 INSPECTIONS.
   It is the duty of the Health Officer or the Health Officer's designee, and
he or she is authorized and empowered, from time to time, to inspect and
examine all premises wherein restaurants are conducted, for the purpose of
ascertaining whether this subchapter and all ordinances of the village and the
laws of the state relative to the keeping of restaurants are being complied
with at the place; and it is his or her duty to cause all ordinances and laws
to be strictly enforced. It is the duty of every keeper of a restaurant to
permit the inspections to be made, and when required, to furnish samples of any
foods kept, sold, offered for sale or served in a restaurant, which samples
shall be examined or analyzed by or under the direction of the Health Officer;
and a record of each examination or analysis shall be made and kept on file in
his or her office.
(1959 Code, § 13-54) (Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 114.29 ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS FOOD CODE.
   The "Food Service Sanitation Code", 77 Ill. Admin. Code 750, as may be
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set
forth herein, except where it is in direct conflict with other sections of this
code, and any future amendments to said rules and regulations shall be
automatically adopted, and such regulations shall apply to all restaurants in
the village.
(Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 114.30 GRADES OF RESTAURANTS; FAILURE TO QUALIFY.
   No restaurants shall be operated within the village except grade A, grade B
or approved itinerant restaurants; provided, that when any restaurant fails to
qualify for any of these grades the Health Officer is authorized to suspend the
license, or in lieu thereof, to degrade the restaurant and permit its operation
during a temporary period not exceeding 30 days.
(1959 Code, § 13-56) (Ord. 1293, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 114.31 ENFORCEMENT OF §§ 114.29 AND 114.30 OF THIS CODE BY HEALTH OFFICER.
   Section 114.29 of this code and the unabridged form of ordinance adopted
thereby and §
114.30 of this code shall be enforced by the Health Officer of the village, or
his or her authorized representative, in accordance with the interpretations
thereof contained in the 1943 Edition of the U.S. Public Health Service Code
Regulating Eating and Drinking Establishments, three copies of which have been
on file in the office of the Village Clerk more than 15 days prior to the
adoption of the sections.
(1959 Code, § 13-57)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 115: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
   
115.01   License required
   
115.02   License fee
   
115.03   Records and reports; when moneys to be paid into treasury
   
115.04   Collection of moneys due by suit
   
115.05   Brokers not to deal with corporations failing to comply with chapter
   
115.06   Establishment of Foreign Fire Insurance Fund
Statutory reference:
   Foreign fire insurance company fee, see 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 et seq.
§ 115.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any corporation, company or association, not incorporated
under the laws of the state, to engage in the village in effecting fire
insurance, or to transact any business of fire insurance in the village, while
in default by not fully complying with any of the requirements of this chapter,
and until these requirements shall have been fully complied with; but this
provision does not relieve any company, corporation or association from payment
of any risk that may be undertaken in violation of this chapter.
(1959 Code, § 14-1)
§ 115.02 LICENSE FEE.
   Any corporation, company or association referred to in §
115.01, which is engaged in the village in effecting fire insurance, shall pay
to the Village Treasurer a sum of money equal in amount to 2% per annum of the
gross receipts received for premiums by all agents of that corporation, company
or association, during the year ending July 1, for any insurance, effected or
agreed to be effected, in the village, by or with the corporation, company or
association during that year.
(1959 Code, § 14-2)
§ 115.03 RECORDS AND REPORTS; WHEN MONEYS TO BE PAID INTO TREASURY.
   Every person acting as agent in the village for or on behalf of any
corporation, company or association covered by this chapter shall, on or before
July 15 of every year, render to the Village Treasurer a full, true and just
account verified by his or her oath, of all premiums which during the year
ending July 1 preceding the report, have been received by him, her or some
other person for him or her, in the behalf of any corporation, company or
association. That agent shall also, at the time of rendering the report, pay to
the Village Treasurer the sum of money for which the company, corporation or
association, represented by him or her is chargeable, by virtue of the
provisions of this chapter.
(1959 Code, § 14-3)
§ 115.04 COLLECTION OF MONEYS DUE BY SUIT.
   (A)   The sum of money for which any company, corporation or association is
so chargeable under the provisions of this chapter may be recovered of it, or
its agent, by action in the name of and for the use of the village as for money
had and received.
   (B)   Nothing in this section exempts any person, corporation, company or
association from indictment and conviction under the provisions of any act of
the state.
(1959 Code, § 14-4)
§ 115.05 BROKERS NOT TO DEAL WITH CORPORATIONS FAILING TO COMPLY WITH CHAPTER.
   No insurance broker in the village shall have any insurance business or
dealings with any company, association or corporation not incorporated under
the laws of this state which shall be in default for not reporting or making
payment as provided in this chapter, until it shall have complied with all of
the requirements of this chapter.
(1959 Code, § 14-5)
§ 115.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE FUND.
   There is hereby established a Foreign Fire Insurance Fund to be managed and
administered by the Foreign Fire Insurance Board in accordance with §
33.092 of this code. The Foreign Fire Insurance Fund shall be operated on a
fiscal year from January 1 to December 31. Each year, the Village Treasurer
shall transfer any Foreign Fire Insurance license fees collected by the village
into the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund. As part of the annual village audit, the
funds in the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund shall be audited to verify that the
funds have been expended by that Foreign Fire Insurance Board only for the
maintenance, use, and benefit of the Fire Department.
CHAPTER 116: INTOXICATING LIQUORS
Section
General Provisions
   
116.001   Definitions
   
116.002   Village President designated Liquor Control Commissioner
   
116.003   Powers and duties of the Liquor Control Commissioner
Licenses
   
116.015   Local liquor license required
   
116.016   Classification of local liquor licenses
   
116.017   Number of licenses
Licensing Process
   
116.030   Application for license
   
116.031   Investigation of applicant
   
116.032   Approval or denial of application
   
116.033   Expiration of licenses
   
116.034   Records and reports
   
116.035   License amendments
   
116.036   License fees
Insurance and Training
   
116.050   Dram shop insurance
   
116.051   Responsible alcohol service training
Sales
   
116.065   Sales restricted to authorized premises
   
116.066   Sanitary requirements
   
116.067   Sales within restaurants
   
116.068   Hours of business
   
116.069   Sales to minors
   
116.070   Sales by minors
   
116.071   Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages by minors
   
116.072   Sales on credit
   
116.073   Special events
   
116.074   Sales promotions
   
116.075   Giveaways and tasting
   
116.076   "To go" cocktails and single servings of wine
Enforcement
   
116.090   Violations and penalties
   
116.091   Enforcement procedure
   
116.092   Liquor Control Commissioner hearings
   
116.093   Appeals
   
116.094   Automatic revocation
   
116.095   Forfeiture of fees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All words
or phrases not defined in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in the Liquor Control Act or Chapter 10 of this Code.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, including, without
limitation, synthetic ethyl alcohol, but not including denatured alcohol or
wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any alcohol, spirits, wine, and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage of a human being. For purposes of this chapter,
this definition shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder, or to any liquid or solid containing not more than one-
half of one percent of alcohol by volume.
   BASSET PROGRAM. A Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and
Training program licensed by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission
pursuant to sections 3-12(A)(11.1) and 6-27 of the Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS
5/3-12(a)(11.1) and 6-27) and 77 III. Admin. Code 3500.101 et seq., as may be
amended from time to time.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops in water, including,
without limitation, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and similar
beverages.
   BREW PUB. As defined in §
153.003.
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of the State of Illinois, not
for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, which shall have been in
operation in the village for two years prior to applying for a liquor license,
kept, used and maintained by its members, through the payment of annual dues,
and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building, of such extent
and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and
comfortable use and accommodations of its members and their guests, and
provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment
and maintaining a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and
serving food and meals for its members and their guests; and further provided
that its affairs and management are conducted by a Board of Directors,
executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting, and that no member, or any officer, agent or employee of the club is
paid or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other
compensation any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to
the club or the members of the club or its guests, beyond the amount of such
salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its
Board of Directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the
club.
   COFFEE SHOP. A place of business that: (a) is licensed under
Chapter 114 of this Code; (b) opens to the public for business each day not
later than 7:00 a.m. and remains open to the public for business continuously
for not less than ten hours; (c) has a total floor area not greater than 2,500
square feet; and (d) is engaged in the primary business of the sale, over a
counter located at the point of sale where customers place orders, of: (i)
coffee, tea, coffee-based beverages, tea-based beverages, and other beverages
prepared on the premises for consumption on or off the premises where served;
and (ii) food items, including baked goods, sandwiches, and salads, primarily
prepared off premises for consumption on or off the premises where served.
   CRAFT BREWERY/DISTILLERY/MEADERY/ WINERY. As defined in §
153.003.
   LICENSEE. The person or entity named in a local liquor license to which the
license has been issued.
   LIQUOR CONTROL ACT. The Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/1-
1 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
   LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER. The Village President.
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead
or other receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor. For the purpose of sales and deliveries authorized by §
116.076 , "original package" shall also include a "sealed container" as defined
in 235 ILCS 5/6-28.8(a).
   RESTAURANT. A place open to the public that has kitchen and dining room
equipment and furnishings and where meals are regularly sold, served, and
consumed by paying customers and employing a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook and serve such meals. This definition does not
include hotels, motels, or other places with sleeping accommodations.
   SALE or SELL. Any transfer, exchange, barter, sale, or selling of alcoholic
liquor.
   SALE AT RETAIL or SELL AT RETAIL.  Sales for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
   SHAREHOLDER. Any person, firm, corporation, or limited liability company
that owns or controls five percent or more of a corporation, partnership,
limited liability company, or other business entity.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A fundraiser, grand opening, concert, show, festival, special
meeting, party, or similar non-recurring or not regularly recurring function,
whether public or private.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substances in solution, including, without limitation,
brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when
rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including, without
limitation, such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or
spirits.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017; Ord. 1317, passed 10-24-2022; Ord. 1321, passed
11-21-2022)
§ 116.002 VILLAGE PRESIDENT DESIGNATED LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   The Village President is hereby designated as the Liquor Control
Commissioner in and for the Village.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.003 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   The Liquor Control Commissioner is charged with the administration
within the village of:
      (1)   The appropriate provisions of this Chapter; and
      (2)   All ordinances, resolutions, statutes, laws, rules, and regulations
relating to alcoholic liquor and applicable within the village.
   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers and
duties:
      (1)   To enter, or to authorize any law enforcement officer or peace
officer to enter, during regular business hours upon any premises licensed
pursuant to this chapter to determine whether any of the provisions of this
chapter or any other applicable statutes, ordinances, resolutions, laws, rules
or regulations have been or are being violated, and at the time of such entry
to examine such premises in connection therewith;
      (2)   To receive complaints from any citizen of the village that any of
the provisions of this chapter or of the Liquor Control Act, or any rules or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or any other applicable rules or
regulations, have been or are being violated, and to act upon such complaints
in the manner set forth in this chapter;
      (3)   To grant or deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a
local liquor license, in accordance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter;
      (4)   To appoint one or more persons to assist in the exercise of all of
the powers and the performance of the duties of the Liquor Control
Commissioner; and
      (5)   To perform all other duties required pursuant to the Liquor Control
Act.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
LICENSES
§ 116.015 LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall sell at retail or offer for sale
at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village except in the manner authorized
by, and in compliance with, the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this
chapter and of a valid local liquor license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer for sale at retail
any alcoholic liquor at any location within the Village without first having
obtained a valid local liquor license issued by the village pursuant to this
chapter for each such location.
   (C)   Where two or more locations, places, or premises are under the same
roof but separated by any area not under the licensee's control and open to the
general public, or at the same street address but separated by any area not
under the licensee's control and open to the general public, a separate local
liquor license shall be obtained for each such location, place, or premises.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or interpreted as prohibiting,
and no local liquor license shall be required for, the following:
      (1)   The possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor by the
possessor for the personal use of the possessor, his or her family, or guests
at least 21 years of age;
      (2)   The making of wine, cider, or other alcoholic liquor by a person
from fruits, vegetables, or grains, or the products thereof, by simple
fermentation and without distillation, if it is made solely for the at home use
of, and not the retail sale by, the maker, his or her family, and guests at
least 21 years of age;
      (3)   The possession or use of alcoholic liquor (a) by a duly licensed
practicing physician or dentist in the strict practice of his or her
profession, or (b) by any hospital or other institution caring for sick or
diseased persons for the treatment of bona fide patients of that hospital or
institution;
      (4)   The possession or use of alcoholic liquor by a drugstore employing
a licensed pharmacist, in the concoction of prescriptions of duly licensed
physicians; and
      (5)   The possession or dispensation of wine by an authorized
representative of any religious institution for the purpose of conducting any
bona fide rite or religious ceremony.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017; Ord. 1321, passed 11-21-2022)
§ 116.016 CLASSIFICATION OF LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSES.
   There shall be the following classes of local liquor licenses:
   (A)   Class A Restaurant License, which shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor by restaurants. The sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to a
Class A license must be incidental and complementary to the sale and service of
food. Alcoholic liquor may only be consumed on the premises where sold, except
as provided in §
116.076.
   (B)   Class B General Retail Sale License, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor, in the original package, for consumption off the
premises where sold only, and not for consumption on the premises where sold.
   (C)   Class C Club License, which shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor to members of clubs or similar organizations, or their guests,
for consumption on the premises where sold only, by clubs that: (1) are
organized under the laws of this state not for pecuniary profit; and (2)
require the payment of annual dues from each of its members of more than $100.
   (D)   Class D Assembly Hall license, which shall authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor at events held on or within the property known as the
Kenilworth Assembly Hall, located at 410 Kenilworth Avenue, as long as the
property is owned and operated by the Kenilworth Park District and the sale
and/or service of alcoholic liquor at that particular event is approved in
advance by the Kenilworth Park District Board of Commissioners, for consumption
on the premises where sold only.
   (E)   Class E Special Event license, which shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor by an educational, political, civic, fraternal, religious, or
other non-profit organization, at a special event, for consumption within the
area specifically designated in such license only, which Class E license shall
not be valid for a period exceeding eight consecutive hours. No more than 12
such licenses shall be issued to any one licensee within a calendar year, and
no more than four such licenses issued to a licensee within a calendar year
shall permit the service of alcoholic liquor outdoors.
   (F)   Class F Coffee Shop license, which shall authorize the retail sale of
solely wine and beer at a coffee shop, solely for consumption on the premises
where sold, subject to and in accordance with the following conditions and
restrictions:
      (1)   Wine must be either: (a) sold and served in single-serving
glassware or plasticware; or (b) sold by the bottle and consumed from single-
serving glassware or plasticware. Beer must be sold and served in single
servings. Packaged sales are prohibited.
      (2)   Wine and beer must be ordered by patrons at, and sold and served
over, the counter of the coffee shop at the point of sale.
      (3)   Each and every patron who desires to consume wine (including,
without limitation, a portion of wine sold by the bottle) or beer must: (a) be
physically present at the counter during the point-of-sale transaction during
which the wine or beer is purchased; and (b) present a form of valid
photographic identification issued by a state government or the United States
government. For the purpose of this division (F), POINT-OF-SALE TRANSACTION
means each instance when a patron or group of patrons purchases food and
beverages at the counter, whether or not the purchases are processed or
documented as a single transaction by the coffee shop.
      (4)   All single-serving sales must comply with the following
requirements:
         (a)   The number of servings of wine or beer sold and served during
each point-of-sale transaction may not exceed the number of patrons who are
physically present at the counter during the transaction and who have presented
identification in accordance with division (F)(3) of this section.
         (b)   The sale and service of a serving of wine or beer to a patron or
group of patrons for consumption by a patron other than the patrons who are
physically present at the counter during the point-of-sale transaction and who
have presented identification in accordance with division(F)(3) of this section
is prohibited.
         (c)   Each and every single serving of wine or beer, other than the
first two servings of wine or beer, or a combination of wine and beer, sold to
each patron must be accompanied by a sale of food to each patron. For the
purpose of this division (F), FOOD means baked goods, sandwiches, salads,
prepared snacks, and similar items. "Food" does not mean candy, mints, gum, or
similar items.
      (5)   All sales of bottles of wine must comply with the following
requirements:
         (a)   Each bottle of wine must be purchased for consumption by not
less than two patrons.
         (b)   The sale of more than one bottle of wine during each point-of-
sale transaction is prohibited.
         (c)   The sale of a bottle of wine for consumption, in whole or in
part, by any patron or patrons who are not physically present at the counter
during the point-of-sale transaction and who have not presented identification
in accordance with division (F)(3) of this section is prohibited.
         (d)   Each bottle of wine sold must be accompanied by the sale of
food.
      (6)   No Class F licensee may derive less than 60% of its gross receipts
in any calendar year from the sale of coffee or coffee beverages that do not
include alcoholic liquor.
   (G)   Class G Brew Pub license, which shall authorize the retail sale at a
brew pub of (a) beer brewed or manufactured on the premises for consumption on
the premises; (b) beer brewed or manufactured on the premises for consumption
in the original package for consumption off the premises; and (c) alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises, all subject to and in accordance with
the following conditions and restrictions:
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to sell a container of beer for off-premises
consumption unless the container, provided by the licensee, is greater than or
equal to 22 fluid ounces or 0.65 liters in volume, and is properly sealed for
transport in compliance with state and federal law.
      (2)   Beer sold in its original package for consumption off the premises
shall not be consumed on the premises. All beer sold for consumption off the
premises shall be placed in a paper or plastic bag prior to its delivery to the
purchaser.
      (3)   Beer tastings of beer brewed or manufactured on the premises are
allowed, provided that (i) the beer tastings shall not exceed three servings of
two ounces each; (ii) the beer tastings shall be performed in accordance with §
6-31 of the Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/6-31); and (iii) the beer tastings
shall comply with any additional restrictions imposed by the Liquor Control
Commissioner.
   (H)   Class H craft brewery/distillery/winery/ meadery license, which shall
authorize the retail sale at a craft brewery/distillery/meadery/winery of (a)
alcoholic liquor that is produced on the premises for consumption on the
premises; and (b) alcoholic liquor that is produced on the premises for
consumption off the premises, all subject to and in accordance with the
following conditions and restrictions:
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to sell a container of alcoholic liquor for
off-premises consumption unless the container, provided by the licensee, is
greater than or equal to 22 fluid ounces or 0.65 liters in volume, and is
properly sealed for transport in compliance with state and federal law.
      (2)   Alcoholic liquor sold for consumption off the premises shall not be
consumed on the premises, including, without limitation, in the tasting room.
      (3)   Alcoholic liquor sold for consumption off the premises shall only
be sold from the retail portion of the premises.
      (4)   Except as provided in divisions (H)(5) and (H)(6) below, alcoholic
liquor sold or offered for consumption on the premises may only be consumed in
the tasting room. Any tasting room located on the premises must offer for sale
packaged or prepared foods for consumption on the premises.
      (5)   Alcoholic liquor sold for consumption on the premises may be
consumed in areas other than the tasting room during supervised tours of the
premises or private events, hosted on the premises, subject to the licensee
actively monitoring such areas for compliance with all applicable federal,
state, and local, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
      (6)   Licensee may give away or otherwise dispense free of charge samples
of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises during a supervised tour of
the premises; provided, however, licensee shall not offer or allow tastings
that exceed the following: (i) beer, up to three servings containing up to two
ounces each; (ii) spirits, up to three servings containing up to 0.25 ounces
each; and (iii) wine, up to three servings containing up to one ounce each.
   (I)   Class S Sidewalk Rider, which shall authorize a Class A local liquor
licensee to serve alcoholic liquor, or a Class F local liquor licensee to serve
beer and wine, on portions of a public or private right-of-way adjacent to the
Class A or Class F licensed premises, or, in the discretion of the Liquor
Control Commissioner, on portions of a village-owned right-of-way within 275
feet of the Class A or Class F licensed premises, for which the licensee has
obtained authorization from the Village to maintain a temporary outdoor dining
area as an accessory use.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017; Ord. 1262, passed 6-15-2020; Ord. 1317, passed
10-24-2022; Ord. 1321, passed 11-21-2022)
§ 116.017 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Number. The number of licenses authorized pursuant to this chapter in
each class shall be as provided in the annual fee ordinance, as amended from
time to time. The maximum number of Class E Special Event Licenses authorized
pursuant to this chapter shall be established by the Liquor Control
Commissioner.
   (B)   No property right. Each liquor license is purely a personal privilege
and is not a property right in any form. No license is or may be subject to
attachment, garnishment, or execution. No license is alienable or transferable,
whether voluntarily or involuntarily, or is subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. No license may descend by the laws of testate or intestate
succession. Every license ceases on the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of the
licensee; except only that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee and the trustee of the estate of any bankrupt or insolvent
licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcohol liquor, may continue the
business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court
and may exercise the privileges of the deceased, bankrupt, or insolvent
licensee until the original expiration date of that licensee's license but no
longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of that
licensee.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
LICENSING PROCESS
§ 116.030 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   New applicants. An applicant for a new local liquor license shall file
an application therefor with the Village Clerk, on a form provided by the
village, which application shall include, without limitation, the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address, date of birth, place of birth, driver's license
number, telephone number, and country of citizenship of all officers,
directors, partners, managers, and shareholders of the applicant business;
      (2)   For all officers, directors, partners, managers, and shareholders
of the applicant business who are naturalized citizens of the United States,
the date and place of naturalization; if an officer, director, partner,
manager, or shareholder is not a citizen of the United States, a statement
indicating if the applicant is a permanent resident of the United States, and
if so, the date the officer, director, partner, manager, or shareholder's
permanent resident status was granted;
      (3)   A photocopy of the driver's license or other state-issued
identification for all officers, directors, partners, managers, and
shareholders of the applicant business;
      (4)   The character of business of the applicant, and the length of time
that the applicant has been in business of that character;
      (5)   The amount of goods, wares, and merchandise on hand at the time of
application;
      (6)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
at which the applicant proposes to sell alcoholic liquor;
      (7)   A statement of whether the proposed location is owned or leased by
the applicant, and, if the applicant does not own the proposed location, a copy
of the lease;
      (8)   A statement of whether the applicant, or any other person involved
directly or indirectly in the applicant's business, is an elected public
official or law enforcement officer;
      (9)   A statement of whether the applicant, or any director, officer,
partner, manager, or shareholder thereof, has ever been convicted of: (a) a
felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or the United States; or (b) a
violation of any federal or state law or local ordinance concerning the
manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor;
      (10)   A statement of whether the applicant, or any director, officer,
partner, manager, or shareholder thereof, possesses a current Federal Wagering
or Gambling Device Stamp, or a current State bingo or charitable games license;
and, if so, the reasons therefor;
      (11)   A statement of whether the applicant has filed an application for
a liquor license on premises other than those described in the application, and
the disposition of that application;
      (12)   A statement of whether a liquor license issued by any state or
subdivision thereof, or by the Federal government, has been previously revoked,
and, if so, the reasons therefor;
      (13)   A certificate of insurance, demonstrating proof of dram shop
insurance coverage covering the period for which the requested local liquor
license will be effective, as required pursuant to §
116.050 of this chapter;
      (14)   For corporate applicants, a copy of the State of Illinois
certificate of incorporation, and, if incorporated in a state other than
Illinois, a copy of the State of Illinois certificate showing the date that the
applicant became qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983, 805 ILCS
5/1.01 et seq., to do business in Illinois;
      (15)   A notarized affidavit, signed by an authorized representative of
the applicant and in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney, stating that:
         (a)   The applicant, and all directors, officers, partners, managers,
and shareholders thereof, have not received or borrowed money or anything else
of value, and will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value, or
accept or receive credit (other than merchandising credit in the ordinary
course of business for a period not to exceed 30 days, or as otherwise
permitted pursuant to the Liquor Control Act), directly or indirectly from any
manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor of alcoholic liquor, or from
any officer, manager, agent, representative, or family member thereof;
         (b)   The applicant has not been a party in any way, directly or
indirectly, to any violation of the Liquor Control Act by a manufacturer,
distributor or importing distributor;
         (c)   The applicant, and all directors, officers, partners, managers,
and shareholders thereof, are not disqualified to receive a local liquor
license by reason of any provision of this chapter, the laws of this state, or
the ordinances of the village;
         (d)   The applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State of
Illinois, or of the United States, or any ordinance of the village in the
conduct of the applicant's place of business, including, without limitation,
the responsible alcohol service training requirements set forth in §
116.051 of this chapter;
         (e)   The applicant has paid all taxes due and owing to the Village as
of the date of the application;
         (f)   The applicant may be held liable for any violation of this
chapter by an officer, director, manager, or employee of the applicant, as set
forth in §
116.090(A)(2) of this chapter;
         (g)   The issuance of a new or renewal local liquor license pursuant
to this chapter will not be deemed as vesting any right to the applicant, or to
any partner, officer, director, manager, shareholder, agent, or employee
thereof, of an additional local liquor license or to future local liquor
licenses; and
         (h)   If the applicant is a club, no member, officer, agent, or
employee of the applicant is paid or directly or indirectly receives, in the
form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale
of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests,
beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual
meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out
of the general revenue of the club; and
      (16)   For all new applications, a non-refundable administrative
application fee, and a license fee, each in the amount set forth in the Annual
Fee Ordinance.
   (B)   Renewal applications. A local liquor licensee may request the renewal
of a local liquor license by filing an application therefor with the Village
Clerk, which application shall include, without limitation, the following:
      (1)   Any change in the information required pursuant to division (A) of
this section that has occurred since the date of the local liquor license
application filed by the applicant for the previous calendar year;
      (2)   The affidavit required pursuant to division (A)(15) of this
section;
      (3)   An application fee and license fee in the amount set forth in the
Annual Fee Ordinance; and
      (4)   For all applications for a renewal local liquor license that are
filed after December 1 of the last calendar year for which the applicant held a
local liquor license, a late renewal application fee, in the amount set forth
in the Annual Fee Ordinance.
   (C)   Special event licenses. Notwithstanding any provision of this §
116.030 to the contrary, the following provisions shall apply to all
applications filed for a Class E Special Event local liquor license:
      (1)   The application must be filed no later than the date that is 14
days before the beginning of the Special Event for which the Class E license is
sought;
      (2)   The application must include all information required pursuant to
division (A) of this section, as the case may be, except that the applicant
shall not be required to disclose any information or make any statement
regarding its directors, except to the extent that a director is also an
officer, partner, manager, or shareholder;
      (3)   The applicant shall identify the name, location, dates and times of
the special event for which the Class E license is sought; and
      (4)   The applicant shall submit proof of its status as a not-for-profit
organization.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.031 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   (A)   Investigation. Prior to issuance of a local liquor license, the
Village Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall investigate the fitness
and character of the applicant and all partners, officers, managers, directors,
shareholders, and agents thereof, as deemed necessary for the protection of the
public health, safety, and order.
   (B)   Fingerprinting. As deemed necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety, and order, the Village Chief of Police, or his or her designee,
shall, within ten days after receipt of a complete application filed pursuant
to this chapter, take and record the fingerprints of (1) all partners,
officers, managers, directors, shareholders, and agents of a new applicant for
a local liquor license, and (2) all new partners, officers, managers,
directors, shareholders, and agents of existing or renewal local liquor license
applicants. The applicant shall pay to the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, a fingerprinting fee for each set of fingerprints taken, covering the
administrative costs of all fingerprinting required pursuant to this division
(B), in the amount set forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance.
   (C)   Within 30 days after receipt of a complete application filed pursuant
to this chapter, the Village Chief of Police shall certify to the Liquor
Control Commissioner his or her recommendations as to whether or not a local
liquor license should be issued to the applicant, together with a statement of
the reasons therefor. The failure of the Chief of Police to provide such
recommendations and statement within 30 days after the date on which a complete
application is filed, or such further time as the applicant may, in writing,
agree, shall not be deemed as either a recommendation for or against the
issuance of the requested local liquor license.
   (D)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this §
116.031, no investigation is required for an applicant of a Class E Special
Event license.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.032 APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Approval. The Liquor Control Commissioner shall approve a local liquor
license application, and issue a local liquor license to the applicant, upon
the occurrence of each of the following:
      (1)   Receipt of a complete application for a new or renewal local liquor
license, in accordance with §
116.030 of this chapter;
      (2)   Receipt of the recommendations and statement of the Chief of Police
pursuant to §
116.031 of this chapter, if applicable;
      (3)   The determination by the Liquor Control Commissioner that the
application satisfies the standards and conditions set forth in this §
116.032; and
      (4)   Payment of the local liquor license fee for the specific class of
local liquor license sought, in the amount set forth in the Annual Fee
Ordinance, which fee shall be reduced in proportion to the number of whole
calendar months which have expired in the license year prior to the issuance of
the local liquor license.
   (B)   Denial.
      (1)   Definition. For purposes of this division (B) only, except as
expressly provided otherwise, the term APPLICANT shall include the entity or
individual named on the application for a local liquor license, as well as all
partners, officers, managers, directors, shareholders, and agents of the entity
or individual that has applied for a local liquor license pursuant to this
chapter; except that the term APPLICANT shall not include the directors of a
not-for-profit organization that has applied for a Class D Special Event local
liquor license pursuant to this Chapter.
      (2)   Mandatory denial. The Liquor Control Commissioner shall deny any
application for a new or renewal local liquor license that satisfies any of the
following conditions:
         (a)   The applicant is a sole proprietorship of which the sole
proprietor does not reside within the Village, or within five miles of the
Village, and is not actively engaged in the day-to-day conduct of the business;
         (b)   Where the applicant is a corporation or limited liability
company, if any member, officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the village;
         (c)   The applicant does not own the premises for which a local liquor
license is sought, and does not have a lease for such premises for the full
period for which the license is to be issued;
         (d)   Any law enforcing public official, or any member of the Village
Board of Trustees, or the Village Clerk or Village Treasurer, has a direct or
indirect interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor
in the Village by the applicant; except that this division (B)(2)(d) shall not
be deemed or interpreted as prohibiting the issuance of a local liquor license
to a bona fide not-for-profit club or charitable organization, operated by its
members, one or more of which members is a law enforcing public official or a
member of the Village Board of Trustees;
         (e)   The applicant has been convicted of a gambling or related
offense, in violation of Article 28 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, 720
ILCS 5/28-1 et seq., as amended;
         (f)   A federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal
government to the applicant or for the premises for which a local liquor
license is sought, unless the applicant is eligible for a local liquor license
pursuant to the Illinois Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq., or the Illinois
Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act, 230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.;
         (g)   The applicant does not possess a valid policy for dram shop
insurance covering the period for which a local liquor license is sought, as
required pursuant to §
116.050 of this chapter;
         (h)   The applicant is a club that has been in operation in the
village for less than two years, as of the date of application;
         (i)   The applicant is the subject of a complaint received by the
Liquor Control Commissioner from the Illinois Department of Revenue pursuant to
Section 6-3 of the Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/6-3), alleging that the
applicant has committed a violation of any tax statute administered by such
Department;
         (j)   The applicant is a club of which any member, officer, agent, or
employee is paid or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or
other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic
liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests, beyond the amount
of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members
or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue
of the club;
         (k)   The application is for a Class E local liquor license, and the
applicant has previously received Class E local liquor licenses authorizing the
sale of alcoholic liquor for more than 15 days in the 12-month period preceding
the date of application;
         (l)   The application is for any premises located within 100 feet of
any religious institution, school, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons
or veterans, their spouses or children, or any military or naval station;
except that this division (B)(2)(l) shall not apply to the following:
            (i)   The renewal of a local liquor license for the sale at retail
of alcoholic liquor on any premises located within 100 feet of any religious
institution occupied after the date of issuance of the original local liquor
license, measured to the nearest part of any building used by the religious
institution for worship services or educational programs;
            (ii)   The renewal of a local liquor license for the sale at retail
of alcoholic liquor on any premises located within 100 feet of any school
occupied after the issuance of the original local liquor license;
            (iii)   Religious institutions or private schools that sell
alcoholic liquor at retail for limited periods during which groups are
assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other
than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors; or
            (iv)   Institutions of higher learning; or
         (m)   The village has not taken and recorded all fingerprints of the
applicant, or the applicant has not paid all required fingerprinting fees, as
required pursuant to §
116.031(B) of this chapter.
      (3)   Permissive denial. The Liquor Commissioner shall have the right,
but not the obligation, to deny any application for a local liquor license that
satisfies any of the following conditions:
         (a)   The application is for any premises, or is filed by any
applicant, for which a license issued pursuant to this chapter has been
revoked;
         (b)   The applicant has been convicted of a violation of any federal
or state law or local ordinance concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale
of alcoholic liquor;
         (c)   The applicant has been convicted of a felony under the laws of
the State of Illinois or the United States;
         (d)   The application is for any premises for which there exists a
violation of
Chapter 153 of this Code;
         (e)   The applicant is delinquent in the payment to the village of any
tax or payment required pursuant to this code, including, without limitation,
any payment for water service or for refuse collection; or
         (f)   The applicant is not of good character or reputation in the
village or in the community in which the applicant resides.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.033 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   Every local liquor license issued pursuant to this Chapter, other than a
Class D Special Event local liquor license, shall terminate on the 31st day of
December following its issuance.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.034 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall keep, or cause to be kept, a complete record
of all local liquor licenses issued pursuant to this chapter, and shall furnish
the Director of Finance and Village Chief of Police each with a copy thereof.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall give written notice of the issuance,
suspension or revocation of a local liquor license to the Director of Finance
and Village Chief of Police within two business days thereof.
   (C)   The Liquor Control Commissioner, at the request of the Village Board
of Trustees, shall report to the Village Board of Trustees (1) all of his or
her acts and doings in the enforcement of this chapter, and (2) the date of
collection and amount of all local liquor license fees paid pursuant to this
chapter.
   (D)   All local liquor licensees shall make their books and records
available, upon reasonable notice, for investigation and control by any
designee of either the Liquor Control Commissioner or the Illinois Liquor
Control Commission.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.035 LICENSE AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Changes in personnel.
      (1)   Any change in the information required pursuant to §
116.030(A)(1) and (2) of this chapter regarding the partners, officers,
directors, managers, or shareholders of a local liquor licensee shall be
reported in writing to the Liquor Control Commissioner and to the Village Chief
of Police within 10 days after the change. All new partners, officers,
directors, managers and shareholders shall meet all of the standards of this
chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a local liquor license. All changes
in personnel shall be subject to review by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
      (2)   Upon any change regarding a local liquor licensee, or regarding any
existing or new partner, officer, director, manager, or shareholder thereof,
that causes the local liquor licensee to be ineligible for a local liquor
license pursuant to this chapter, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall hold a
public hearing to consider revocation of the liquor license, in accordance with
§
116.092 of this chapter.
   (B)   Change in location. The premises at which the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor is licensed pursuant to this chapter may be changed only upon
the prior written approval of the Liquor Control Commissioner, which approval
shall not be granted unless the proposed new location is suitable for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to this chapter and all other
applicable statutes, ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.036 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Fees for replacement license. Any local liquor licensee that, during
the term of its current license, applies for a new local liquor license that is
intended to replace the current license, and not to supplement it, shall be
required to pay only the prorated difference between the replacement local
liquor license fee and the value of the current local liquor license fee. The
Village shall have no obligation to reimburse the licensee if the replacement
local liquor license fee is less expensive than the current local liquor
license fee.
   (B)   Refunds of application fees. The village shall have no obligation to
refund any application fee paid pursuant to this chapter to an applicant or
local liquor licensee for any reason.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
INSURANCE AND TRAINING
§ 116.050 DRAM SHOP INSURANCE.
   All local liquor licensees shall maintain dram shop insurance for the
premises within which alcoholic liquor is sold in a minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence. The dram shop insurance coverage shall name the
Village and its elected and appointed officers, agents, employees, and
officials as additional insured parties.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.051 RESPONSIBLE ALCOHOL SERVICE TRAINING.
   (A)   Responsible alcohol service training required. Each manager of a local
liquor licensee, and each employee of a local liquor licensee who will be
engaged in selling, mixing, preparing, serving or delivering alcoholic liquor
to customers, guests or patrons for consumption on or off the licensed
premises, shall, within ten days after the manager or employee begins
employment with the local liquor licensee, successfully complete a BASSET
program.
   (B)   Proof of training. Each local liquor licensee shall maintain on the
licensed premises proof of completion by each manager and employee of the local
liquor licensee of the training required pursuant to this §
116.051, in a manner that will allow inspection, upon demand, by any full-time,
part-time, or auxiliary Village police officer or by any designee of either the
State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission or the Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (C)   Restrictions on sales by untrained personnel.
      (1)   No person shall sell, mix, prepare, serve, or deliver alcoholic
liquor in the village, for consumption on a licensed premises, unless that
person has successfully completed a BASSET program, as required pursuant to
division (A) of this section; except that a person may sell, mix, prepare,
serve, or deliver alcoholic beverages: (a) within ten days after that person
begins employment with the licensee; and (b) under the direct supervision of a
manager or employee of the local liquor licensee that has successfully
completed a BASSET program.
      (2)   No local liquor licensee shall sell, serve, or deliver any
alcoholic liquor at any time at which there is not physically present on the
licensed premises a manager or employee of the local liquor licensee who has
successfully completed a BASSET program as required pursuant to division (A) of
this section.
   (D)   Any person who attends a program provided by the Village Department of
Police for the responsible alcohol service training required pursuant to this §
116.051 shall pay a program fee in the amount set forth in the Annual Fee
Ordinance.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
SALES
§ 116.065 SALES RESTRICTED TO AUTHORIZED PREMISES.
   A local liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in or
from the premises described in the local liquor license, and only in the manner
therein authorized and in compliance with the terms thereof.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.066 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   All premises used for the retail sale or storage of alcoholic liquor shall
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance
with the provisions of the Village Code regulating the condition of premises
used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.067 SALES WITHIN RESTAURANTS.
   (A)   Size of bar and lounge areas limited. No Class A local liquor licensee
may maintain within the licensed premises a bar or lounge area containing more
than 10% of the total number of seats located within the entire licensed
premises.
   (B)   Sales to waiting patrons. Class A local liquor licensees may sell
alcoholic liquor to dining patrons waiting to be seated at tables for the
service of food, at a bar or within a lounge located within the licensed
premises.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.068 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to sell, or offer for sale, at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village except between the hours set forth below:
      (1)   Class A license: between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on
Sundays through Thursdays, and between 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays; except that the 12:00 a.m. closing hour shall be extended to 1:00
a.m. on New Year's Day.
      (2)   Class B license: between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
Sundays through Thursdays, and between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays.
      (3)   Class C license: between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on
Sundays through Thursdays, and between 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays; except that the 12:00 a.m. closing hour shall be extended to 1:00
a.m. on New Year's Day.
      (4)   Class D license: between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
Sundays through Thursdays, and between 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays.
      (5)   Class E license: between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
Sundays through Thursdays, and between 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays.
      (6)   Class F license: between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m.
      (7)   Class G license: between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on
Sundays through Thursdays, and between 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays; except that the 12:00 a.m. closing hour shall be extended to 1:00
a.m. on New Year's Day.
      (8)   Class H license: between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on
Sundays through Thursdays, and between 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays; except that the 12:00 a.m. closing hour shall be extended to 1:00
a.m. on New Year's Day.
      (9)   Class S rider: between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in
any residence district of the village, and between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. in all other areas within the village.
   (B)   Licensed premises may remain open for the sale of food or other
products during the hours within which the sale of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited pursuant to this § 116.068; except that no alcoholic liquor may be
sold to, or consumed by, the public during such hours.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017; Ord. 1321, passed 11-21-2022)
§ 116.069 SALES TO MINORS.
   (A)   Except as may be permitted pursuant to Chapter 116, no person shall
sell, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21
years or to any intoxicated person; except that it shall not be a violation of
this division (A) if the person who sells, gives, or delivers alcoholic liquor
to a person under the age of 21 years: (1) is shown, and relies upon, adequate
written evidence of the age and identity of the person to whom the alcoholic
liquor is sold, given, or delivered; and (2) does not know the written evidence
to be false or fraudulent.
   (B)   In the event that a local liquor licensee, or agent or employee
thereof, believes or reasonably should believe that a sale or delivery of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient is younger
than 30 years of age, he or she shall, before making such sale or delivery,
demand presentation of a valid, written, positive, government-issued
identification containing proof of age.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to misrepresent his or her age for the
purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the village
at which alcoholic liquor is sold.
   (D)   No person under the age of 21 years shall possess, present, or offer
false or fraudulent evidence of age or identity for the purpose of purchasing
or obtaining any alcoholic beverage.
   (E)   No person shall transfer, alter, or deface an identification card, use
the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false
information, for the purpose of purchasing or procuring alcoholic liquor.
   (F)   In any place in the village at which alcoholic liquor is sold, there
must be displayed at all times, in a prominent place, a printed card that shall
read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE
   YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF KENILWORTH
IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF
PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian who has legal custody
and control over a person who is under 18 years of age to permit such person to
violate any provision of this §
116.069.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017) Penalty, see §
116.090
§ 116.070 SALES BY MINORS.
   It is unlawful for any local liquor licensee, or manager, agent, employee,
or representative thereof, to permit any person less than 21 years of age to
sell, serve, prepare, mix, or deliver any alcoholic liquor in any licensed
premises; except that employees of on-premises local liquor licensees that are
at least 18 years of age may sell, serve, and deliver alcoholic liquor that has
been prepared or mixed by a manager or employee of the local liquor licensee
that is 21 years of age or older.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017) Penalty, see §
116.090
§ 116.071 CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY MINORS.
   The consumption, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages by any
person under 21 years of age is prohibited, except in accordance with and
pursuant to §
116.070 of this chapter or §
134.02(A) of this code.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017) Penalty, see §
116.090
§ 116.072 SALES ON CREDIT.
   Except for Class C local liquor licensees with respect to members, no local
liquor licensee shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person
on credit or on a pass book, or order on a store, or in exchange for any goods,
wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered; except that this
§
116.072 shall not be deemed or construed to prohibit payment by credit card.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017) Penalty, see §
116.090
§ 116.073 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   General requirements. No person, firm, corporation or limited
liability company shall sell, offer for sale, or dispense any alcoholic liquor
at a special event located in the village except in compliance with the
following:
      (1)   The seller shall obtain all liquor licenses required pursuant to
this chapter and the Liquor Control Act;
      (2)   No individual shall be permitted to purchase more than two
alcoholic beverages at any one time; and
      (3)   The quantity of alcoholic liquor within each beverage sold shall
not exceed 16 ounces of beer, six ounces of wine, or one and one-half ounces of
distilled spirits.
   (B)   Licenses. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the
contrary, no Class A, B, C, G, or H local liquor licensee shall be required to
obtain an additional local liquor license for the sale of alcoholic liquor at a
special event.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017; Ord. 1321, passed 11-21-2022) Penalty, see §
116.090
§ 116.074 SALES PROMOTIONS.
   (A)   All local liquor licensees shall maintain a schedule of prices for all
drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any local liquor licensee, or any employee or agent
thereof, to:
      (1)   Sell more than one drink of alcoholic liquor for the price of one
drink of alcoholic liquor;
      (2)   Sell, offer to sell, or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public or as provided in
division (C) of this section;
      (3)   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or
the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
      (4)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for the game or contest on the licensed premises; or
      (5)   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited pursuant to this division (B).
   (C)   Notwithstanding division (B) of this section, a local liquor licensee
may:
      (1)   Offer free food or entertainment at any time;
      (2)   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
      (3)   Sell or offer for sale a party package, but only if the licensee:
(a) offers food in the dedicated event space; (b) limits the party package to
no more than three hours; (c) distributes wristbands, lanyards, shirts, or any
other such wearable items to identify party package attendees so the attendees
may be granted access to the dedicated event space; and (d) excludes
individuals not participating in the party package from the dedicated event
space;
      (4)   Sell pitchers (orthe equivalent, including, without limitation,
buckets of bottled beer), carafes, or bottles of beer or wine which are
customarily sold in such quantities and delivered to two or more persons at one
time;
      (5)   Advertise events permitted under this division (C); or
      (6)   Discount any drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time
period, but only if: (a) the price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is not
changed during the time that it is discounted; (b) the period of time during
which any drink of alcoholic liquor is discounted does not exceed four hours
per day and 15 hours per week, which period of time is not required to be
consecutive and may be divided by the licensee in any manner; (c) the drink of
alcoholic liquor is not discounted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the
licensed premises' closing hour; and (d) notice of the discount of the drink of
alcoholic liquor during a specified time is posted on the licensed premises or
on the licensee's publicly available website at least seven days prior to the
specified time.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, it is
unlawful to sell or serve a bottle of any type of alcoholic liquor, other than
beer or wine, to two or more persons at one time for consumption on the
premises where sold, except at private functions not open to the public at
which ten or more persons are present.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017) Penalty, see §
116.090
§ 116.075 GIVEAWAYS AND TASTING.
   It is unlawful for any local liquor licensee to give away or otherwise
dispense free of charge, by the drink or in any other manner, within the
village, an alcoholic beverage with the intent of promoting the sale of an
alcoholic beverage, except that a Class B licensee may, without charge, give
away or otherwise dispense free of charge alcoholic liquor in small and limited
amounts for tasting purposes only, immediately prior and incident to the sale
of alcoholic liquor in the original package for consumption off the premises
pursuant to the terms of the local liquor license, and in accordance with the
following conditions and limitations:
   (A)   The tasting shall be attended and supervised at all times by a person
21 years old or older, who must be either a full-time or part-time employee of
the local liquor licensee or a representative of an alcoholic beverage
distributor;
   (B)   The licensee may not serve more than three samples of alcoholic liquor
to a consumer in one day. Each such sample may consist of no more than one
ounce of wine, two ounces of beer, or 1/4 ounce of distilled spirits;
   (C)   The sample shall be served in a container which shall be disposed of
following the sampling; and
   (D)   All product sampling conducted pursuant to this §
116.075 shall be performed in accordance with this section, Section 6-31 of the
Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/6-31), and any additional restrictions imposed
by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017) Penalty, see §
116.090
§ 116.076 "TO GO" COCKTAILS AND SINGLE SERVINGS OF WINE.
   Licensees holding a valid Class A Restaurant License are authorized to sell
and deliver "to go" cocktails and single servings of wine subject to and in
accordance with the 235 ILCS 5/6-28.8. Any Class A Restaurant licensee selling
or delivering cocktails and single servings of wine in accordance with this
section is considered to hold a combined on- premises/off-premises liquor
license for the express and limited purpose of selling or delivering cocktails
and single servings of wine in accordance with this section. In the event 235
ILCS 5/6-28.8 is repealed, this section is automatically repealed without
further action by the Village Board and, upon repeal, the additional privileges
granted by this section will automatically terminate.
(Ord. 1317, passed 10-24-2022)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 116.090 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Fines.
      (1)   Except where otherwise permitted or required by the Liquor Control
Act or this Code, any person who violates any provision of this chapter, who
makes a false statement in obtaining a local liquor license pursuant to this
chapter, or who violates a condition of a local liquor license granted pursuant
to this chapter, shall be fined not less than the amount set forth in the
Annual Fee Ordinance, plus costs.
      (2)   Any violation of this chapter by any officer, director, manager, or
employee of a local liquor licensee shall also be deemed and held to be the act
of the licensee, which local liquor licensee shall be punishable in the same
manner as if the violation had been committed by the licensee itself.
      (3)   Each day on or during which any person violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
      (4)   All fines and other monetary penalties imposed by the Liquor
Control Commissioner shall be remitted to the village and deposited in the
general corporate fund of the village.
   (B)   Suspension and revocation of local liquor license. The Liquor Control
Commissioner may, at its discretion and in accordance with the procedures set
forth in §
116.092 of this chapter, fine a local liquor licensee, or revoke or suspend any
local liquor license issued pursuant to this chapter, upon the occurrence of
any of the following:
      (1)   Violation of any provision of this chapter by a local liquor
licensee, or any officer, director, manager, representative, agent or other
employee thereof, while (a) engaged in activities in furtherance of the
business of the local liquor licensee, or (b) on the licensed premises;
      (2)   Violation of any federal, state, county, or Village statute,
ordinance, law, rule or regulation pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor;
      (3)   Failure to pay any license fee or any tax imposed by any unit of
government on alcoholic liquor or the sale thereof;
      (4)   Receipt by the Liquor Control Commissioner of a complaint of the
Illinois Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 6-3 of the Liquor Control
Act (235 ILCS 5/6-3), alleging that the local liquor license has committed a
violation of a tax statute administered by such Department;
      (5)   Issuance of a false statement in connection with obtaining a local
liquor license pursuant to this chapter;
      (6)   Violation of a condition of a local liquor license granted pursuant
to this chapter;
      (7)   Conviction of the applicant, or any officer, director, manager, or
shareholder thereof, of a felony pursuant to any federal or state law; or
      (8)   Any change regarding a local liquor licensee, or regarding any
existing or new partner, officer, director, manager, or shareholder thereof,
that causes the local liquor licensee to be ineligible for a local liquor
license pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   Additional penalties. In addition to, or in lieu of, the penalties
available pursuant to divisions (A) and (B) of this section, the Liquor Control
Commissioner shall have the right, but not the obligation, to:
      (1)   Require the local liquor licensee to reimburse the village for its
third-party costs, including attorneys' fees, incurred in connection with the
enforcement action before the Liquor Control Commissioner;
      (2)   Impose a penalty of community service and/or a penalty of
probation; and/or
      (3)   Require the local liquor licensee to reimburse the village for the
cost of publication, in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, of a
public safety announcement that advocates for the safe and responsible service,
possession, and consumption of alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.091 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Enforcement against violator. All alleged violations of this chapter
shall be adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   Enforcement against local liquor licensee. The Liquor Control
Commissioner may conduct a hearing in accordance with §
116.092 of this chapter regarding any action to be taken or penalty to be
imposed against a local liquor licensee for a violation of this chapter that
occurs at the licensed premises under the control of the local liquor licensee.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.092 LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER HEARINGS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
116.094 of this chapter, no local liquor license shall be revoked or suspended,
and no fines shall be assessed against a local liquor licensee pursuant to §
116.091(B) of this chapter, except after a public hearing held by the Liquor
Control Commissioner in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Written notice of the date, time, and place of, and the general
reasons for, the hearing shall be transmitted to the local liquor licensee at
the licensed premises by personal service, if possible, and/or by certified
United States mail, affording the local liquor licensee an opportunity to
appear and defend.
      (2)   No public hearing authorized by this §
116.092 may be conducted less than three days after receipt by the local liquor
licensee of the notice required pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section.
      (3)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall hold the hearing at the date,
time and place set forth in the notice, and shall give the licensee an
opportunity to be heard.
   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner may, upon a reasonable belief that any
continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten
the welfare of the community, order a licensed premises closed for not more
than seven days, pending a hearing on the suspension or revocation of the local
liquor license: (1) upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for
such conclusion; and (2) without notice or hearing. Any order issued pursuant
to this division (B) shall include the notice of public hearing required
pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section. If the local liquor licensee is
also engaged in the conduct of another business on the licensed premises, the
order issued pursuant to this division (B) shall not be applicable to the other
business.
   (C)   Within 14 days after the public hearing, the Liquor Control
Commissioner shall issue a written order setting forth any penalties to be
assessed against or imposed upon the local liquor licensee, and the reasons
therefor. A copy of the written order shall be served upon the local liquor
licensee by personal service or by certified United States mail.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.093 APPEALS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Section 7-9 of the Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/7-9),
all appeals of orders or actions of the Liquor Control Commission shall be made
to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.
   (B)   Appeals to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission from an order or
action of the Liquor Control Commissioner shall be limited to a review of the
official record of the proceedings before the Liquor Control Commissioner. In
the event of such an appeal, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall file, or
cause to be filed, with the Illinois Liquor Control Commission a certified
official record, taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter, of the hearing before the Liquor Control Commissioner,
within five days after receipt of notice of such appeal and upon payment by the
appellant of the cost of the certified official record.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.094 AUTOMATIC REVOCATION.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, a local
liquor license shall be terminated, automatically and without a public hearing,
upon the conviction of the local liquor licensee, or any officer, director,
manager, partner, or shareholder thereof, by any court of law of a willful
violation of any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 116.095 FORFEITURE OF FEES.
   Upon revocation of a local liquor license by the Liquor Control Commissioner
pursuant to this chapter, all fees paid by the local liquor licensee pursuant
to this chapter shall be forfeited.
(Ord. 1191, passed 3-20-2017)
CHAPTER 117: JUNK DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND STORES
Section
Junk Dealers
   
117.01   Junk store or yard prohibited
   
117.02   Itinerant junk dealers; license; fee
   117.03 through 117.14   Reserved
Pawnbrokers
   
117.15   License required
   
117.16   License application; contents; investigation
   
117.17   License fee
   
117.18   License revocation
   
117.19   Record to be kept
   
117.20   Weapons
   
117.21   Minors
   
117.22   Report to police of stolen goods
   
117.23   When secondhand dealer’s license required to conduct business of
pawnbroker
   117.24 through 117.34   Reserved
Secondhand Stores
   
117.35   License required; application; investigation
   
117.36   License fee
   
117.37   Pawnbroker license, when required
   
117.38   Records to be kept
JUNK DEALERS
§ 117.01 JUNK STORE OR YARD PROHIBITED.
   No person shall locate, build, construct, operate or maintain any shop,
store, yard or place in the village in or upon which rags, old rope, paper,
bags, metals, bottles, automobiles, trucks, vehicles or similar articles are
placed or stored, sold or dealt in, except in an area in which the shop, store,
yard or place, the placing, storage or dealing in those articles is expressly
permitted under the zoning regulations of the village, or without first
obtaining a special permit from the Village Board upon the terms and conditions
as it may require.
(1959 Code, § 19-1)
§ 117.02 ITINERANT JUNK DEALERS; LICENSE; FEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, sell or deal in junk, old
rags, paper, bags, metals, bottles, automobiles, trucks or vehicles to be
dismantled, or other similar articles, without first obtaining a license
therefor, for which the fee shall be established in the annual fee ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 19-2)
§§ 117.03 THROUGH 117.14 RESERVED.
PAWNBROKERS
§ 117.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to conduct or operate the business of a
pawnbroker in the village without obtaining a license therefor.
(1959 Code, § 25-1)
§ 117.16 LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENTS; INVESTIGATION.
   The application for a pawnbroker’s license shall be made to the Village
Manager, and shall state the residence address of the applicant and the number
of employees intended to be engaged. The Village Manager shall refer the
application to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police or a member of the
Police Department designated by him or her shall investigate each applicant.
The Chief of Police shall make a recommendation as to whether the license shall
issue and no license shall issue unless he or she recommends it. No license
shall be issued to a person who is not of good character, nor to any person who
has been convicted of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery.
(1959 Code, § 25-2)
§ 117.17 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for a pawnbroker’s license shall be established in the annual
fee ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 25-3)
§ 117.18 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Any pawnbroker’s license may be revoked by the President for any violation
of any provision of this subchapter.
(1959 Code, § 25-4)
§ 117.19 RECORD TO BE KEPT.
   Every pawnbroker doing business in the village shall keep a record of every
article pledged with him or her or sold to him or her, stating the name and
address of the person from whom the purchase was obtained, an accurate
description of the article, the time of the purchase or pledge, and the amount
paid therefor. This record shall be open to inspection by any police officer at
any time.
(1959 Code, § 25-5)
§ 117.20 WEAPONS.
   No pawnbroker shall receive or have in his or her possession as a pledge or
purchase, any revolver, pistol, blackjack, machine gun or sawed-off shotgun.
(1959 Code, § 25-6)
§ 117.21 MINORS.
   No pawnbroker’s license shall be issued to any person under the age of 21
years. No pawnbroker shall employ a minor to assist him or her in his or her
business, neither shall he or she have any business dealings as pawnbroker with
any minor, except with the written consent of the parent or guardian of the
minor to the particular transaction.
(1959 Code, § 25-7)
§ 117.22 REPORT TO POLICE OF STOLEN GOODS.
   It is the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article
pledged with him or her or which it is sought to pledge with him or her if he
or she has reason to believe that the article was stolen.
(1959 Code, § 25-8)
§ 117.23 WHEN SECONDHAND DEALER’S LICENSE REQUIRED TO CONDUCT BUSINESS OF
PAWNBROKER.
   No pawnbroker shall conduct the business of secondhand dealer without
obtaining the license required for the dealer in addition to his or her
pawnbroker’s license.
(1959 Code, § 25-9)
§§ 117.24 THROUGH 117.34 RESERVED.
SECONDHAND STORES
§ 117.35 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate or conduct a secondhand store in
the village without obtaining a license therefor. Application for the license
shall be made to the Village Manager and shall be by him or her referred to the
Chief of Police, who shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the
applicant. No license shall be issued to any person who is not of good moral
character, nor to any person who has been convicted of burglary, robbery or
receiving stolen goods, nor shall any license issue without a recommendation by
the Chief of Police as to whether the license shall be issued.
(1959 Code, § 29-1)
§ 117.36 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee for a secondhand store shall be established in the
annual fee ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 29-2)
§ 117.37 PAWNBROKER LICENSE, WHEN REQUIRED.
   No person operating a secondhand store shall do business as a pawnbroker
without having obtained a pawnbroker’s license in addition to the secondhand
dealer’s license required.
(1959 Code, § 29-3)
§ 117.38 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   Every person operating a secondhand store shall keep a record of every
article purchased by him or her, showing the name and address of the person
from whom the purchase was made, an accurate description of the article, the
time of purchase and the price paid therefor, and the record shall be open to
inspection by any police officer at any time.
(1959 Code, § 29-4)
CHAPTER 118: VACANT GROUND FLOOR STOREFRONTS
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Vacant ground floor premises window screening
   
118.03   Vacant ground floor premises storefront maintenance
 
   
118.99   Penalty
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROUND FLOOR. Any occupiable floor of a building that is located less than
one story above, or less than one story below, grade, and for which the top of
the floor is within 24 vertical inches of the average grade of the adjoining
sidewalk.
   PREMISES. Any building or separately owned, leased, or occupied space of a
building.
   STOREFRONT. Any façade of a ground floor premises having one or more
storefront windows.
   STOREFRONT WINDOW. Any window of any ground floor premises that permits an
unobstructed public view into the interior of that ground floor premises from
any immediately adjacent street, sidewalk, or right-of-way.
   VACANT. The state of not being occupied by a regularly operating business,
including the state of undergoing interior renovation.
   WINDOW SCREENING. A display made of film, vinyl, polymat, canvas, or brown
heavy duty paper and that is placed in a window or window area of a vacant
storefront.
(Ord. 1240, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 118.02 VACANT GROUND FLOOR PREMISES WINDOW SCREENING.
   (A)   Window screening required. Any vacant, ground floor premises that is
located within the B Business District, must, not more than 15 business days
after the date on which the ground floor premises first becomes vacant, contain
window screening in each of the storefront windows, if any, of that ground
floor premises. Each window screening must fully cover not less than 80% of
each storefront window of that ground floor premises so as to obscure a direct
public view of the vacant interior of that ground floor premises.
   (B)   Signage.
      (1)   A real estate sign that complies with the requirements of §
153.049(B)(1)(i) of this code may be placed in a storefront window along with
the window screening required pursuant to this section.
      (2)   Short-term temporary commercial message window signs or short-term
temporary commercial window display signs (as those terms are defined in
Chapter 153 of this code) may be used to display “Opening Soon” or similar
information in compliance with §
153.049(B)(2)(c) and (d) of this code.
   (C)   Content of window screening. All window screening placed in a vacant
ground floor premises storefront pursuant to this section shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this chapter, this code, and the following additional
restrictions:
      (1)   The window screening may consist of graphic elements, words, or
letters subject to the written approval of the Building Commissioner; and
      (2)   The window screening must not contain any matter, in writing or in
a depiction, that, when considered as a whole, predominantly appeals to
prurient interests.
   (D)   Responsibility for compliance. Any person owning, leasing,
maintaining, or in possession or control of any vacant, ground floor premises
located within the village, or any owner of the lot upon which the vacant,
ground floor premises is located, is and will be responsible for adherence to
the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 1240, passed 4-15-2019) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.03 VACANT GROUND FLOOR PREMISES STOREFRONT MAINTENANCE.
   Any vacant, ground floor premises that is located within the B Business
District, must, in addition to the requirements set forth in §
118.02 of this chapter, if applicable, be maintained in good condition, kept
neat, clean, attractive, and lighted, as required by this code.
(Ord. 1240, passed 4-15-2019) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 1240, passed 4-15-2019)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
      
133.   FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS
      
134.   MINORS
      
135.   NUISANCES
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Assault and battery
   
130.02   Disorderly conduct
   
130.03   Disturbing assemblies
   
130.04   False alarms
   
130.05   Impersonating an officer
   
130.06   Interfering with village officers
   
130.07   Unlawful assemblies
   
130.08   Loafing at depots and the like
   
130.09   Spitting on streets, sidewalks, public buildings and the like
   
130.10   Drunkenness
   
130.11   Indecent conduct or exposure
   130.12 through 130.24   Reserved
Heating of Multiple Dwellings
   
130.25   Duty of person owning or controlling to heat; required temperature
   
130.26   Written notice of complaint
   
130.27   Failure to furnish heat in case of breakdowns, strikes and the like
not deemed offense; exception; notice by registered mail
   
130.28   Method of determining temperature; authority of Health Officer or
agent
   
130.29   Duty of person owning or controlling to permit inspections
   
130.30   Enforcement of subchapter
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit assault and battery or to fight in
any street, alley or public place in the village.
(1959 Code, § 24-1)
§ 130.02 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct or of
any conduct which shall tend to a breach of the peace in the village.
   (B)   The causing or making of any unnecessary loud noise and shouting or
yelling is considered disorderly conduct.
(1959 Code, §§ 24-5, 27-10)
§ 130.03 DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES.
   It is unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or gathering
in the village.
(1959 Code, § 24-6)
§ 130.04 FALSE ALARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to start or spread any false alarm
of fire in the village.
(1959 Code, § 24-8)
§ 130.05 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person to impersonate without lawful authority any
village officer or employee.
(1959 Code, § 24-13)
§ 130.06 INTERFERING WITH VILLAGE OFFICERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or resist any
officer or employee of the village while engaged in the duties of his or her
office or employment.
(1959 Code, § 24-19)
§ 130.07 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   It is unlawful for any person to collect, gather or be a member of any
disorderly crowd, or any crowd gathered together for any unlawful purpose in
the village.
(1959 Code, § 24-29)
§ 130.08 LOAFING AT DEPOTS AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall obstruct or encumber any depot, railroad platform, street
corner or other public place in the village by loafing or lounging in or about
the same, after being directed to move on by any police officer.
(1959 Code, § 27-8)
§ 130.09 SPITTING ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND THE LIKE.
   It is unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate on any public street,
sidewalk or other public way in the village, or on the floor or wall of any
store, assembly hall or other place used or frequented by the public or in any
public conveyance.
(1959 Code, § 16-7)
§ 130.10 DRUNKENNESS.
   It is unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition in any
street, alley or public place in the village.
(1959 Code, § 24-7)
§ 130.11 INDECENT CONDUCT OR EXPOSURE.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit any indecent or immoral act in any
street, alley or public place in the village, or to appear in any street, alley
or public place not properly and decently clothed.
(1959 Code, § 24-14)
§§ 130.12 THROUGH 130.24 RESERVED.
HEATING OF MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
§ 130.25 DUTY OF PERSON OWNING OR CONTROLLING TO HEAT; REQUIRED TEMPERATURE.
   It is the duty of every person owning or controlling any dwelling in which
heat is furnished from a heating plant used in common for the purpose of
heating the various rooms therein, to furnish heat to the rooms from September
15 of each year to June 1 of the succeeding year so that the occupants thereof
may secure, without undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere with
proper sanitary conditions, a minimum temperature of 65°F at 6:30 a.m., 65°F at
7:30 a.m. and 68°F at 8:30 a.m. and thereafter until 10:30 p.m. average
throughout the room.
(1959 Code, § 16-35)
§ 130.26 WRITTEN NOTICE OF COMPLAINT.
   Written notice of complaint concerning lack of heat as required by this
subchapter shall first be given to the person owning or controlling the
dwelling, by registered mail, before a violation of this subchapter is deemed
to exist.
(1959 Code, § 16-36)
§ 130.27 FAILURE TO FURNISH HEAT IN CASE OF BREAKDOWNS, STRIKES AND THE LIKE
NOT DEEMED OFFENSE; EXCEPTION; NOTICE BY REGISTERED MAIL.
   The failure to furnish heat as required by this subchapter shall not
constitute an offense where it is due to a breakdown of the heating plant, if
diligence is used to have the plant repaired, unless the breakdown has been
caused by the violation of an existing provision of this code or other
ordinance of the village relating to the operation of heating plants, nor where
it is due to strikes, a general shortage of fuel or any act of the tenant who
makes the complaint, or to any cause beyond the control of the person owning or
controlling the dwelling, unless written notice of the failure to furnish the
heat hereby required is first given to the owner or person in control of the
dwelling, or his or her agent, by registered mail, and the temperature readings
hereinafter provided for are made after the delivery of the registered letter
to the addresses thereof.
(1959 Code, § 16-37)
§ 130.28 METHOD OF DETERMINING TEMPERATURE; AUTHORITY OF HEALTH OFFICER OR
AGENT.
   For the purpose of determining whether or not the temperature in any
dwelling is in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, temperature
readings shall be made only by the Building Commissioner, or some person duly
authorized by him or her, by means of a standard Fahrenheit thermometer
approved by the Building Commissioner in the following manner. If the building
is a multiple dwelling, the temperature reading shall be taken in not less than
two separate rooms of the dwelling which the tenant is entitled to occupy, or
if the dwelling consists of only one room, then in two opposite parts of that
room as near the extremes as practicable, the thermometer to be placed at a
point not less than four feet nor more than six feet above the floor of the
room and at least four feet away from any door or window leading to the outer
air.
(1959 Code, § 16-38)
§ 130.29 DUTY OF PERSON OWNING OR CONTROLLING TO PERMIT INSPECTIONS.
   It is the duty of every person owning or controlling any multiple dwelling
to allow the Building Commissioner, or any person duly authorized by him or
her, access to any and all parts of the buildings covered by this subchapter
between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. for the purpose of determining
whether the provisions of this subchapter are being complied with.
(1959 Code, § 16-39)
§ 130.30 ENFORCEMENT OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The Building Commissioner, or any person duly authorized by him or her, is
hereby designated and authorized to enforce this subchapter.
(1959 Code, § 16-40)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Injuring property
   
131.02   Obstructing exits or stairways
   
131.03   Throwing missiles, stones and the like
   
131.04   Destroying or defacing property
   
131.05   Posting bills and notices
   
131.06   Throwing glass on streets or public places
   
131.07   Burning leaves and the like in streets and alleys
   
131.08   Distribution of handbills
   131.09 through 131.19   Reserved
Trespass to Property
   
131.20   Definitions
   
131.21   Trespass prohibited
   
131.22   Trespass and theft
   
131.23   Liability of parent or legal guardian of minor offender
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 INJURING PROPERTY.
   Any person who unlawfully defaces or interferes with any property belonging
to another shall be, upon conviction, fined as provided in §
131.99 of this code.
(1959 Code, § 24-18)
§ 131.02 OBSTRUCTING EXITS OR STAIRWAYS.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any
stairway, aisle, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel,
school, church, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any
building used by two or more tenants or families in the village, in a manner as
to interfere with the free use of the stairway, aisle, corridor or exit.
(1959 Code, § 24-24)
§ 131.03 THROWING MISSILES, STONES AND THE LIKE.
   It is unlawful for any person to cast, throw or propel any missile from, on
or across any street, alley or public place in the village.
(1959 Code, § 24-28)
§ 131.04 DESTROYING OR DEFACING PROPERTY.
   No person shall negligently or willfully injure, destroy or deface any
bridge, crossing, sidewalk, lamp, lamp post or other property of another.
(1959 Code, § 27-1)
§ 131.05 POSTING BILLS AND NOTICES.
   No person shall stick, paste, put up or place, upon or against any building,
structure, fence, wall, lamp post, tree or other place, any handbill, show-
bill, picture or representation unless by the consent of the owner or occupant
of the building, structure, fence, wall, lamp post, tree or place.
(1959 Code, § 27-4)
§ 131.06 THROWING GLASS ON STREETS OR PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall throw, cast, lay or place upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place within the village any glass bottle, window glass or any other
articles made of or containing glass, nor any tacks, nails or other sharp
substances; and in case of the accidental breaking of any glass upon any
street, sidewalk or public place, the owner or person in charge of the glass,
or the person responsible for the breakage, shall at once remove the same from
the street, sidewalk or public place.
(1959 Code, § 27-5)
§ 131.07 BURNING LEAVES AND THE LIKE IN STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   No person shall burn any leaves or materials of any kind in any street or
alley. The burning may be summarily abated by any officer of the village and
the failure of any person to cease and desist from burning shall make the
person guilty of maintaining a nuisance, and the abatement may be in addition
to the fine hereinafter provided.
(1959 Code, § 27-6)
§ 131.08 DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS.
   No person or persons shall distribute, cast, throw or place in, upon or
along any of the streets, alleys or public places in the village any samples,
handbills, pamphlets, circulars, books or advertisements for the purpose or
with the intent of advertising or making known in a general or promiscuous
manner, any business, occupation, service, profession, medical treatment,
medicine or anything whatsoever.
(1959 Code, § 27-9)
§§ 131.09 THROUGH 131.19 RESERVED.
TRESPASS TO PROPERTY
§ 131.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by
a Circuit Court of this state, but does not include a person appointed
guardian, or given custody of a minor, under the State Juvenile Court Act.
   MINOR. A person who has attained 11 years of age but who has not yet reached
18 years of age.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY. Any real estate, including improvements thereon, and tangible
personalty.
(Ord. 640, passed 8-9-1976)
§ 131.21 TRESPASS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit a
trespass within the village upon either public or private property.
   (B)   Without constituting any limitation upon subsection (A) above, any of
the following acts by any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed included
among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of
subsection (A) above, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any
time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or violations
of this section, the aforesaid enumerated acts to included, being as follows:
      (1)   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another,
including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or entry in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any
owner or occupant thereof;
      (2)   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case
of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or
occupant thereof; or
      (3)   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made
without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control
thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft
after being requested to leave by the person having the right.
(Ord. 589, passed 7-13-1970; Ord. 690, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 131.22 TRESPASS AND THEFT.
   No person shall knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control
over any motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft, or any part thereof,
of another person without his or her consent.
(Ord. 640, passed 8-9-1976)
§ 131.23 LIABILITY OF PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN OF MINOR OFFENDER.
   The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant, who resides with the
parent or legal guardian, shall be liable for any fine or condition of
restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for violation of this
subchapter, provided that the minor has not paid the fine or made restitution
or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further provided that
the parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear
in the original cause and all proceedings thereafter as provided by law.
(Ord. 640, passed 8-9-1976)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 132: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
132.01   Duty of citizens to assist police
   
132.02   Impersonating an officer
   
132.03   Persons at fire to assist
   
132.04   Driving over unprotected hose
   
132.05   Tampering with fire hydrant
   
132.06   False alarms
   132.07 through 132.19   Reserved
Gambling, Gambling Devices and Games of Chance
   
132.20   Gambling prohibited
   
132.21   Keeping gambling houses or devices prohibited
   132.22 through 132.49   Reserved
Possession of Cannabis
   
132.50   Possession, use and sale of cannabis
   
132.51   Definitions
 
   
132.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 132.01 DUTY OF CITIZENS TO ASSIST POLICE.
   It shall be the duty of every person, when called upon by any member of the
Police Department, to promptly aid and assist him or her in the execution of
his or her police duties, but no police officer shall call for assistance
except in case of emergency and necessity.
(1959 Code, § 2a-11)
§ 132.02 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself or herself
to be a member of the Police Department or conservator of the peace, or
maliciously or with intent to deceive, use or imitate any of the signals of the
Police Department, or to wear any uniform or part thereof which would be
generally accepted as a police uniform; and it shall be unlawful for any person
to use, wear or exhibit a star, shield or other similar device or insignia
usually used or worn by members of the Police Department or conservators of the
peace, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or law.
(1959 Code, § 2a-12)
§ 132.03 PERSONS AT FIRE TO ASSIST.
   It shall be the duty of any and all persons who shall be present at a fire
to obey the lawful orders of the Fire Marshal and authorized officers, and to
aid in extinguishing fires and in the removal and protection of property when
directed so to do by any officer.
(1959 Code, § 2a-20)
§ 132.04 DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED HOSE.
   No vehicle of any kind shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when the hose has been laid on any street, alley or right-of-way
under the direction of the Fire Department, without the consent of the Fire
Marshal or officer in charge of the hose.
(1959 Code, § 2a-21)
§ 132.05 TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANT.
   No person other than an employee of the village, or duly authorized by the
Fire Marshal or Village Board, shall open or attempt to open, or tamper with,
or obstruct the approach to any fire hydrant, and except in case of public
emergency, shall use any device other than a proper hydrant wrench to open any
fire hydrant.
(1959 Code, § 2a-22)
§ 132.06 FALSE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to call the Fire Department except in
case of fire, asphyxiation, drowning or other similar emergency involving the
safety of life or property.
(1959 Code, § 2a-24)
§§ 132.07 THROUGH 132.19 RESERVED.
GAMBLING, GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 132.20 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person in the village to play for
money or other valuable thing at any game with cards, dice, chips or checks, or
at billiards or pool, bagatelle, pigeon hole tables, video gaming terminals or
any other electronic gambling device or with any other article, instrument or
thing whatsoever which may be used for the purpose of playing or betting upon
or winning or losing money or anything of value, or to bet on any game others
may be playing.
   (B)   Definition. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. The meaning assigned to it in § 5 of the Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
(1959 Code, § 24-9) (Ord. 1026, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 132.21 KEEPING GAMBLING HOUSES OR DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep a place of gambling in the village by
himself, herself, or his or her agent, or to procure or permit any person to
frequent or to come together to play for money or other valuable thing at any
game at any place in the village. It is also unlawful for any person to possess
or use in the village any table, device, handbook, bagatelle, pigeon hole
tables, video gaming terminals or any other electronic gambling device or
paraphernalia or other apparatus for playing at any game or sport for money or
any valuable thing, or keep or allow to be used or rented any table, device,
handbook, bagatelle, pigeon hole table, video gaming terminals or any other
electronic gambling device or paraphernalia or other apparatus for playing at
any game or sport for money or other valuable thing or to keep or allow to be
used or rented any place for gambling purposes.
(1959 Code, § 24-10) (Ord. 1026, passed 9-14-2009)
§§ 132.22 THROUGH 132.49 RESERVED.
POSSESSION OF CANNABIS
§ 132.50 POSSESSION, USE, AND SALE OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   Prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the
village to possess, consume, use, purchase, obtain, transport, or sell
cannabis, except in compliance with the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410
ILCS 705/1 et seq. or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act,
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person knowingly to
use or consume, or allow someone else to use or consume, cannabis on the
premises of any privately owned commercial facility that is open to members of
the general public, including, without limitation, retail stores, restaurants,
taverns, theatres, and other recreational facilities, except as otherwise
specifically permitted pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act and the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
(Ord. 656, passed 1-8-1979; Ord. 824, passed 7-10-1995; Ord. 1255, passed 12-
16-2019)
§ 132.51 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant,
its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivatives,whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, “cannabis” does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt derivative mixture or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it) , fiber,
oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. “Cannabis” does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act, 505 ILCS 89/1 et seq. “Cannabis” also
means concentrate and cannabis- infused products.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
(Ord. 656, passed 1-8-1979; Ord. 1255, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 133: FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS
Section
General Provisions
   
133.01   Unlawful to discharge firearms
   
133.02   Unlawful to carry concealed weapons without license; fee
   
133.03   Unlawful to sell firearms
   133.04 through 133.19   Reserved
Fireworks
   
133.20   Definition
   
133.21   Unlawful to sell, discharge or explode fireworks
 
   
133.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 133.01 UNLAWFUL TO DISCHARGE FIREARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged within
the village, any gun, pistol or other firearms, or to use, discharge or operate
any air gun or sling shot; provided, however that this section shall not apply
to duly constituted police officers in the performance of their duties or to
persons at the direction and under the supervision of those officers, or to a
citizen when lawfully defending his or her person or property.
(1959 Code, § 11a-1)
§ 133.02 UNLAWFUL TO CARRY CONCEALED WEAPONS WITHOUT LICENSE; FEE.
   Unless otherwise provided by state law, it is unlawful for any person to
carry or wear within the village, under his or her clothing or concealed about
his or her person, any pistol, revolver or firearms of any kind, or any sling
shot, knuckles of lead, brass or other metal, or any bowie knife, dirk, razor,
dagger or other dangerous or deadly weapon.
(1959 Code, § 11a-2)
§ 133.03 UNLAWFUL TO SELL FIREARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person, including any corporation, partnership or
other business entity, to sell, barter, rent or loan any firearm within the
boundaries of the village, except for those quality hunting weapons which are
sold in stores whose primary purpose is the sale of sporting goods.
(Ord. 662, passed 7-9-1979)
§§ 133.04 THROUGH 133.19 RESERVED.
FIREWORKS
§ 133.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREWORKS. Any explosive composition or substance or combination of
substances or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion,
deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in
which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath
to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles,
sparklers, bombs or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks
containing any explosive substance producing visual effects; provided, however
that the term shall not include toy pistols, toy guns or other devices in which
paper caps containing less than twenty-five hundredths grams of explosive
compounds are used, or photographic flash light powders.
(1959 Code, § 11a-5)
§ 133.21 UNLAWFUL TO SELL, DISCHARGE OR EXPLODE FIREWORKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at
retail or to use, discharge or explode any fireworks within the village;
provided, however that nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as
prohibiting the use of signals or fuses necessary for the safe operation of
railroads or other instrumentalities of transportation, and provided further
that the public display of fireworks and explosives when handled by a competent
individual and where the display and discharge is of a character and so
located, discharged or fired, as not to be hazardous to property or to endanger
any person or persons, may be made upon a permit applied for and issued as
follows. Application for permits for public displays shall be made in writing
by not less than three individuals, filed with the Chief of Police not less
than 15 days in advance of the date of the proposed display, and shall be acted
upon by the Fire Marshal or persons designated by the President to act in his
or her place, with in 48 hours after the application is made, and if approved
by the Marshal or designated persons, permit for the displays may be issued by
the Village Clerk. A permit to hold a supervised public display shall authorize
the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for the approved
display only and the permit shall not be transferable.
(1959 Code, § 11a-6)
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 134: MINORS
Section
   
134.01   Curfew for minors
   
134.02   Unlawful possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons
underage
 
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at
or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the
following times unless one of the exceptions listed in subsection (B) below
applies:
      (1)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
      (2)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
      (3)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m.
on the following day.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person less than 17 years of age
who is:
      (1)   Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible companion at least 18 years of age approved by a parent or legal
guardian;
      (2)   Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state
authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform;
      (3)   Attending or traveling directly to or from an official school,
religious or civic activity;
      (4)   Attending or traveling directly to or from any assembly activity
for which a permit has been lawfully issued;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or
property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage; or
      (6)   Traveling between states or internationally from a location outside
of the state to another location outside of state.
   (C)   The police officer shall not take any enforcement action under this
section unless the police officer reasonably believes that a violation of this
section has occurred and that no exception listed in subsection (B) above is
applicable.
   (D)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate this
section.
(Ord. 614, passed 6-11-1973; Ord. 732, passed 9-8-1986; Ord. 917, passed 4-12-
2004)
§ 134.02 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY PERSONS
UNDERAGE.
   (A)   Unlawful possession.
      (1)   No person under the age of 21 years shall consume, purchase or
accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession within the village. The possession and dispensing or consumption by
a person under the age of 21 years of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony or the consumption by a person under the age of
21 years under the direct supervision and approval of a parent or guardian of
the underage person in the privacy of the parent’s or guardian’s home is not a
violation of this section.
      (2)   No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor
shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of
21 years, except as allowed under paragraph(A)(1) above.
   (B)   Responsibility of parent, owner or occupant of any premises. It shall
be unlawful for any person who has ownership or control of any premises located
within the village to knowingly suffer, permit or allow any person(s) under the
age of 21 years to be present on the premises in possession of any alcoholic
liquor or to consume any alcoholic liquor, except as allowed under paragraph
division (A)(1) above, or in possession of any cannabis or controlled substance
prohibited by §
132.50 or state statute. A person who owns or controls a premises is deemed to
have permitted the premises to be used in violation of this section if he or
she knowingly authorized, enabled or permitted the use to occur by failing to
control access to either the premises or the alcoholic liquor maintained
therein with knowledge, or with reason to know, that the use would occur or was
reasonably likely to occur.
(Ord. 697, passed 7-11-1983; Ord. 824, passed 7-10-1995)
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 135: NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances Generally
   
135.01   Public nuisances prohibited
   
135.02   Public nuisances defined
   
135.03   Weeds
   
135.04   Dutch elm disease
   
135.05   Nuisances; authority to abate
   135.06 through 135.19   Reserved
Advertising
   
135.20   Littering streets with handbills and the like prohibited
   
135.21   Placing circulars, handbills and the like relating to commercial
enterprises in or upon automobiles prohibited; declared nuisance
   
135.22   Advertising unlawful business or article
   
135.23   Injuring lawful advertisements
 
   
135.99   Penalty
NUISANCES GENERALLY
§ 135.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to
exist any public nuisance within the village or within the police jurisdiction
of the village.
(Ord. 766, passed 9-10-1990)
§ 135.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
   (A)   Generally. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or
use of property which shall continue for the length of time as to:
      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public;
      (2)   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property;
      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
      (4)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way.
   (B)   Public nuisances affecting health. The following acts, omissions,
places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances
coming within the definition of subsection (A) above:
      (1)   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink
sold or offered for sale to the public;
      (2)   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;
      (3)   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish
or rotting lumber; furniture, bedding or upholstered items or packing material,
household appliances, tires or scrap metal left outdoors; abandoned automobiles
or machinery; any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease- carrying
insects, rats or other vermin may breed; or accumulations of any material that
may constitute a fire hazard;
      (4)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply;
      (5)   Garbage cans which are not fly-tight;
      (6)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases,
fly ash or industrial dust within the village limits in quantities as to
endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or
cause substantial injury to property; or any act in violation of the State
Environmental Protection Act;
      (7)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by sewage or industrial wastes or other substances;
      (8)   Any use of property, substances or things within the village
emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisesome, nauseous, noxious or
disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical
senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the
health of any appreciable number of persons within the village;
      (9)   All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public
use;
      (10)   Any barn, stable or shed used for keeping animals other than
household pets;
      (11)   Any obstruction in or across any water course, drainage ditch or
ravine;
      (12)   Any open burning contrary to the regulations of the State
Pollution Control Board;
      (13)   The deposit of garbage, rubbish, junk or any offensive substance
on any street, sidewalk or public place or on any private property, except as
may be permitted by ordinance;
      (14)   The deposit or placement of abandoned or dismantled vehicles, and
appliances, furniture and other household effects (whether abandoned or held
for use, storage or repairs) on any street, sidewalk or public place or on any
private property unless located in an enclosed building, except for the
furniture and household effects as are intended or designed for outdoor use;
and
      (15)   To engage or permit any agent or person (other than employees and
independent contractors of the village and independent contractors of the state
or any agency thereof acting with express authorization of the Village Board of
Trustees) employed on premises owned or occupied in the village, to engage in
any business, occupation, work or activity, including the use of any machine,
tool or other apparatus, the use of which is attended with loud or unusual
noise, which disturbs the peace and quiet of any individual, family or
neighborhood, before the hour of 7:00 a.m. and after the hour of 6:00 p.m. on
any day Monday through Friday, before the hour of 9:00 a.m. and after the hour
of 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, or at any time on Sundays or on the following legal
holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. Engaging in the business, occupation, work
or activity on Sundays and these legal holidays, or between the hours herein
specified on week days, may be summarily abated by any officer of the village,
and the failure of any person to cease and desist from the disturbance of the
peace and quiet shall make the person or persons guilty of maintaining a
nuisance and of disorderly conduct. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply:
         (a)   In the event of a bona fide emergency to which a response is
required; or
         (b)   To any work ordered or required by the village.
   (C)   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be
public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but the enumeration shall
not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency
coming within the definition of subsection (A) above:
      (1)   All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling
houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling;
      (2)   All gambling devices and slot machines, excluding the state
lottery; and
      (3)   Any place or premises within the village where ordinances or state
laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly,
continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
   (D)   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public
nuisances affecting peace and safety, but the enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming
within the provisions of subsection (A) above:
      (1)   All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the
provisions of the ordinances of the village relating to materials and manner of
construction of buildings and structures;
      (2)   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport
to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices placed or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing;
      (3)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk;
      (4)   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than
eight feet above the surface thereof or less than ten feet above the surface of
a public street;
      (5)   All possession, use or display of fireworks except as provided by
the laws of the state and ordinances of the village;
      (6)   Any building or structure so old, dilapidated, out of repair or
otherwise in a condition as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
unfit for normal human use;
      (7)   Any project or work involving the demolition, construction,
structural alteration, repair, renovation or remodeling of any exterior feature
of any building in the village if for any reason no substantial progress is
made toward completion of the project or work during any period of 30
consecutive days;
      (8)   Any open or accessible, unguarded or unoccupied structure with
respect to which demolition, construction, structural alteration, repair,
renovation or remodeling is in progress, whether or not any substantial
progress towards completion thereof shall be made;
      (9)   Any accumulation of debris or waste materials attributable to the
demolition, construction, structural alteration, repair, renovation or
remodeling of any structure or any part of any structure, unless the debris or
waste materials are deposited in appropriate, secure containers for temporary
holding pending removal thereof;
      (10)   Any open or accessible, unguarded excavation, pit, hole or well
more than one foot in depth;
      (11)   Any open or accessible, unguarded basement, cellar, crawl space or
foundation structure;
      (12)   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung
less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground;
      (13)   All loud and discordant noises or vibrations of any kind;
      (14)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and
all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by ordinances of the
village or which, although made in accordance with the ordinances, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof has
been accomplished;
      (15)   All refrigerators, iceboxes and other appliances and furniture
left outdoors or otherwise accessible to small children and from which the
doors and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a
device for opening from the inside by pushing only with the strength of a small
child;
      (16)   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes
large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the
streets or sidewalks;
      (17)   Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall, fence,
sidewalk, street or other private or public property without permission of the
owner thereof;
      (18)   Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition, or
which overhangs any roadway, or which overhangs any sidewalk less than eight
feet above the surface thereof;
      (19)   Any barbed wire fence or barbed wire railing fronting on any
street;
      (20)   Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire
hazard or will impair the extinguishing of any fire;
      (21)   The presence in any residential district of any hazardous
materials (excepting any hazardous materials of a kind and quantity customarily
used for household purposes) including any substance that is toxic, corrosive,
flammable, explosive, radioactive, infectious, carcinogenic, mutagenic or
otherwise hazardous or which contains petroleum hydrocarbons, polychlorinated
biphenols, mercury or lead, or which is intended for use as a pesticide or
herbicide, or the presence in any residential district of empty or spent
containers for any hazardous materials; and
      (22)   Any water discharge that is conveyed by any sump pump, downspout,
yard drain or gravity pipe and:
         (a)   Empties into or onto a parkway, sidewalk, drainage ditch, storm
sewer, sanitary sewer or other public property without approval from the
village; or
         (b)   Empties into or onto any public property in manner or volume
that creates standing water that remains for a period of more than 72 hours; or
         (c)   Empties into or onto any property in a manner or volume that
allows formation of ice of any thickness on any public property including, but
not limited to, sidewalks or paved roads.
      (23)   The use of any gasoline- powered leaf blower, whether backpack-
mounted, wheel-mounted, or handheld, which includes electric leaf blowers
connected to portable gasoline-powered electric generators:
         (a)   At all times from December 1 through March 31 and May 1 through
September 30;
         (b)   During the months of April, October, and November, before 8:00
a.m. and after 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and before 9:00 a.m. and after
5:00 p.m. on Saturdays, and at all times on Sundays and holidays; or
         (c)   That exceed 75 decibels when in use.
         (d)   Exemptions. This subsection (D)(23) shall not apply to the
following:
               1.   The use of electric-powered leaf blowers plugged into
permanently installed electrical outlets attached to a permanent structure such
as a residential single family or multi-family dwelling or battery- powered
units; provided, however, the electric- powered leaf blowers do not exceed 75
decibels when in use.
               2.   In the event of a storm, emergency, or special project,
upon determining that it is in the best interests of the safety and welfare of
the village to use gasoline-powered leaf blowers in cleanup or restoration
activities, the Village Manager may waive the enforcement of the foregoing
restrictions.
      (24)   Any nuisance so defined by laws of the state or other provisions
of this code or ordinances of the village.
(Ord. 766, passed 9-10-1990; Ord. 801, passed 4-12-1993; Ord. 872, passed 6-12-
2000; Ord. 941, passed 7-12-2005; Ord. 1169, passed 3-28-2016; Ord. 1264,
passed 8-17-2020; Ord. 1353, passed 3-18-2024)
§ 135.03 WEEDS.
   (A)   Excessive growth. It shall be unlawful, and is declared a public
nuisance, for any owner, lessee or occupant or agent of any owner or occupant
having control of any lot or parcel of privately owned land situated in the
village to allow or maintain on any lot or parcel of privately owned land any
growth of noxious weeds or any growth of other weeds or grass to a height in
excess of seven inches, other than ornamental grasses that are customarily and
properly cultivated to grow to a height in excess of seven inches.
   (B)   Noxious weeds. For the purposes of this section, the term NOXIOUS
WEEDS includes the following: burdock, ragweed (giant), ragweed (common),
thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common milk weed, wild carrot, poison
ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambsquarter, wild lettuce, curled dock,
smartweeds (all varieties), poison hemlock and wild hemp, all other weeds
defined as noxious weeds by, or under authority of, the laws of the state and
all other weeds of a like kind.
   (C)   Duty to destroy or control. It shall be the duty of all owners and
occupants of privately owned land on which noxious weeds are growing to destroy
the same before they reach a seed-bearing stage and to prevent the weeds from
perpetuating themselves. It shall be the duty of all owners and occupants of
privately owned land on which weeds or grasses are growing to a height of more
than seven inches to cut the weeds and grasses to a height lower than seven
inches.
   (D)   Notice to owner; destruction by village. The Village Manager shall
notify, in writing, the owner, agent or occupant of any lands on which noxious
weeds are found growing, or on which other weeds or grasses are found growing
to a height of in excess of seven inches, of the fact of the growth. The notice
shall contain a statement of the methods of treating and eradicating the
noxious weeds or other weeds or grasses and a summary of the provisions of this
section. Failure of the Village Manager to give written notice shall not
constitute a defense to any action to enforce the payment of any cost or
penalty provided for violation of this section. In case any owner, agent or
occupant shall refuse or neglect to destroy any noxious weeds or cut other
weeds or grasses after written notice transmitted to the owner, agent or
occupant by the Village Manager, it shall be the duty of the Village Manager or
the Village Manager’s representative to enter upon the lands and to destroy the
noxious weeds or cut the other weeds or grasses, or cause the same to be
destroyed or cut.
   (E)   Removal by village; ownership unknown. In the case of property where
definite ownership is not known to the Village Manager and cannot be
established with reasonable effort, it shall be the duty of the Village Manager
to cause the destruction of noxious weeds or cut the other weeds or grasses
found upon the property in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (F)   Assessment of costs; lien for costs. Any expense incurred by the
village in destroying or cutting any weeds or grasses pursuant to this section
shall be paid by the owner of the land, and the village shall have a lien
against the land for the expense, which lien shall be enforced in the manner
provided by law for the enforcement thereof.
(Ord. 766, passed 9-10-1990; Ord. 930, passed 12-14-2004)
§ 135.04 DUTCH ELM DISEASE.
   (A)   Infected trees a nuisance. All species and varieties of elm trees
(trees of the genus Ulmus) infected with the fungus known as the Dutch elm
disease (Certostomella Ulmi) are declared to be a public nuisance.
   (B)   Breeding places for European elm bark beetle. All species and
varieties of elm trees that are dead or substantially dead and all dead elm
wood to which the bark is still attached, which, because of their condition may
serve as a breeding place for the European elm bark beetle (Scolytus
Multistriatus), are declared to be public nuisances.
   (C)   Duty of owner to remove and burn trees. It shall be unlawful for any
owner of any lot or land in the village to permit or maintain on any lot or
land, any elm tree or dead elm wood which, as provided in this section, is a
public nuisance, and the owner shall promptly remove and burn any elm tree or
dead elm wood under the direction of the Village Manager or the Village
Manager’s representative.
   (D)   Right of entry of village officers. To carry out the purposes of this
section and to implement the enforcement thereof, the Village Manager or the
Village Manager’s representative is empowered to enter upon any lot or land in
the village at all reasonable hours to inspect any elm trees or dead elm wood
situated thereon and the Village Manager or the Village Manager’s
representative may remove the specimens from any tree as are required for the
purposes of the laboratory analysis referred to in this section, or to
determine whether the tree, because it is dead or substantially dead, may serve
as a breeding place for the European elm bark beetle. It shall be unlawful for
any person to take any action to prevent the Village Manager, or his or her
representative, from entering on any lot or land in the village for the
inspection, or to interfere with the Village Manager or a representative in the
performance of any of his or her duties provided for under the provisions of
this section.
   (E)   Notice to owner to comply; action by village; assessment of costs. If,
on analysis of any elm tree by the Village Manager, it is determined that the
tree is a public nuisance as provided by subsection (A) above, or if the
Village Manager determines that any dead or substantially dead elm trees, or
dead elm wood is a public nuisance as provided by subsection (B) above, the
Village Manager shall cause to be served upon the person who is the owner of
the lot or land on which the tree or dead elm wood is located, a written notice
requiring the owner to comply with the provisions of this section. If the
person fails to remove and destroy the elm tree or dead elm wood within 15 days
after service of the notice, the Village Manager may proceed to remove and
destroy, or cause the removal and destruction of, the tree or dead elm wood and
assess the cost thereof against the owner of the lot or land, and the amount of
the cost shall be paid by the owner to the village.
   (F)   Lien for costs. The cost of removal and destruction of any elm tree or
dead elm wood as provided in subsection (E) above shall be a lien upon the real
estate affected, provided that notice is given as hereinafter described and
further provided that within 60 days after the cost and expense is incurred,
the village or the person performing the work under authority from the village
files a notice of lien conforming to the requirements of applicable laws of the
state. The cost of the removal of any elm tree or dead elm wood shall not be a
lien upon the real estate affected unless notice shall be personally served or
sent by registered mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the
general taxes for the last preceding year on the property and, if different,
the current owner of the property, with the notice to be delivered or sent not
less than 30 days prior to removal of the elm tree or trees or dead elm wood
thereon. The notice shall contain a summary of applicable laws of the state and
this section and identify the property by common address and the tree or trees
affected.
(Ord. 766, passed 9-10-1990; Ord. 801, passed 4-12-1993)
§ 135.05 NUISANCES; AUTHORITY TO ABATE.
   (a)   Generally. The Village Manager or any member of the Police Department
is authorized to abate any public nuisance existing in the village, whether or
not the nuisance is one specifically recognized as such by the provisions of
this code or any other ordinance of the village or laws of the state.
   (B)   Abatement. Whenever complaint is made to the Village Manager that a
public nuisance exists or has existed within the village, the Village Manager
shall cause the premises to be inspected and shall cause a report thereof to be
made. Except as otherwise provided in §§
135.03 and
135.04:
      (1)   If the inspecting officer or representative shall report that a
public nuisance exists on private property in the village or shall report
conditions that lead to the conclusion that a public nuisance exists on private
property in the village, and that there is great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Village Manager may direct
the Chief of Police to serve notice on the owner or occupant of the property,
or on any person controlling the property or causing, permitting or maintaining
the public nuisance, or if the owner, occupant or other person cannot be
located or served with notice reasonably promptly, to post notice on the
premises. The notice shall direct the owner or occupant of, or other person
controlling, the premises, or any other person who shall appear to be
responsible for causing, permitting or maintaining the public nuisance to abate
and remove the public nuisance within 24 hours, or a longer time as shall be
specified in the notice, and shall state that unless the public nuisance is so
abated within the time specified, the village will cause the same to be abated
and will charge the cost thereof to the owner or occupant of the premises or
other person controlling the premises or causing, permitting or maintaining the
public nuisance. If the public nuisance is not abated within the time provided
or if the owner or occupant of the premises or other person controlling the
premises or causing, permitting or maintaining the public nuisance cannot be
located or served with notice, the Village Manager shall cause the abatement or
removal of the public nuisance.
      (2)   If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance
exists on private property but that the nature of the public nuisance is not
such that creates a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety,
peace, morals or decency, the inspecting officer shall file a written report of
the findings with the Village Manager, who shall cause legal action to be
commenced in the name of the village to abate or remove the public nuisance in
the name of the village.
   (C)   Costs. In addition to any penalty imposed by village code or ordinance
for the creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the costs
incurred by the village in abating or removing a public nuisance (including
reasonable attorney’s fees) shall be collected as a debt of the owner or
occupant of the premises or other person controlling the premises or causing,
permitting or maintaining the public nuisance. Except as otherwise provided in
§§
135.03 and
135.04, if notice to abate has been given to the owner of record of the
premises, or if the owner of record cannot be located and notice has been
posted on the premises, the costs shall, at the option of the village and to
the extent permitted by law, be assessed against the premises and the village
shall have a lien against the premises for the costs, enforceable in the manner
provided by law for the enforcement of mechanics liens.
(Ord. 766, passed 9-10-1990)
§§ 135.06 THROUGH 135.19 RESERVED.
ADVERTISING
§ 135.20 LITTERING STREETS WITH HANDBILLS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to litter any street or sidewalk in the
village with any circulars, leaflets, handbills or other advertisements
relating to amusements, services, products or commercial enterprises. It is
also unlawful for any person or organization to distribute or hand out any
circular, leaflet, handbill or any other advertisement, to any person on the
public streets or sidewalks so as to cause, directly or indirectly, the
littering of any street or sidewalk within the village without the person or
organization agreeing in advance to clean up or pay the cost of clean-up of any
littering which may result from the distribution.
(1959 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. 687, passed 10-11-1982; Ord. 688, passed 11-8-1982)
§ 135.21 PLACING CIRCULARS, HANDBILLS AND THE LIKE RELATING TO COMMERCIAL
ENTERPRISES IN OR UPON AUTOMOBILES PROHIBITED; DECLARED NUISANCE.
   It is unlawful for any person to distribute circulars, leaflets, handbills
or other advertisements relating to amusements, services, products or other
commercial enterprises, by placing them in or upon automobiles parked on any
street or in any public parking place within the village, and the distribution
hereby is declared to be a public nuisance.
(1959 Code, § 3-2) (Ord. 688, passed 11-8-1982)
§ 135.22 ADVERTISING UNLAWFUL BUSINESS OR ARTICLE.
   It is unlawful for any person to advertise any unlawful business or illegal
article in the village.
(1959 Code, § 3-6)
§ 135.23 INJURING LAWFUL ADVERTISEMENTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to injure or deface any lawful advertisement
or notice in the village.
(1959 Code, § 3-7)
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided. , Zoning
and Development
TITLE XV: BUILDING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
      
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
153.   ZONING
      
154.   STEEP SLOPE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Compliance required
   
150.002   Standards
   
150.003   Code official
   
150.004   Permits and certificates of occupancy required
   
150.005   Fees
   
150.006   Inspections
   
150.007   Other requirements
   
150.008   Steep slope areas or zones
   150.009 through 150.019   Reserved
Demolitions
   
150.020   Demolitions generally
   
150.021   Demolition permit required
   
150.022   Demolition work
   
150.023   Building permit
   
150.024   Emergency permit
   
150.025   Permit application
   
150.026   Content of application
   
150.027   Changes in ownership
   
150.028   Processing of application
   
150.029   Demolition escrow requirements
   150.030   Preliminary determination of special importance
   150.031 through 150.039   Reserved
Preliminary Historic and Architectural Review
   
150.040   Time and nature of review
   
150.041   Notice of preliminary review to applicant
   
150.042   Notice of preliminary review to the public
   
150.043   Building Review Commission determination and findings
   
150.044   Record of findings
   150.045  through 150.053   Reserved
Properties of Special Importance
   
150.054   Predetermination of special importance for certain business district
properties
   
150.055   Criteria for properties of special importance — generally
   
150.056   Determination of special importance
   150.057 through 150.069   Reserved
Permits and Delay of Issuance
   
150.070   Delay for public convenience and safety
   
150.071   Emergency delay
   
150.072   Administrative delay
   
150.073   Permits from other authorities
   
150.074   Duration of delay
   
150.075   Issuance of demolition permit
   
150.076   Expiration of permit
   150.077 through 150.089   Reserved
Notice Requirement
   
150.090   Notice to adjacent property owners
   150.091 through 150.104   Reserved
Municipal Property Damage Deposit
   
150.105   Municipal property damage deposit
   150.106 through 150.119   Reserved
Insurance
   
150.120   Certificate of insurance
   150.121 through 150.134   Reserved
Construction Site Management Regulations
   
150.135   Generally
   
150.136   Limitations on deliveries
   
150.137   Posting of regulations and contract information
   
150.138   Litter control and cleanup
   
150.139   Public rights-of-way
   
150.140   Dust and particulate control
   
150.141   Portable toilets
   
150.142   Safety fencing
   
150.143   Parking
   150.144 through 150.154   Reserved
Tree Preservation
   
150.155   Purpose
   
150.156   Definitions
   
150.157   Tree permit or tree ordinance authorization required
   
150.158   Tree permit application contents
   
150.159   Tree permit and tree ordinance authorization fees
   
150.160   Review of tree permit applications; permit and authorization issuance
   
150.161   Time limitation on tree permit and tree ordinance authorization
   
150.162   Denial of a tree permit
   
150.163   Appeals
   
150.164   Tree replacement
   
150.165   Payment in lieu of replacement
   
150.166   Tree protection plan
   
150.167   Security
   150.168 through 150.174   Reserved
Buildings
   
150.175   Adoption of International Building Code
   
150.176   Additions, deletions and modifications of the International Building
Code
   150.177 through 150.184   Reserved
One- and Two-Family Dwellings
   
150.185   Adoption of International Residential Code, 2021 Edition
   
150.186   Additions, deletions and modifications of the International
Residential Code
   150.187 through 150.194   Reserved
Plumbing
   
150.195   Adoption of the State of Illinois Plumbing Code
   
150.196   Additions, deletions and modifications of the State of Illinois
Plumbing Code
   150.197 through 150.204   Reserved
Mechanical
   
150.205   Adoption of the International Mechanical Code
   
150.206   Additions, deletions and modifications of the International
Mechanical Code
   150.207 through 150.214   Reserved
Electrical
   
150.215   Adoption of the National Electrical Code
   
150.216   Permit required
   
150.217   Registration required
   
150.218   Additions, deletions and modifications of the National Electrical
Code
   150.219 through 150.229   Reserved
Fire Prevention Code
   
150.230   Adoption of International Fire Code
   
150.231   Additions, deletions and modifications of the International Fire Code
   150.232 through 150.244   Reserved
Life Safety
   
150.245   Adoption of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code
   
150.246   Additions, deletions and modifications of the NFPA 101 Life Safety
Code
   150.247 through 150.289   Reserved
Fuel Gas
   
150.290   Adoption of the International Fuel Gas Code
   
150.291   Additions, deletions and modifications of the International Fuel Gas
Code
   150.292 through 150.304   Reserved
Energy Conservation
   
150.305   Adoption of the International Energy Conservation Code
   
150.306   Additions, deletions and modifications of the International Energy
Conservation Code
   150.307 through 150.424   Reserved
Public Improvement Standards
   
150.425   Requirements generally
   
150.426   Street widths
   
150.427   Water mains
   
150.428   Fire hydrants
   
150.429   Sanitary sewers
   
150.430   Inspection of improvements; rejection or condemnation of work
   
150.431   Compliance with subchapter prerequisite to issuance of building
permit
   
150.432   Variations
   150.433 through 150.439   Reserved
Drainage and Grading
   
150.440   Purpose
   
150.441   Definitions
   
150.442   Regulated activities
   
150.443   Permit provisions
   
150.444   Permit application requirements
   
150.445   Drainage and grading standards
   
150.446   Disclaimer of liability
   150.447 through 150.449   Reserved
Property Maintenance
   
150.450   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code
   
150.451   Additions, deletions, and modifications of the International Property
Maintenance Code
   150.452 through 150.459   Reserved
Existing Buildings
   
150.460   Adoption of the International Existing Building Code
   
150.461   Additions, deletions and modifications of the International Existing
Building Code
   150.462 through 150.549   Reserved
Swimming Pools and Spas
   
150.550   Adoption of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
150.551   Additions, deletions and modifications of the International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code
   150.552 through 150.998   Reserved
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, repair or alter, occupy or
maintain, remove or demolish any building or structure in the village or to
perform any work regulated by this chapter in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or without complying with the provisions of this
chapter. It shall be unlawful to vary from the terms of any building permit,
including the plans and specifications relative thereto, in connection with any
work; provided that a building permit may be amended upon proper application as
provided herein.
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.002 STANDARDS.
   The standards, regulations and specifications contained in this chapter
shall be considered as minimum standards for all building and construction for
the protection of life safety and public health.
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.003 CODE OFFICIAL.
   The code official shall be the Building Commissioner as provided in this
code.
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.004 PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   Where a subchapter in this chapter does not have a permit or certificate of
occupancy requirement, the work governed by that subchapter shall be governed
by the permit or certificate of occupancy requirements of §§
150.185 and
150.186 of this chapter for detached one- and two-family dwellings, and §§
150.155 and
150.156 of this chapter for all other work.
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.005 FEES.
   (A)   No permit required by this chapter shall be issued until all permit
fees, as established in this chapter, or by resolution or ordinance of the
village, have been paid. No amendment of a permit shall be issued until any
required additional fees have been paid.
   (B)   If, in the opinion of the code official, any applicant for a permit
has provided with his or her application an incorrect estimate of the cost of
the work to be performed thereunder, the code official shall make a correct
estimate of the cost of the work in accordance with the annual fee ordinance
building valuation schedule. The applicant shall pay any increased permit fee,
which may be due upon written demand from the code official.
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.006 INSPECTIONS.
   Where a subchapter in this chapter does not have an inspection requirement,
the work governed by that subchapter shall be governed by the inspection
requirements of §§
150.185 and
150.186 of this chapter for detached one- and two-family dwellings, and §§
150.155 and
150.156 of this chapter for all other work.
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.007 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   When a subchapter in this chapter does not have administrative and
enforcement requirements, the work governed by that subchapter shall be
governed by the administrative and enforcement requirements of §§
150.185 and
150.186 of this chapter for detached one- and two-family dwellings, and §§
150.155 and
150.156 of this chapter for all other work.
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.008 STEEP SLOPE AREAS OR ZONES.
   No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for any development
proposed on property within the area defined as a “Steep Slope Zone” in
Chapter 154 of this code unless the proposed development also complies with the
requirements of
Chapter 154.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§§ 150.009 THROUGH 150.019 RESERVED.
DEMOLITIONS
§ 150.020 DEMOLITIONS GENERALLY.
   No application for a building permit that contemplates demolition work for
which a demolition permit is required pursuant to this chapter shall be
accepted by the code official unless and until a demolition permit shall have
been issued by the code official for the demolition work.
(Ord. 929, passed 12-14-2004; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.021 DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A demolition permit shall be required before any person proceeds with any of
the following work:
   (A)   The demolition or removal of 50% or more of the floor area of any
building (or buildings on the same lot) in any residential or business district
in the village zoning regulations; or
   (B)   The demolition or removal of 50% or more of the structural elements of
the walls or facade of a building (or buildings on the same lot) facing a
street in any residential or business district in the village.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-
13-2009)
§ 150.022 DEMOLITION WORK.
   No part of any demolition work for which a permit is required under this
chapter shall be commenced unless and until:
   (A)   A demolition permit is applied for and issued in the name of the owner
and/or applicant in accordance with this chapter and has not expired; and
   (B)   Unless the code official shall issue a demolition permit pursuant to §
150.024, a building permit is issued by the code official for the proposed new
structure or improvements to the existing structure.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 1010, passed 4-
13-2009)
§ 150.023 BUILDING PERMIT.
   No building permit that contemplates demolition work for which a demolition
permit is required pursuant to this chapter shall be applied for or accepted by
the code official unless and until:
   (A)   A demolition permit shall be applied for, approved and issued in the
name of the owner and/or applicant in accordance with this chapter;
   (B)   All required fees shall have been paid by the owner or applicant; and
   (C)   The owner or applicant shall have reimbursed the village, pursuant to
the demolition escrow required by §
150.029, for all costs that the owner or applicant is required to reimburse
under this chapter.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 929, passed 12-
14-2004; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.024 EMERGENCY PERMIT.
   A demolition permit may be issued by the code official without compliance
with §§
150.025 through
150.029,
150.040 through
150.044,
150.054 through
150.056,
150.070 through
150.076 upon a determination by the code official that the building or
structure in question presents a threat to public safety.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1350, passed
12-11-2023)
§ 150.025 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   All applications for demolition permits shall be submitted in accordance
with § 105.3 of the International Building Code on forms provided by the code
official, in a number of copies as the code official shall require, and shall
include an undertaking to establish a demolition escrow in accordance with §
150.029, to pay expenses of the village and the Building Review Commission in
reviewing and acting on the application, subject to the limitation in §
150.056. No demolition permit application shall be accepted for processing
unless it is complete and is accompanied by all applicable fees, deposits and
all items required by §
150.026.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 1010, passed 4-
13-2009)
§ 150.026 CONTENT OF APPLICATION.
   Except for a demolition permit to be issued pursuant to §
150.024, the application for demolition permit shall include the following:
   (A)   A legible property survey made within three years prior to the filing
of the application, prepared and sealed by a surveyor licensed by the state.
The survey shall include the legal description of the property and shall
accurately depict lot boundaries, lot area and current improvements;
   (B)   A list of the addresses of all properties located in whole or in part
within 500 feet of the perimeter of the subject property;
   (C)   (1)   Disclosure and proof, through submission of documents evidencing
title and ownership interests, of all persons holding ownership of fee simple
title to, as well as any person who is a party to any contract, agreement,
option, memorandum of understanding, letter of intent, lease or other document
affecting the owner’s interest or providing for transfer of a future interest
in, the subject property consisting of one of the following, whichever is
applicable:
         (a)   If one or more individuals, the name and address of each
individual;
         (b)   If one or more partnerships, the names and addresses of all
general partners, the date the partnership was formed, the name of the
partnership, the location of the principal office of the partnership and
evidence that the partnership is registered in the assumed name registry for
the county for each partnership;
         (c)   If one or more corporations or limited liability companies or a
partnership of which the general partner(s) is (are) a corporation or limited
liability company, the names and addresses of the directors, officers and
shareholders of the corporation or the managers, officers and members of the
limited liability company, the location of the principal office of the
corporation or limited liability company, the name and address of the
corporation’s or limited liability company’s registered agent, and proof that
the corporation or limited liability company is authorized to do business in
the state for each entity; and
         (d)   If one or more trusts, the name and address of the trustees and
the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of each trust.
      (2)   All persons disclosed shall execute the application and be
considered co-applicants, and shall be bound by the terms of this code in the
review of the application and the terms of the permit, if issued.
   (D)   (1)   A summary of the architectural and historic character of the
building to be demolished, including:
         (a)   Original date of construction, including date of issuance of
initial building permit, if available;
         (b)   Name of architect, if known;
         (c)   List of previous owners and occupants;
         (d)   Description of architectural features and building materials;
         (e)   Scale drawing of the floor plan of the entire principal building
and any accessory buildings on the property, including all dimensions;
         (f)   Summary of a review of previous permits granted for the property
by the village;
         (g)   List of other available historical records regarding the
property that are held by the Village Historical Society;
         (h)   Photographs of all exterior elevations;
         (i)   Photographs of all major interior features, including attic,
basement and garage;
         (j)   Detailed close-up photographs of interior and exterior
architectural features; and
         (k)   Photographs of the front elevation of the principal buildings
and properties on the same block as the proposed demolition property, on the
same side of the street as well as the block directly across the street.
      (2)   Each photograph shall be clearly labeled with a description of the
contents and subject of the photograph, including the address of the property
depicted, the direction from which the photograph was taken, the name and
contact information of the photographer and the date on which the photograph
was taken.
   (E)   Other information and documentation of the type described in this
section as the code official or the Building Review Commission may determine to
be reasonably necessary to process the application in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   The code official may modify or waive the documents and information
required to be submitted pursuant to this section based on the nature of the
application and the property involved.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-
2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1350, passed 12-11-2023)
§ 150.027 CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP.
   In the event of any change in or addition to the persons required to be
disclosed under §
150.026, the persons filing the application shall file an amendment to the
application not more than five days after the change containing all disclosures
and proof required in §
150.026 about the additional persons, which shall be executed as provided in §
150.026. No filing under this provision shall be permitted during the period
between:
   (A)   The commencement of the stay period required by §
150.043; and
   (B)   The issuance of a demolition permit.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 929, passed 12-
14-2004; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1099,
passed 4-29-2013)
§ 150.028 PROCESSING OF APPLICATION.
   Upon receipt of an application for a demolition permit, the code official,
in consultation with a member of the Building Review Commission designated from
time to time by the Chair of the Building Review Commission, shall make a final
determination as to whether the application is complete within 30 days after
the date of filing the application. The code official shall forward any
application determined to be complete to the Building Review Commission unless
the code official shall determine to issue a demolition permit pursuant to §
150.024 or the application does not require Building Review Commission review,
as set forth in §§
150.030 and
150.054(C). If the code official, in consultation with a member of the Building
Review Commission designated from time to time by the Chair of the Building
Review Commission, determines that an application is not complete or otherwise
fails to comply with this chapter, the code official shall notify the
applicant.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-
2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1265, passed 9-21-2020; Ord. 1350,
passed 12-11-2023)
§ 150.029 DEMOLITION ESCROW REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Establishment of demolition escrow. In addition to payment of all fees
required pursuant to §
150.005, every application filed for a demolition permit shall be subject to
the demolition escrow provisions set forth in this section.
   (B)   Responsibility for payment. The owner of the property that is the
subject of the application and, if different, the applicant, shall be jointly
and severally liable for the establishment and payment of the demolition escrow
amount of an amount as established in the annual fee ordinance at the time of
filing the application. By signing the application, the owner and applicant
shall be deemed to have agreed to pay, and to have consented to, the demolition
escrow amount. The village shall have no obligation to process or act on any
application where the demolition escrow amount has not been paid.
   (C)   Demolition escrow amount.
      (1)   The demolition escrow amount to be paid by the owner or applicant
shall be to reimburse the village for its actual out-of-pocket expenses:
         (a)   In an amount not to exceed an amount as established in the
annual fee ordinance for its review of a demolition application prior to a
determination of special importance pursuant to §
150.056; and
         (b)   In an amount not to exceed an amount as established in the
annual fee ordinance for the review of demolition alternatives by consultants
hired by the village pursuant to §
150.056. These amounts may be amended from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Demolition escrow fee payment and establishment of demolition escrow.
      (1)   Initial payment and demolition escrow. Every application shall be
accompanied by the required demolition escrow amount to be deposited in the
demolition escrow account established by the village. No interest shall be
payable on any funds retained in the demolition escrow account.
      (2)   Charges against demolition escrow. From the date of filing of any
application, the village shall maintain an accurate record of the actual costs
that may be reimbursed from the escrow amount in connection with processing the
application. The Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall, from time to
time, draw funds from the demolition escrow account established for the
application to pay actual costs and shall transfer the funds to the appropriate
village accounts. The Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall maintain
an accurate record of all the drawings from the demolition escrow account.
      (3)   Final settlement. As soon as reasonably feasible following final
action on an application, the Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall
cause a final accounting to be made of the demolition escrow amounts deposited
in connection with the application and of the actual costs incurred and
reimbursable to the village in connection with the application. A copy of the
accounting shall be provided to the owner and the applicant. Any remaining
funds in the demolition escrow after payment of the total actual costs due
pursuant to this section shall be returned to, or applied to the demolition
permit fee due at permit issuance from, the owner or applicant, as applicable.
   (E)   Condition of all applications, approvals and permits. No application
filed pursuant to §
150.028 of this code shall be considered complete unless and until all fees and
deposits due pursuant to this section have been paid. Every approval granted
and every permit issued for a demolition shall, whether or not expressly so
conditioned, be deemed to be conditioned upon payment of demolition escrow fees
as required by this section.
   (F)   Tolling of time periods. Where the Building Code provides that the
passage of time without decision or action shall be deemed an approval or a
recommendation for approval, time periods shall be tolled during any period of
nonpayment of the demolition escrow amounts due pursuant to this section, but
shall otherwise continue to run.
   (G)   Failure to pay demolition escrow fees. The failure to pay in full when
due any demolition escrow amount required under this section shall be grounds
for refusing to process an application and for denying, stopping work under, or
revoking any demolition permit.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-
2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.030 PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION OF SPECIAL IMPORTANCE.
   (A)   Prior to submission of an application for the full demolition permit
process, the co-applicants for a particular building or property as described
in §
150.026 may file an application for preliminary historic and architectural
review and a determination of whether or not the building or property is of
special importance pursuant to §§
150.040 through
150.056. Any such application shall comply with the requirements of §§
150.025 through
150.029 and shall be processed in accordance with §§
150.028 and
150.040. The filing of such an application does not obligate the co-applicants
to perform any demolition work.
   (B)   In the event that a building or property is determined not to be of
special importance, the co-applicants for that building or property may
complete the process of application for a demolition permit by filing an
amended application within seven years after the date of such determination in
the manner described in §
150.043. Any amended application shall include all ownership information
required by §
150.026 and any change in ownership information required by §
150.027.
   (C)   In the event that a building or property is determined to be of
special importance, the co-applicants for that building or property may
complete the process of application for a demolition permit by filing an
amended application in the manner described in §
150.043. Any amended application shall include all ownership information
required by §
150.026 and any change in ownership information required by §
150.027. Upon determination that a complete amended application has been filed,
the stay of issuance of the demolition permit shall commence pursuant to §
150.043.
(Ord. 1099, passed 4-29-2013)
§§ 150.031 THROUGH 150.039 RESERVED.
PRELIMINARY HISTORIC AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
§ 150.040 TIME AND NATURE OF REVIEW.
   (A)   Except as provided below, the Building Review Commission shall meet
and determine whether the building and/or property that is the subject of the
permit application is of special importance under the criteria set forth in §
150.055 within 90 days after the later of:
      (1)   The determination that a demolition application is complete; or
      (2)   Any filing of a change in or addition to the persons required to be
disclosed under §§
150.026 and
150.027 that is filed after the application is found complete and prior to a
determination of special importance on the application.
For the avoidance of doubt, if the subject of a permit application in any
residential district is only an accessory structure that is not designed and
capable of functioning as a dwelling unit, no Building Review Commission review
shall be required and the permit application shall be processed in accordance
with the procedures applicable to properties that do not have special
importance, all as set forth in §§
150.020 through
150.030.
   (B)   In connection with this review, the Building Review Commission may
seek outside professional assistance in gathering factual information regarding
the applicability of the criteria to the property. The cost of the assistance
will be borne by the applicant and shall be paid out of the demolition escrow
established pursuant to §
150.029, provided that the costs charged to the applicant shall not exceed the
amount established pursuant to §
150.029(C).
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 929, passed 12-
14-2004; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1350,
passed 12-11-2023)
§ 150.041 NOTICE OF PRELIMINARY REVIEW TO APPLICANT.
   No less than ten nor more than 30 days before the Building Review Commission
meets to evaluate the application to determine if the building or the property
is of special importance, the Building Review Commission shall issue a notice
of preliminary review to the owner and the applicant.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-
2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.042 NOTICE OF PRELIMINARY REVIEW TO THE PUBLIC.
   Notice of the public meeting at which any application for demolition permit
is to be considered shall be provided by all methods described in this section.
   (A)   Notice by mail.
      (1)   The applicant shall notify, in writing, by first class mail or hand
delivery, all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the property
that is the subject of the application not less than ten days or more than 30
days in advance of the scheduled public meeting date. The mailing of notice,
addressed to the name and address on the most recent county real estate tax
records shall be deemed a satisfaction of this notice requirement. The required
mail notice for applications shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
         (a)   The street address, legal description or detailed location
description of the property, if any, that is the subject of the application;
         (b)   A statement describing the scope of the demolition permit
requested;
         (c)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (d)   The name and address of the legal owner, and beneficial owner,
if any, of the property; and
         (e)   The meeting date, time and location.
      (2)   Not less than seven days prior to the public meeting, the applicant
shall present to the Building Review Commission an affidavit, certification or
other evidence satisfactory to the Building Review Commission, demonstrating to
the satisfaction of the Building Review Commission that the notice requirement
of this section has been satisfied.
   (B)   Notice by sign. The applicant shall provide and post a sign of not
less than 48 inches by 48 inches in area on the property so as to be visible
from the nearest public street, containing the words “Proposed Demolition”
printed on the sign in letters at least four inches in height, and any other
text as is specified by the village, including the date and time of the meeting
of the Building Review Commission at which the preliminary review of the
application will be considered; and the name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s)
of the property. The sign must be posted not less than ten days or more than 30
days in advance of the scheduled meeting date and remain posted until three
days after the Building Review Commission reaches a determination of the
significance of the property, unless a shorter time is authorized by the
Building Review Commission.
(Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.043 BUILDING REVIEW COMMISSION DETERMINATION AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   If the Building Review Commission shall determine the demolition
permit application does not affect a building or property of special
importance, the Building Review Commission shall notify the code official that
there are no architectural or historic reasons to delay the issuance of the
demolition permit.
   (B)   If the Building Review Commission shall determine that the permit
application affects a building or property of special importance, in order to
permit adequate time for consideration of alternatives to demolition of the
existing building or buildings, it shall order a stay of issuance of a
demolition permit for a period ending not later than one year, or a lesser
period as the Building Review Commission shall deem appropriate, after the
later of:
      (1)   The meeting at which the Building Review Commission adopts the
findings of fact pursuant to this section; or
      (2)   Any filing of a change in or addition to the persons required to be
disclosed under §
150.026 and
150.027 that is filed prior to the end of the stay period. The stay order shall
be issued to the applicant and the owner, with a copy to the code official.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 929, passed 12-
14-2004; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1099,
passed 4-29-2013)
§ 150.044 RECORD OF FINDINGS.
   The determination of the Building Review Commission under §
150.043 shall be supported by findings of fact based on the record. The
findings of fact shall include statements and other evidence as to whether or
not the building or property is of special importance.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-
13-2009)
§§ 150.045 THROUGH 150.053 RESERVED.
PROPERTIES OF SPECIAL IMPORTANCE
§ 150.054 PREDETERMINATION OF SPECIAL IMPORTANCE FOR CERTAIN BUSINESS DISTRICT
PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Subject to division (B) below, the Building Review Commission finds
that the properties identified as having special importance in the Downtown
Intensive-Level Survey prepared by Benjamin Historic Certifications and dated
June 12, 2023, as amended (“Historic Survey”), have special importance, and, as
a result, no further Building Review Commission determination of special
importance is necessary for these properties. To provide adequate time for
consideration of alternatives to demolition of the existing building or
buildings located on any property the Historic Survey designates as having
special importance, upon receipt of a demolition permit application, the code
official shall order a stay of issuance of the permit for a period ending not
later than one year, or a lesser period as the Building Review Commission shall
deem appropriate, after the later of the dates below, and the provisions of §
150.056 shall, without limitation, apply to the property:
      (1)   The date the code official determines the demolition permit
application to be complete in accordance with §
150.028; or
      (2)   Any filing of a change in or addition to the persons required to be
disclosed under §§
150.026 and
150.027 that is filed prior to the end of the stay period. The stay order shall
be issued to the applicant and the owner.
   (B)   The owner of a property the Historic Survey identifies as having
special importance may, as an alternative to the procedure set forth in
division (A) above, file an application asking the Building Review Commission
to review and determine whether the owner’s property is of special importance,
all in accordance with the standards and procedures identified in §
150.030.
   (C)   The Building Review Commission finds that any property located in the
Business District as of the Historic Survey’s date that the Historic Survey
does not designate as having special importance is not a property of special
importance, and, as a result, (1) no further Building Review Commission
determination of special importance is necessary for these properties; and (2)
payment of a demolition escrow in accordance with §
150.029 is not required. The applicant for any such property may apply for a
demolition permit in accordance with the procedures applicable to properties
that do not have special importance, all as set forth in §§
150.020 through
150.030.
   (D)   The village will exercise reasonable efforts to update the Historic
Survey every ten years or when practicable.
(Ord. 1350, passed 12-11-2023)
§ 150.055 CRITERIA FOR PROPERTIES OF SPECIAL IMPORTANCE — GENERALLY.
   The Building Review Commission shall determine that the building or property
is of special importance if it meets any one or more of the following criteria:
   (A)   The structure, building, object or site has significant character,
interest or value as part of the historic, cultural or architectural
characteristics of the village, the state or the United States;
   (B)   The structure, building, object or site is closely identified with a
person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture or development
of the village, the state or the United States;
   (C)   The structure, building, object or site is the result of the notable
efforts of, or is a known example of work by, a master builder, designer,
architect, architectural firm or artist whose individual accomplishment has
influenced the development of the village, the state or the United States;
   (D)   The location and physical characteristics of the structure, building,
object or site make it an established and important visual feature of the
village;
   (E)   The activities associated with the structure, building, object or site
makes it a current or former focal point of reference in the village;
   (F)   The structure, building or object is of a type or is associated with a
use once common but now rare, or is a particularly fine or unique example of a
utilitarian structure and possesses a high level of integrity or architectural
significance;
   (G)   The structure, building, object or site represents distinguishing
characteristics of architecture inherently valuable for the study of a time
period, type of property, method of construction or use of indigenous
materials;
   (H)   The structure, building, object or site embodies elements of design,
detail, material or craftsmanship of exceptional quality;
   (I)   The structure, building, object or site exemplifies a particular
architectural style in terms of detail, material and workmanship;
   (J)   The structure, building, object or site is one of the relatively
limited remaining examples of a particular architectural style;
   (K)   The structure, building, object or site is, or is part of, a
contiguous grouping that has a sense of cohesiveness expressed through a
similarity of style characteristics, time period, type of property, method of
construction, or use of indigenous materials and accents the architectural
significance of an area;
   (L)   The structure, building, object or site is an exceptional example of
an historic or vernacular style, or is one of the few remaining properties in
the village;
   (M)   The structure, building, object or site has a strong association with
the life or activities of a person, persons, organization or group who
significantly contributed to or participated in historic or cultural events; or
   (N)   The structure, building, object or site is associated with a notable
historic event.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 1010, passed 4-
13-2009; Ord. 1350, passed 12-11-2023)
§ 150.056 DETERMINATION OF SPECIAL IMPORTANCE.
   If the Building Review Commission shall determine that the proposed
demolition will affect a building or property of special importance and a stay
order is issued pursuant to §
150.043 or
150.054:
   (A)   The Building Review Commission may require the applicant or owner to
prepare and submit one or more of the following:
      (1)   An engineer’s structural analysis report;
      (2)   An adaptive reuse feasibility study; and/or
      (3)   A detailed analysis of the estimated cost to repair and
rehabilitate the existing building to incorporate features similar to the
proposed new construction.
   (B)   (1)   The Building Review Commission may seek outside professional
assistance, develop its own summary plan as to how to save the building or
perform or procure a detailed analysis of rehabilitation versus new
construction alternatives; and
      (2)   The cost of all reviews, consultations or plans will be borne by
the applicant, and shall be paid out of the demolition escrow established
pursuant to §
150.029, provided that the costs charged to the applicant shall not exceed the
amount established pursuant to §
150.029(C).
   (C)   The Building Review Commission will call at least one meeting with the
applicant or owner to discuss alternatives and offer suggestions and may
request additional information from the applicant or owner as reasonably
necessary to evaluate the historic and architectural significance of the
property or evaluate alternatives to demolition;
   (D)   The Building Review Commission will seek (through public hearings or
otherwise) the opinions of the residents and property owners within 500 feet of
the perimeter of the subject property;
   (E)   The Building Review Commission may at any time request additional
information or a conference with the applicant or owner as reasonably necessary
to evaluate the historic and architectural significance of the property or
evaluate alternatives to demolition; and
   (F)   In the event that the applicant or owner is unwilling or unable to
meet on a timely basis as determined by the Building Review Commission or
provide information requested by the Building Review Commission, the Building
Review Commission may extend the stay period ordered pursuant to §
150.043 or
150.054 for the duration of the delay until the meeting occurs or information
is provided or is determined to be unavailable. Any order for extension of the
stay period shall be issued to the applicant and the owner, with a copy to the
code official.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-
2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1350, passed 12-11-2023)
§§ 150.057 THROUGH 150.069 RESERVED.
PERMITS AND DELAY OF ISSUANCE
§ 150.070 DELAY FOR PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND SAFETY.
   The code official may order that the issuance of a demolition permit be
delayed if the proposed schedule for the demolition will interfere with
previously scheduled work in the public rights-of-way in the immediate vicinity
of the subject property, or if the code official determines that delay is
necessary to prevent undue congestion and noise in the neighborhoods when the
traffic or noise from the proposed demolition combines with traffic or noise
from previously scheduled public works projects in the immediate neighborhood.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 1005, passed 9-8-2008; Ord. 1010, passed 4-
13-2009)
§ 150.071 EMERGENCY DELAY.
   The code official may delay the issuance of a demolition permit in the event
of an emergency if the code official determines that the demolition work will
delay or otherwise interfere with response to the emergency.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.072 ADMINISTRATIVE DELAY.
   The code official may delay the issuance of a demolition permit for up to 60
days if two or more building permits for primary structures have been approved
for properties, for which work is continuing, within 500 feet of the subject
property on either side of the rights-of-way abutting the subject property, or
if the code official determines that a delay is necessary to prevent undue
congestion and noise in the neighborhood.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.073 PERMITS FROM OTHER AUTHORITIES.
   Prior to the issuance of any demolition permit, the owner or applicant shall
provide the code official with proof that any permits required for the
requested demolition from the county, state or other regulating authorities
have been approved.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 1010, passed 4-
13-2009)
§ 150.074 DURATION OF DELAY.
   The delays authorized by §§
150.070 through
150.074 shall begin no earlier than the date of the Building Review
Commission’s final determination or expiration of the stays ordered by the
Building Review Commission. The delays authorized by §§
150.070 through
150.074 shall be promptly terminated by the person imposing the delay when the
conditions giving rise to the delay cease to exist.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.075 ISSUANCE OF DEMOLITION PERMIT.
   Except as provided in §§
150.070 through
150.074, a demolition permit shall be approved and issued in the following
circumstances:
   (A)   If the Building Review Commission determines that the subject building
or property is not of special importance;
   (B)   If the Building Review Commission determines that a delay to seek
alternatives to demolition is not warranted; or
   (C)   Upon the expiration of the stay period and all extensions of the stay
period, unless the applicant shall withdraw or amend the application for
demolition permit; or
   (D)   If the subject building or property is not subject to special
importance review as set forth in §
150.040.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1350, passed
12-11-2023)
§ 150.076 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   Unless the demolition work authorized by a demolition permit shall have
commenced in accordance with the permit and this chapter prior to the
expiration of the permit, a demolition permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall expire six months after its issuance.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 916, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 1010, passed 4-
13-2009)
§§ 150.077 THROUGH 150.089 RESERVED.
NOTICE REQUIREMENT
§ 150.090 NOTICE TO ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   All applicants filing an application for a permit involving a lot in a
residential zone and authorizing the demolition of a dwelling or additions that
will increase the gross floor area of buildings and structures on the property
shall be required to provide notice of the demolition, addition or construction
to adjacent property owners, including those properties located behind the
property and those located across the street from the property that would be
adjacent to the property but for the presence of a street. The notice shall be
either by first class mail with purchase of a certificate of mailing or by
personal delivery, not later than ten days after the filing of the permit
application. The applicant shall also file with the village, within 14 days
after the filing of the permit application, written certification, under oath
or affirmation, that the notice has been properly given. If notice was mailed,
the certification shall include the original receipts from the certificate of
mailing. If notice was by personal delivery, the certification shall include a
signature acknowledging receipt for each property so notified.
   (B)   The village shall not process, and shall return to the applicant, any
application for which the notice was not given or for which the certification
was not filed as provided herein.
(Ord. 1000, passed 8-5-2008)
§§ 150.091 THROUGH 150.104 RESERVED.
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY DAMAGE DEPOSIT
§ 150.105 MUNICIPAL PROPERTY DAMAGE DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Before commencing any work on village property for which a permit is
required, the applicant shall post with the village a cash deposit or other
form of surety bond or letter of credit approved by the Building Commissioner,
as a municipal property damage deposit covering the amount of damage which may
be done to village property along the frontage of the lot on any street or
other public right-of-way or easement contiguous or adjacent to the premises
for which permit is issued, while performing work under the permit. The amount
shall be established by the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   The deposit shall be held by the Village Treasurer until the work
under the permit is complete.
   (C)   Any and all damage to village property, including the public right-of-
way, infrastructure or other public property, that is caused by the property
owner, its contractors or agents, shall be repaired, replaced or otherwise
remedied by, and at the sole expense of, the property owner. The village shall
also have the right, at its option, to make the necessary repairs and deduct
the cost of the repairs from the amount of the deposit. If the cost of repairs
exceeds the amount of the deposit, the additional cost shall be charged to the
owner of the property on which the work is being done.
   (D)   If the village draws on the deposit, the applicant shall be required
to replenish the deposit to the full amount required by this provision upon
written demand to the applicant by the village. Any failure of the applicant to
replenish the deposit when requested may result in the issuance of a stop-work
order for work under the permit.
   (E)   Within 30 days after completion of the work under the permit, the
village shall return any unused portion of the deposit to the applicant,
without interest. No part of the deposit shall be returned, however, unless the
property owner and the contractor have provided the village with a written
warranty providing that for a period of two years, the property owner and the
contractor, jointly and severally, shall reimburse the village for any costs
incurred in repairing damage to village property that is attributable to the
work completed under the permit.
   (F)   No further permits shall be issued to the property owner or the
contractor unless all payments arising under the warranty have been made to the
village’s satisfaction.
   (G)   In the event that the requirements of any other section of this code
also require a bond or deposit for damage to village property, the deposit
required by this section shall be provided and additional bonds or deposits for
damage to village property pursuant to those other sections shall not be
required.
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§§ 150.106 THROUGH 150.119 RESERVED.
INSURANCE
§ 150.120 CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE.
   Prior to issuance of a permit for any demolition or construction, the permit
applicant shall provide the village with a certificate of insurance
establishing that the contractor to be performing the work has general
liability insurance coverage for all damage to persons and property, including
public property and private property, that may result from the proposed work on
the construction site. The insurance coverage shall be in limits not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence and $3,000,000 in the aggregate. The certificate of
insurance shall provide that insurance coverage shall be maintained during the
entire time that work is being performed on the site pursuant to the permit.
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§§ 150.121 THROUGH 150.134 RESERVED.
CONSTRUCTION SITE MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
§ 150.135 GENERALLY.
   The following standards and regulations in this subchapter shall apply to
all construction or demolition work undertaken in the village for which a
permit is required.
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 150.136 LIMITATIONS ON DELIVERIES.
   (A)   No construction materials shall be delivered to a residential lot
prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and prior to 9:00
a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on Saturday.
   (B)   No deliveries are permitted on Sundays or the following legal
holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply:
      (1)   In the event of a bona fide emergency to which construction workers
must respond; or
      (2)   To any work ordered or required by the village.
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 150.137 POSTING OF REGULATIONS AND CONTRACT INFORMATION.
   Every applicant for a construction or demolition permit shall be provided
with a copy of the construction site management regulations contained in §§
150.135 through
150.143 and the noise regulations contained in Chapter 95, and shall sign a
form acknowledging receipt thereof. The applicant shall maintain a copy of
these regulations with the approved construction documents on the site, as well
as post a copy of these regulations, on a form to be provided by the village,
in a prominent place at the construction site in advance of the commencement of
the construction or demolition work. This form shall include the contact
information, including the telephone number and address, of the contractor or
other responsible person to be contacted in case of emergencies. The applicant
is responsible for ensuring that a copy of the regulations and contact
information are prominently posted and maintained on the construction site
until all work has been completed, and removal is approved by the Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 150.138 LITTER CONTROL AND CLEANUP.
   All litter and debris at the site shall be controlled at all times and the
permit holder shall designate a person to be responsible to assure than no
litter or debris leaves the site and that it shall be cleaned from the site and
surrounding areas, and deposited into a dumpster at the end of every day on
which work was conducted on the site. Dumpsters shall be emptied or removed
when full. All dumpsters are to be located entirely on the lot for which the
permit is issued.
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 150.139 PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   All public rights-of-way, including streets, alleys, sidewalks and driveways
crossing sidewalks, shall be maintained in a clean, safe and accessible
condition. The applicant shall remove all dirt, mud, gravel and other debris
generated at the site from the public rights-of-way regularly at the end of
every work day, and more frequently as necessary to prevent a hazardous
situation. No construction materials, including the dumpsters required under §
150.138 shall be permitted within the public rights-of-way. Sidewalks shall
remain passable at all times, except for when part of the sidewalk must be
removed or replaced during construction, in which case the applicant must
provide an alternative clean, safe and accessible walkway. No part of the
sidewalk shall be out of service for more than three days.
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 150.140 DUST AND PARTICULATE CONTROL.
   Airborne particles generated during demolition, stone and brick cutting and
other dust-emitting activities shall be controlled by thoroughly saturating all
affected portions of the structure, building materials, equipment and
surrounding construction site with water. This spraying shall be undertaken at
any time necessary to thoroughly control the creation and migration of dust and
other airborne particles.
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 150.141 PORTABLE TOILETS.
   A portable toilet or other indoor sanitary facilities shall be provided at
every construction site, no later than immediately after completion of
excavation of the foundation. The proposed location of any portable toilet
shall be depicted on plans submitted for permit approval. The portable toilet
must be located at the rear of the lot and out of plain view of any public
right-of-way. Under no circumstances may the portable toilet be located in a
front yard or, in the case of a corner lot, in a side yard facing a street,
unless an administrative waiver has been obtained. The application fee for this
waiver is in an amount as established in the annual fee ordinance, and shall be
issued only where the condition of the property renders it impracticable to
locate the portable toilet elsewhere, and the applicant can satisfactorily
demonstrate that the portable toilet will be otherwise shielded from view.
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 150.142 SAFETY FENCING.
   (A)   A six-foot tall fence or similar barrier shall be erected:
      (1)   Around every property for which a permit for the demolition of an
existing structure and the construction of a replacement structure has been
issued;
      (2)   Around the perimeter of any open excavation more than one foot
deep; and
      (3)   Around every property on which internal work is authorized by
permit and the building or structure is not secure to the outside.
   (B)   The fence must be installed after the demolition permit has been
issued, and prior to the commencement of the demolition. All safety fencing
shall be located entirely on the lot for which the permit is issued, and may
not block sidewalks or other public rights-of-way when opened. Fences shall
remain securely closed during non-work hours and at any other time the
construction site is unattended. No safety fencing installed pursuant to this
subsection shall be removed until the condition of the property no longer poses
a health or safety risk.
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 150.143 PARKING.
   Workers may not park at the construction site so as to block access to or
through any public street, sidewalk, crosswalk or alley or any driveway
(Ord. 941, passed 7-11-2005)
§§ 150.144 THROUGH 150.154 RESERVED.
TREE PRESERVATION
§ 150.155 PURPOSE.
   The preservation, protection and replacement of trees under this subchapter
is intended to accomplish the following benefits:
   (A)   Protect and enhance the quality of life and the general welfare of the
village and its residents, and conserve and enhance the village’s physical and
aesthetic environment by:
      (1)   Reducing energy consumption through summer shade and protection
from winter wind;
      (2)   Providing a buffer and screen against noise, light and pollution;
and
      (3)   Reducing air pollution through the removal of harmful carbon
dioxide, the generation of oxygen and the precipitation of dust and other
airborne materials.
   (B)   Protect and increase property values in a manner that maintains each
property owner’s enjoyment of his or her property;
   (C)   Recognize and maintain the historic significance and natural heritage
of the village;
   (D)   Protect and enhance the natural environment by providing habitat and
food that are essential for wildlife, including migratory and nesting birds,
and to sustain them and the many benefits they provide, including control of
disease-carrying insects;
   (E)   Stabilize topsoil by preventing or minimizing soil erosion and
sedimentation;
   (F)   Assist in controlling stormwater run-off; and
   (G)   Protect existing healthy trees during the course of construction and
development.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 150.156 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future or past tense, and words in the singular include the plural. Words not
defined in this section shall have their usual and customary meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Any human- made change to improved or unimproved real
estate that will or may result in impact on, damage to or removal of a
protected tree or heritage tree, including, without limitation:
      (1)   Demolition of buildings or structures;
      (2)   The construction, installation or enlargement of buildings,
structures, streets or utilities that will affect a protected tree or heritage
tree or its root zone;
      (3)   Dredging, filling, clearing, drilling, mining, grading, paving or
excavating operations that will affect a protected tree or heritage tree or its
root zone;
      (4)   Storage of materials, including dumpsters, in the root zone of a
protected tree or heritage tree; and
      (5)   Driving of vehicles or equipment in the root zone of a protected
tree or heritage tree, other than on established driveways.
   DAMAGE. Any direct or indirect action that causes, or is reasonably likely
to cause, the death or substantial destruction of a tree or a significant loss
of a tree’s structural integrity including, without limitation, destruction,
poisoning, carving, mutilating, girdling, severing the main trunk, leader or
large branches or roots, removing any portion of the bark from the main trunk,
leader or large branches, touching with live wires, crushing or exposing the
roots, digging or drilling any hole or trench within the root zone, filling
with soil or other materials within the root zone, compacting a substantial
portion of the soil in the root zone, or moving a tree to another location.
Without limitation of the foregoing, DAMAGE does not include the pruning of
trees in accordance with national pruning standards.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of the trunk of a tree
measured in inches at a point four and one-half feet above the existing grade
at the base of the tree. All references to diameter size shall be to the DBH.
   DISEASED TREE. Any of the following types of trees:
      (1)   Trees of any species or variety infected with Dutch elm disease or
oak wilt, as determined by laboratory analysis or by any other reliable means;
      (2)   Trees or parts thereof of elm or zelkova, or of any other species,
in a dead or dying condition that may serve as breeding places for the European
elm bark beetle, Dutch elm disease or oak wilt;
      (3)   Trees of any species or variety infected with, or that may serve as
breeding places for, the Asian long-horned beetle or the Asian cerambycid
beetle (anoplophora glabripennis); or
      (4)   Trees harboring other diseases or infestations that create a
condition that is otherwise unsafe and a hazard to the urban forest.
   HERITAGE TREE. All genus, species, varieties and cultivars of trees with a
DBH equal to or greater than 18 inches.
   IMPACT. Any act that causes, or is reasonably likely to cause, the loss in
value or loss in aesthetic value of a tree. Without limitation of the
foregoing, IMPACT does not include the pruning of trees in accordance with
national pruning standards.
   LOT. Any lot of record in the village, or any lot as defined in the village
zoning regulations.
   NATIONAL PRUNING STANDARDS. The standards adopted by the American National
Standards Institute, ANSI A300 (Part 1)-2001 Pruning, as those standards may be
amended from time to time.
   PERSON. Any public or private individual, group, company, firm, corporation,
partnership, association, society, entity or any other combination of human
beings, whether legal or natural, including, without limitation, public
utilities, but not the village or its employees or officials acting in their
official capacity.
   PROTECTED TREE. The following:
      (1)   All genus, species, varieties and cultivars of deciduous trees with
a DBH of at least eight inches but less than 18 inches;
      (2)   All coniferous trees, regardless of their DBH, that exceed 30 feet
in height; and
      (3)   All trees located on any public right-of-way or property that is
owned by or under the jurisdiction of the village.
   REMOVE or REMOVAL. The physical detachment or elimination of a tree, or the
effective detachment or elimination of a tree, through damage or other direct
or indirect action resulting in, or likely to result in, the death of the tree.
Without limitation of the foregoing, REMOVE or REMOVAL does not include the
pruning of trees in accordance with national pruning standards.
   REQUIRED YARD. Any yard required to be established on any lot pursuant to
the applicable zoning district regulations of the village zoning regulations.
   ROOT ZONE. The area inscribed by an imaginary circular line on the ground
beneath a tree and surrounding a tree and measured from the perimeter of the
base of the trunk of the tree for a distance equal to one foot for every one
inch of DBH. The ROOT ZONE may be located, in part, outside of the lot on which
the tree is located.
   TREE. A self-supporting, woody plant, together with its root system, having
a well-defined stem or trunk or a multi-stemmed trunk system. TREE shall not
include trees in containers or nursery stock trees maintained for resale.
   TREE EMERGENCY. The existence of any tree within the village that has become
an immediate danger or hazard to persons or property as a result of any
tornado, windstorm, flood, freeze or other natural disaster.
   TREE ORDINANCE AUTHORIZATION. A written form issued by the Village Manager
pursuant to this subchapter allowing construction activity to proceed without
any impact on, damage to or removal of any protected tree or heritage tree in
the village.
   TREE PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter that must be issued prior
to the impact on, damage to, or removal of any protected tree or heritage tree
in the village.
   TREE PERMIT APPLICATION. An application that must be filed pursuant to §
150.158.
   VILLAGE MANAGER. The individual appointed as Village Manager pursuant to
this code, or his or her designee.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005; Ord. 1282, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 150.157 TREE PERMIT OR TREE ORDINANCE AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   General. Except as expressly provided in subsection (B) below, no
person shall commence any construction activity without first obtaining a tree
ordinance authorization or a tree permit from the Village Manager.
   (B)   Tree emergency exception.
      (1)   In the case of a tree emergency, the Village Manager is hereby
authorized to:
         (a)   Issue a tree permit without a tree permit application;
         (b)   Waive the requirement for a tree permit; or
         (c)   Waive any of the other regulations of this section or this
subchapter.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other regulations of this subchapter, if a tree
emergency occurs, the person endangered by the tree emergency may take any
reasonable action necessary to avoid or eliminate the immediate danger or
hazard. The action taken shall be an action that is least likely under the
circumstances to cause impact on, damage to or removal of any trees, and the
village assumes no responsibility or liability for any action taken. The person
taking the action shall document the reasons for the tree emergency by
photography or videotape of the tree emergency condition and the danger or
hazard created by the condition, and shall report the action taken to the
Village Manager within 48 hours after the action is taken.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 150.158 TREE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   (A)   A tree permit application shall be submitted to the Village Manager on
a form provided by the Village Manager setting forth or otherwise providing the
information described in this section, concurrent with the submission of any
permit application for, and prior to commencement of, any construction
activity:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The owner’s name and address and the owner’s signed consent to the
application if the applicant is not the owner;
      (3)   The street address or legal description of the lot on which the
construction activity will occur and the lot or property on which the protected
tree or heritage tree is located, if different;
      (4)   A description of the size (DBH), genus, species and condition of
the protected tree or heritage tree to be damaged or removed;
      (5)   A brief explanation of the reasons necessitating impact on, damage
to or removal of the protected tree or heritage tree, or a statement certifying
that no impact on, damage to or removal of a protected tree or heritage tree
will occur;
      (6)   A construction activity protection plan, if applicable, in
accordance with §
150.166;
      (7)   A description or depiction of the size and location of any utility
facility located, or proposed to be located, on the lot or any adjacent
property; and
      (8)   Any other data and information as the Village Manager shall deem
necessary to allow full and fair consideration of the tree permit application.
   (B)   Any person submitting an application for a permit or approval to
perform any work pursuant to codes and ordinances of the village or other law
may be required to certify that the work under the permit or approval is not
construction activity under this subchapter. In the event that any
certification is found by the Village Manager or Building Commissioner to be
untrue or incorrect, all work included in the permit or approval may be stopped
until an application is filed pursuant to this subchapter and any appropriate
permits or authorizations are issued by the village.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 150.159 TREE PERMIT AND TREE ORDINANCE AUTHORIZATION FEES.
   (A)   Permit fee required. No tree permit shall be issued pursuant to this
subchapter unless a tree permit fee is paid by the applicant. The tree permit
fee shall be in the amount established in the annual fee ordinance.
   (B)   Exception to fee requirement. No tree permit fee shall be required if
the tree permit application seeks to impact, damage or remove a tree that is:
      (1)   Dead, diseased, insect infected or otherwise unsafe and a hazard to
persons, property or other trees;
      (2)   In dangerous proximity to any public utility line or related
facility; or
      (3)   Necessary to comply with established good forestry practices.
   (C)   Tree ordinance authorization. No fee shall be assessed for the
issuance of a tree ordinance authorization.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 150.160 REVIEW OF TREE PERMIT APPLICATIONS; PERMIT AND AUTHORIZATION
ISSUANCE.
   (A)   On-site inspection. Upon receipt of a complete tree permit
application, the Village Manager shall visit and inspect the lot and contiguous
and adjoining lots in order to evaluate the tree permit application, and, where
necessary as determined by the Village Manager, provide an on-site consultation
with the applicant to:
      (1)   Review the tree permit application; and
      (2)   Suggest alternatives that may be less likely to result in impact
on, damage to or removal of, or otherwise minimize impact on or damage to, a
protected tree or heritage tree.
   (B)   Tree permit for protected trees not in a required yard. If the
protected tree is not located in a required yard of a lot, the Village Manager
shall approve a tree permit application and issue a tree permit immediately
after the on-site consultation.
   (C)   Tree permit for protected tree in a required yard. No tree permit
shall be issued for a protected tree located in a required yard of a lot,
unless the protected tree to be removed or damaged is replaced in accordance
with §§
150.164 and
150.165.
   (D)   Tree permit for heritage trees anywhere on a lot. No tree permit shall
be issued for a heritage tree located anywhere on a lot unless the heritage
tree damaged or removed is replaced in accordance with §§
150.164 and
150.165 of this subchapter; provided, however, that no application for any
permit involving any exterior construction activity or the demolition, removal
or addition of 50% or more of:
      (1)   The floor area of any building or buildings on the same lot; or
      (2)   The structural elements of the walls or facade of a building or
buildings on the same lot, shall be accepted by the village for any lot within
one year following the issuance of a tree permit for the removal of a heritage
tree on the same lot unless the tree permit was issued because the heritage
tree was dead, diseased, insect infected or otherwise unsafe and a hazard to
persons, property or other trees or in dangerous proximity to any public
utility line or related facility.
   (E)   Tree ordinance authorization. Whenever the Village Manager determines
that the construction activity contemplated in connection with a tree permit
application will not have any impact on, or will not damage or remove any
protected tree or heritage tree on the lot, the Village Manager shall issue the
applicant a tree ordinance authorization. Any pruning or other work under the
authorization shall be consistent with national pruning standards.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 150.161 TIME LIMITATION ON TREE PERMIT AND TREE ORDINANCE AUTHORIZATION.
   A tree permit or tree ordinance authorization issued under this subchapter
shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized is not commenced
within six months from the date of issuance, or if the work is suspended or
discontinued for a period of six months.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 150.162 DENIAL OF A TREE PERMIT.
   If the tree permit application, inspection of the lot, on-site consultation
(where necessary) and consideration of all other reliable and relevant
information reveal that the applicant has not justified impacting, damaging or
removing a protected tree or heritage tree to the satisfaction of the Village
Manager, then the Village Manager shall promptly notify the applicant that the
tree permit application is denied and that no tree permit shall be issued.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 150.163 APPEALS.
   Any applicant, owner of the lot on which construction activity is proposed
or owner of an affected protected tree or heritage tree aggrieved by a decision
of the Village Manager in the enforcement of any terms or provisions of this
subchapter may appeal the decision by filing a written notice of appeal with
the Village Clerk within ten days after the date of the Village Manager’s
decision. Any applicant, lot owner or tree owner filing an appeal shall have
the burden of demonstrating an actual hardship, an abuse of discretion, or an
error in interpretation of this subchapter. The Village Board shall review the
tree permit application and render a decision on the appeal and, in making this
decision, may consider any relevant evidence, documents or information pursuant
to rules and procedures that the Village Board may establish from time to time.
The decision of the Village Board to affirm, modify or reverse the Village
Manager’s decision shall be final. The Village Clerk shall notify the person
who filed the appeal, as well as the applicant, lot owner or the owner of the
affected tree if different than the party filing the appeal, of the Village
Board’s decision on the appeal within five days after the final action. No work
shall be performed involving the affected protected tree or heritage tree prior
to issuance of notice of the Village Board’s decision on the appeal.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 150.164 TREE REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   Tree replacement required. Except as expressly provided in subsection
(D) below and except where payment in lieu of replacement is expressly
authorized by §
150.165, tree replacement shall be mandatory for the damage or removal of any
protected tree that is located in a required yard of a lot, and for the damage
or removal of any heritage tree located anywhere on a lot, according to the
following tree replacement rate:
      (1)   The replacement of protected trees shall be so that the sum of the
DBH inches of the new trees shall be one inch or more for each one inch of DBH
of the protected trees that have been damaged or removed;
      (2)   The replacement of heritage trees shall be so that the sum of the
DBH inches of the new trees shall be two inches or more for each one inch of
DBH of the heritage trees that have been damaged or removed; and
      (3)   The replacement of protected and heritage trees removed for good
forestry practices shall be replaced on a one-for- one basis. Replacement trees
must comply with the regulations established in §
150.164(B) of this code.
   (B)   Replacement trees. All replacement trees shall be in good health,
structurally sound and of appropriate genus, species, variety and cultivar, and
shall be planted in accordance with good construction practices and current
standards generally observed by professionals in the forestry, landscaping and
landscape architecture professions. The Village Board, by resolution duly
adopted, shall establish a list of trees of appropriate or inappropriate genus,
species, varieties and cultivars under this section. No individual replacement
tree may be less than three inches DBH. Any replacement tree that dies or
becomes diseased within one year following the date of planting shall be
replaced by the applicant at the applicant’s sole expense.
   (C)   Replacement schedule. All tree replacements must be made pursuant to a
written time schedule submitted by the applicant and approved by the Village
Manager.
   (D)   Exception to replacement requirement. The Village Manager shall have
the authority to authorize an exemption from the replacement requirements and
payment in lieu requirements otherwise applicable under this subchapter:
      (1)   If the Village Manager determines that the protected tree or
heritage tree to be damaged or removed is dead, diseased, insect infected or
otherwise unsafe and a hazard to persons, property or other trees; or
      (2)   If the Village Manager determines that the protected tree or
heritage tree to be damaged or removed is in dangerous proximity to any public
utility line or related facility;.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005; Ord. 1282, passed 6-21-2121)
§ 150.165 PAYMENT IN LIEU OF REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   When applicable. If the applicant determines that there is
insufficient space on the lot to allow for the planting of all replacement
trees, or replacement at the required rate would otherwise be inconsistent with
the current standards generally observed by professionals in the forestry,
landscaping and landscape architecture professions, the Village Manager shall
charge a fee in lieu of some or all of the replacement trees otherwise required
under this subchapter.
   (B)   Amount. The fee to be charged in lieu of replacing any protected tree
or heritage tree shall be as established in the annual fee ordinance.
   (C)   Use of payments in lieu. The proceeds of any fees collected under this
section shall be used for the planting of trees on public parkways or other
public properties in the village. Where consistent with good forestry
practices, the fees collected for a particular lot shall be used for
replacement trees within the block or blocks on which the lot is located or on
the block or blocks on the opposite side of the street or streets on which the
lot is located.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 150.166 TREE PROTECTION PLAN.
   (A)   Plan required. A tree protection plan shall be submitted with all
building permit applications pursuant to which construction activity will
occur, regardless of whether a tree is located on the lot on which the
construction activity is proposed, unless an exception is granted pursuant to
division (F) below. Such plan shall be submitted contemporaneously with a
building permit application, and in no event shall a building permit be issued
without such a plan being submitted and approved.
   (B)   Contents of tree protection plan. The tree protection plan shall be a
site plan, with a scale no less than one inch equals ten feet, on a topographic
map if deemed necessary by the Village Manager.
      (1)   All tree protection plans shall accurately show the following:
         (a)   The existing and proposed shrubs and landscaping on the lot
other than trees;
         (b)   The location, species, DBH, general condition, and proposed
disposition of existing trees that are located on (i) the lot; (ii) the
properties within 15 feet of the lot lines; (iii) and adjacent rights-of-way;
         (c)   The location and type of protective fencing to be placed on the
lot and adjacent rights-of-way;
         (d)   The location of critical root zone areas and the types and
locations of protection to be provided to minimize damage to tree roots in such
areas, such as wood chips and exterior plywood;
         (e)   A description of the tree preservation procedures required by §§
150.155 through
150.167 of this code, such as root pruning, crown pruning, and the like;
         (f)   The location, shape, and spatial arrangement of all temporary
and permanent driveways, parking areas, and temporary material storage sites
and access ways; and
         (g)   The location of any new utility services, including water,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, gas, electric, telephone, and cable television or
any modifications to existing utility services, that may impact existing
private or public trees.
      (2)   If a grading plan is required by some other provisions of this
code, the tree protection plan shall also depict the existing and proposed
grading of the development area, showing elevations with contour lines at one-
foot intervals.
      (3)   The Village Manager may require the applicant to provide any
additional information the Village Manager deems necessary to determine whether
the tree protection plan complies with the requirements and the stated policy
and purpose of this chapter.
   (C)   Tree protection procedures prior to construction. New construction can
lead to tree loss or loss of vigor if root damage or encroachment occurs. In
order to protect tree root zones and maximize available space for tree roots,
the following procedures shall be adhered to during the project planning and
design period:
      (1)   Planning and design. Project and development plans should be
developed so that areas of demolition and construction activity are situated so
as to avoid, to the greatest extent possible, damage to or removal of any
protected tree or heritage tree. Consideration shall be given to the use of
various building methods that minimize tree disturbance, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   Cantilever construction in order to minimize foundation
excavations;
         (b)   Minimizing grade changes or designing grades in such a way as to
minimize root damage or compaction; and
         (c)   Use of materials other than concrete or asphalt for patios,
driveways, sidewalks or other surfaces, in order to allow maximum air and water
penetration to tree roots.
   (D)   Tree protection procedures during construction. Prior to issuance of a
building permit, the Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall determine
tree preservation procedures for trees on the property and on any adjacent
private or public property within 15 feet of lot lines. The tree preservation
procedures shall include, but are not limited to, the requirements set forth in
the following paragraphs.
      (1)   Protective fencing. In areas where vehicular traffic and material
storage is not necessary, protective fencing shall be installed around trees
and critical root areas. The protective fencing and the areas it encloses shall
be subject to the following standards:
         (a)   The owner and the owner’s general contractor shall be jointly
responsible for requesting an inspection of the protective fencing required by
the tree protection plan, and no other construction activity shall be permitted
unless and until the Village Manager, or his or her designee, has inspected and
approved the protective fencing;
         (b)   The protective fencing shall not be moved or removed without the
prior inspection and approval of the Village Manager, or his or her designee;
         (c)   All protective fencing shall be wire mesh or welded wire fencing
four feet high with steel or wooden posts installed and spaced no more than
eight feet apart and securely anchored;
         (d)   The protective fencing shall extend to the drip line of the
tree, but in no case shall fencing be less than a radius of ten feet from
protected trees and no less than 15 feet from heritage trees; and
         (e)   Protective fencing must be properly maintained in an erect
position at all times, as approved by the Village Manager, or his or her
designee. During construction and until completion, the area within the fencing
shall be a no-use area, in which all construction activities such as the
movement and placement of equipment or material, and the storage of spoils, is
prohibited; provided that nothing herein shall relieve the owner of the
responsibility to keep the construction site, including the no-use area, free
from litter and overgrowth.
      (2)   Protection of tree limbs, tree trunks and critical root zones. Tree
limbs, tree trunks and critical root zones shall be protected in areas where
vehicular traffic, material storage or construction activity may occur.
Examples of such protection include, but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   Tree branch pruning by a certified arborist to minimize damage
prior to construction activity caused by heavy equipment, vehicular traffic, or
construction activity;
         (b)   Root pruning by a certified arborist prior to excavation
activities, with the root pruning at a depth of 18 to 24 inches below grade and
located 12 inches behind the excavation line;
         (c)   Bridging to minimize compaction of tree roots in critical root
zones, which shall consist of, but not limited to, applying eight inches of
wood chips in the critical root zone or covering the critical root zone with
sheets of exterior plywood that is at least three-quarters-inch thick; and
         (d)   Protecting tree trunks with wood planks, which shall: (i)
measure two feet by four feet, two feet by six feet, or one foot by six feet;
(ii) be erected vertically and continuously around the tree trunk; and (iii) be
fastened in place with metal wires or banding.
      (3)   Underground utilities. Where the only available route for
underground utilities runs through a critical root zone, all such utilities
shall be installed by auguring rather than by open trench methods.
         (a)   Commencement of auguring shall begin at a distance from the
tree’s base of at least one foot for every one inch of DBH, up to a maximum
distance of 20 feet from the tree’s base. The same minimum distance shall apply
to the auguring exit.
         (b)   The auguring shall be done at least 24 inches below the soil
surface.
      (4)   The owner and the owner’s general contractor shall be jointly
responsible for requesting an inspection of underground utility work, and no
other construction activity shall be permitted unless and until the Village
Manager has inspected and approved such work.
      (5)   Grade changes within the drip line of a tree, such as filling or
lowering, are prohibited unless approved by the Village Manager.
      (6)   In addition to complying with the various yard setback requirements
of Chapter 153 of this code, all buildings and other structures shall be
located on a lot or parcel of land so as to minimize damage to and/or removal
of protected trees and heritage trees.
   (E)   Tree protection procedures following construction. In order to
maximize the long-term survivability and growth of protected trees and heritage
trees on a construction site, the Village Manager may require post-construction
measures to be undertaken on a construction site prior to final inspection or
closeout of a building permit. The measures to be taken may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Root aeration to remediate soil compaction around the root systems
of protected trees and heritage trees. This work may only be performed by a
certified arborist.
      (2)   Fertilization, to provide existing protected trees and heritage
trees with nutrients and trace elements to promote healthy growth.
Fertilization may be accomplished by root injection feeding, spraying, or
topical application, and shall not apply to newly planted trees.
      (3)   Pruning or trimming of protected trees and heritage trees in
accordance with national standards to promote healthy growth and remove
diseased or dead branches. Pruning undertaken pursuant to this section shall be
performed by a certified arborist or under the direction of the Village
Manager.
      (4)   Mulching, to provide a protective, moisture-retaining layer around
the base of a tree, to help assure healthy growth.
      (5)   Any additional measures deemed necessary by the Village Manager to
assure the continued health of protected trees and heritage trees on the
property.
   (F)   Exceptions. The Village Manager, or his or her designee, may waive any
requirement of this section in the event that the Village Manager, or his or
her designee, determines that the construction activity is minimal in nature
and will not, or is not reasonably likely to, cause impact on, damage to, or
removal of, a protected tree or heritage tree.
(Ord. 1215, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 150.167 SECURITY.
   The Village Manager shall require an applicant for a tree permit to provide
the village with a letter of credit, bond or cash deposit to secure the tree
replacement obligations required pursuant to §
150.164 or the tree protection measures required pursuant to §
150.166(C), where the amount of the security as determined under this section
is in an amount as established in the annual fee ordinance. The amount of the
security shall be determined by the Village Manager and shall be equal to the
total cost of the required replacement trees based on the formula set forth in
§
150.165(B) or the total cost of strictly complying with and fully implementing
the tree protection measures, as the case may be. If the Village Manager
determines that the applicant has neglected or refused, following written
notice, to comply with the tree replacement obligations or to implement the
tree protection measures, as the case may be, the Village Manager is authorized
to perform or to cause to be performed the work and to apply an amount
equivalent to the actual costs of the work from the security. Upon completion
of the tree replacement or the tree protection measures, as the case may be,
the security, or any remainder thereof, shall be returned or released to the
applicant.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
§§ 150.168 THROUGH 150.174 RESERVED.
BUILDINGS
§ 150.175 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   The provisions of the International Building Code, 2021 edition, published
by the International Code Council, are hereby adopted by reference, subject
only to the additions, deletions and modifications specifically set forth in §
150.176 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 723, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-
15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 150.176 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING
CODE.
   The following sections of the International Building Code, are hereby
amended, deleted or modified as hereinafter set forth:
Section Number Section Title Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Section    Section Title Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number
101.1      Title         Insert the Village of Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois for [name of
                         jurisdiction].
101.4.3    Plumbing      Delete International Plumbing Code and insert State of Illinois Plumbing Code,
                         2014 or current edition.
           Department of
103.1      building      Insert "The Community Development Department" for "[insert name of department].
           safety
103.3      Deputies      Delete last sentence.
           Permit for    Add new subsection: A permit to demolish or remove a principal structure for the
105.1.3    principal     purpose of constructing a new principal structure on that same property shall
           structure     not be issued until a building permit is obtained for the purpose of
           required      constructing said new principal structure.
           Permit
           application   Add new subsection: No application for a building permit that contemplates
105.1.4    for           demolition work for which a demolition permit is required shall be accepted by
           replacement   the Building Commissioner unless and until the issuance of a demolition permit
           of principal  is approved by the Building Review Commission.
           structure
                         Building: Delete and substitute:
                         "Permits shall not be required for the following work:
                         a. Building:
                         i. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops, and similar
                         finish work.
                         ii. Construction or installation of temporary motion picture, television, and
                         theater stage sets and scenery. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a film production
                         permit shall be required.
                         iii. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-
                         family dwellings.
                         b. Electrical: A permit shall not be required for the replacement of switches,
                         receptacle outlets, light fixtures, light fixtures with ceiling fans, ceiling
                         fans, or overcurrent protection devices (breakers, fuses, etc.) where all work
                         is executed in compliance with the adopted version of the National Electrical
                         Code. A permit shall be required to extend any branch circuit or feeder circuit.
                         In addition, a permit shall be required for the replacement or relocation of any
                         electrical service panel, feeder panel, branch circuit panel, or for any new
                         electrical work.
                         c. Mechanical:
                         i. Portable heating appliances.
           Work exempt   ii. Portable ventilation appliances.
105.2      from permit   iii. Portable cooling units.
                         iv. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or
                         make such equipment unsafe.
                         v. Portable evaporative coolers.
                         vi. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less
                         of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746W) or less.
                         vii. Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
                         system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
                         d. Plumbing:
                         i. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided,
                         however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe
                         becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with
                         new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be
                         obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
                         ii. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or
                         fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
                         repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves,
                         pipes or fixtures.
                         Exemptions from the permit requirements of this Building Code shall not be
                         deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation
                         of the provisions of the Village Code or any other laws or ordinances of the
                         Village.
                         Delete subsection and substitute: A permit shall expire if the work covered by
                         the permit:
                         (a)   is not commenced within six months after issuance of the permit, or
105.5      Expiration    (b)   is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months or more, or
                         (c)   is not completed within 18 months after issuance of the permit, unless the
                         work under the permit is limited to fences, impervious surfaces, or work with a
                         value of less than $50,000, in which case the permit shall expire if the work is
                         not completed within 12 months.
                         An extension must be applied for prior to the expiration of the permit for which
                         extension is sought, and may be granted by the Building Commissioner because of
                         delays resulting from strikes, fire, windstorm or other circumstances beyond the
                         applicant s control; provided, however, that no single extension shall exceed
                         six months, and the total duration of all extensions granted shall not exceed 12
                        months. If no such extension is granted and the work is not completed, the
                         applicant shall be required to apply for a new permit under the provisions of
                         this Code. No permit fees shall be refunded because of the expiration of any
                         permit pursuant to the provisions of this section. Fees for all extensions shall
                         be in amounts established by the Board of Trustees by resolution from time to
                         time.
                         Add to subsection: All plans, computations and specifications required for a
                         building permit application for new construction work, alteration, repair,
                         expansion, addition or modification work involving the practice of professional
106.1.1.2  Signature and architecture or engineering, as defined by the laws of the State of Illinois,
           seal required shall be prepared by, or under the supervision of, and signed and sealed by a
                         professional architect or engineer registered or licensed in the State of
                         Illinois, unless specifically excepted from this requirement by the Illinois
                         Architecture Practice Act of 1989.
                         Add new subsection: All applications for building permits shall be accompanied
                         by a permit closeout escrow in amounts established by the Board of Trustees by
                         resolution from time to time. The escrow shall be held by the Village for the
                         duration of the work under the permit and returned to the permittee or property
                         owner of record only after the completion and final inspection and approval of
                         all work under the permit within the term of the permit or any lawful extension
                         thereof. If the completion, final inspection, and approval of the work does not
           Permit        occur prior to the expiration of the permit or any lawful extension thereof, the
108.5.1    closeout      Village must send notice to the property owner of record and the permittee
           escrow        stating that the escrow will be forfeited to the Village unless the owner of
                         record or permittee, within 30 days after the notice date, takes corrective
                         action by (i) completing the work and obtaining final inspection and approval;
                         (ii) obtaining a lawful extension of the permit term; or (iii) otherwise
                         arranging to complete the work in a manner acceptable to the Village Manager. If
                         the property owner of record or permittee fails to take such corrective action
                         within 30 days, the escrow will be retained by the Village to cover the costs
                         and expenses associated with the administration of any final inspections and
                         approvals of the work.
                         Add new subsection: If any re-inspection is required to verify that corrective
109.3.8.1  Re-           work has been done in compliance with this code, a fee shall be charged to the
           inspections   owner for each re-inspection. The fee shall be in amounts established by the
                         Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time.
                         Delete subsection and substitute: Within 10 working days following receipt of a
                         request by the holder of a permit, the Building Commissioner may review and
                         determine whether the request meets the requirements to issue a temporary
                         certificate of occupancy of a portion of the work covered under the building
           Temporary     permit, before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided
110.3      occupancy     that such temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued only where such
                         portion or portions shall be occupied safely prior to full completion of the
                         structure without endangering life or public welfare. Such temporary
                         certificates of occupancy shall be issued for a period of no more than six
                         months, unless an extension is granted by the Building Commissioner. To obtain a
                         temporary certificate of occupancy, the holder of a building permit must:
                         (a)   Sign a written agreement with the Village stipulating remaining work to be
                         done and/or deficiencies which must be corrected. Such agreement may contain
                         additional stipulations as may from time to time be deemed in the best interest
                         of the Village by the Building Commissioner. Such agreement shall be co-signed
                         by the owner, contract purchaser and/or the tenant; and
                         (b)    Post an additional cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit
                         acceptable to the Village Manager, in an amount equivalent to (1) 110 percent of
                         the estimated cost of completing and/or remedying all items stipulated to in the
                         agreement (which amount shall be not less than an amount established by the
                         Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time) plus (2) a temporary
                         certificate of occupancy fee in amounts established by the Board of Trustees by
                         resolution from time to time.
                         Failure by the holder of a temporary certificate of occupancy to obtain a final
                         certificate of occupancy by the date established by the Building Commissioner
                         shall result in automatic forfeiture of the related cash deposit or irrevocable
                         letter of credit. The Building Commissioner may, but shall not be obligated to,
                         use such forfeited funds to complete the work indicated on the inspection report
                         attached to the temporary certificate of occupancy, which was issued for the
                        premises. Such forfeiture shall not impair the right of the Village to enforce
                         any and all remedies available to it by reason of any violation, including the
                         right to recover a fine or penalty or seek injunctive relief. In the event that
                         the Building Commissioner uses such forfeited funds, he or she shall assess and
                         deduct an administrative fee equal to 10 percent of the amount of forfeited
                         funds used. Any balance remaining in the cash deposit or irrevocable letter of
                         credit not required to complete the work shall be refunded to the depositor upon
                         issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.
112        Board of      Delete entire subsection.
           Appeals
                         Add new subsection: If the Building Commissioner issues a stop work order
           Fees for      pursuant to Section 114.1, the owner shall pay a fee established by the Board of
114.2.1    stop-work     Trustees by resolution from time to time for removal of the stop work order, in
           order         addition to any fee payable under Section 109.3.8.1 for re-inspection of the
                         work.
                         At end of paragraph, delete: International Plumbing Code and substitute: State
903.3.5    Water         of Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014 or current edition. Hydrant water flow data used
           supplies      for the design of any sprinkler system shall be witnessed by the Fire Department
                         and shall be no more than six (6) months old.
903.4.2    Alarms        At end of paragraph, add: An outside audio/visual device shall be provided and
                         shall be located above the fire department connection.
           Alarm-        Add new subsection: All sprinklered buildings shall be provided with audio/
903.4.2.1  indicating    visual alarm-indicating devices. The alarm-indicating devices shall be of
           devices       sufficient number and power to be seen and heard in all areas of every building.
                         Add new subsection: Fire sprinkler system inspector test valves shall be
903.5.1    Test valves   accessible at all times and shall be located no more than 6 feet above the
                         finished floor. On multiple riser systems, each test valve shall be marked to
                         identify which riser and area it tests.
903.4.3    Floor control At end of paragraph, add: In multiple story buildings, floor control valves with
           valves        water flow and tamper switches shall be provided for each floor.
                         Add new subsection: Provide a minimum 10% safety factor in the fire protection
903.6      Safety factor system hydraulic calculation. The system demand shall be 10% minimum below the
                         seasonal low water flow test supply.
903.7      Hydraulic     Add new subsection: By each hydraulically calculated area, on each drawing,
           nameplate     provide a copy of the hydraulic nameplate.
           NFPA          Add new subsection: The appendixes of all NFPA standards are to be considered as
903.8      standards     part of each standard and are considered a shall requirement and not should
                         information.
903.9      Fire alarm    Add new subsection: All fire alarm systems shall be of the addressable type and
           systems       shall be installed per NFPA 72, 2022.
           Quick         Add new subsection: All offices, assembly, and residential buildings and areas
903.10     response      where a sprinkler system is required shall be provided with residential and/or
           sprinklers    quick response sprinklers.
                         At end of paragraph, add: Notwithstanding the foregoing, standpipes shall be
905.3.1    Height        required in all buildings that are more than two stories high and/or more than
                         two stories below grade.
907.2.11.1 Group R-1     Add new sub-sentence Smoke detectors shall be installed at the top of every
(4)                      stairwell used for exiting.
907.2.11.2 Groups R-2,   Add new sub-sentence Smoke detectors shall be installed at the top of every
(4)        R-3, R-4 and  stairwell used for exiting.
           I-1
1028.5     Access to a   Delete and substitute: The exit discharge shall provide a paved direct and
           Public Way    unobstructed path to a public way.
Chapter 11 Accessibility Deleted in its entirety, superseded by the adoption of the Illinois
                         Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Adm. Code 400), current edition.
1404.5.3   Lead-coated   Deleted in its entirety.
           copper
                         Add new subsection: All structures other than one- and two- family dwellings
                         shall have no less than a Class A or Class B roof covering, as classified in
                         accordance with standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials
1506.2     Materials     (ASTM). All one- or two-family dwellings shall have no less than a Class C roof
                         covering as classified in accordance with the standards of the ASTM. Permits
                         shall be required for the installation and replacement of roofing materials. All
                         roofing contractors shall be licensed by the state.
           Establishment Insert the Village of Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois for [name of
1612.3     of flood      jurisdiction] .
           hazard areas
                         Add new subsection:
                         Building elevation standards. The lowest floor elevation for any new building
1803.5.4   Ground-water  construction which includes a basement, cellar or crawlspace on a previously
           table         developed property shall not be lower than at least 18 inches above the seasonal
                         high groundwater elevation. The seasonal high groundwater elevation for the
                         subject property shall be determined by a qualified professional.
1805.4.5   Timber        Delete entire subsection.
           footings
           Permanent
1807.1.4   Wood          Delete entire subsection.
           foundations
Chapter 27 Electrical    Deleted in its entirety, superseded by Section 150.215 of the Village Code.
Chapter 29 Plumbing      Deleted in its entirety, superseded by Section 150.195 of the Village Code.
           systems
                         Delete and substitute: Except as otherwise provided for in the code, the design,
                         construction, installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of elevators and
           References    conveying systems and their components shall conform to ASME A17.1/CSA B44, ASME
3001.2     standards     A90.1, ASME B20.1, and ALI ALCTV, the provisions of the Illinois Elevator Safety
                         and Regulation Act, 225 ILCS 312/1 et seq. and Part 1000, Chapter II, Title 41
                         of the Illinois Administrative Code, entitled "Illinois Elevator Safety Rules,"
                         are hereby adopted into this Code by this reference.
                         Passenger elevators required to be accessible or to serve as part of an
3001.3     Accessibility accessible means of egress shall comply with Sections 1009.4, and the Illinois
                         Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Adm. Code 400), current edition.
                         Delete and substitute: Where elevators are installed in any building, other than
                         a one- or two-family dwelling, shall provide not fewer than one elevator for
           Elevator car  fire department emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of
           to            such a size and arrangement to accommodate an ambulance stretcher 24 inches by
3002.4     accommodate   84 inches with not less than 5-inch radius corners, in an open horizontal
           ambulance     position, plus two attendants and their equipment. The elevator car shall be
           stretcher     identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (Star of
                         Life). The symbol shall not be less than three inches in height and shall be
                         placed inside on both sides of the hoistway door frame.
           Personnel and Add after last sentence: All miscellaneous hoisting and elevating equipment
3004.4     material      shall be subjected to tests and inspections as required by the AHJ to ensure
           hoist         safe operation.
                         Add the following sentence: The approved means is not to be used as a passage
3005.1     Access        way through the space to other areas of the building. Section 3005.4 Machine
                         rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces, and control spaces. Delete Exception #2.
                         Add new section:
                         3009.1 Prohibited Operation. Add new subsection to new section: The operation of
                         all equipment governed by the provisions of this chapter and hereafter
                         installed, relocated or altered shall be unlawful by persons other than the
           Certificate   installer until such equipment has been inspected and tested as herein required
3009       of Compliance and a final certificate of compliance has been issued by the building
                         commissioner.
                         3009.2 Posting Certificates of Compliance: Add new subsection to new section:
                         The owner or lessee shall post the current-issued certificate of compliance in a
                         conspicuous place inside the conveyance. A copy of the current issued
                         certificate is acceptable. Please refer to Illinois Elevator Safety Act.
 
(Ord. 723, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1211, passed 1-
22-2018; Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1336, passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1374,
passed 12-9-2024)
§§ 150.177 THROUGH 150.184 RESERVED.
ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS
§ 150.185 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE, 2021 EDITION.
   The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, 2021 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., are
hereby adopted by reference, subject only to the additions, deletions and
modifications specifically set forth in §
150.186 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed
12-9-2024)
§ 150.186 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL
RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   The following sections of the International Residential Code for One- and
Two-Family Dwellings, 2021 edition, are hereby amended, deleted or modified as
hereinafter set forth:
Section Number Section Title Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Section Number Section Title                                   Additions, Deletions and Modifications
R101.1         Title                                           Insert “the Village of Kenilworth, Cook County,
                                                               Illinois” for “[name of jurisdiction].”
                                                               Delete “The department of building safety” and
R103.1         Department of building safety                   substitute “The Community Development Department”
                                                               and delete “and the official in charge thereof
                                                               shall be known as the Building Commissioner.”
                                                               Add new subsection: “A permit to demolish or
                                                               remove a principal structure for the purpose of
R105.1.1       Permit for principal structure required         constructing a new principal structure on that
                                                               same property shall not be issued until a building
                                                               permit is obtained for the purpose of constructing
                                                               said new principal structure.”
                                                               Add new subsection: “No application for a building
                                                               permit that contemplates demolition work for which
                                                               a demolition permit is required shall be accepted
R105.1.2       Permit application for replacement of principal by the Building Commissioner unless and until the
               structure                                       demolition permit reviewed by the Building Review
                                                               Commission process as outlined in Article I of the
                                                               Village Code is approved by the Building Review
                                                               Commission.”
                                                               Delete and substitute: "Permits shall not be
                                                               required for the following work:
                                                               a. Building:
                                                               i. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
                                                               cabinets, countertops, and similar finish work.
                                                               ii. Construction or installation of temporary
                                                               motion picture, television, and theater stage sets
                                                               and scenery. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a film
                                                               production permit shall be required.
                                                               iii. Swings and other playground equipment
                                                               accessory to detached one- and two-family
                                                               dwellings.
                                                               b. Electrical: A permit shall not be required for
                                                               the replacement of switches, receptacle outlets,
                                                               light fixtures, light fixtures with ceiling fans,
                                                               ceiling fans, or overcurrent protection devices
                                                               (breakers, fuses, etc.) where all work is executed
                                                               in compliance with the adopted version of the
                                                               National Electrical Code. A permit shall be
                                                               required to extend any branch circuit or feeder
                                                               circuit. In addition, a permit shall be required
                                                               for the replacement or relocation of any
                                                               electrical service panel, feeder panel, branch
                                                               circuit panel, or for any new electrical work.
                                                               c. Mechanical:
                                                               i. Portable heating appliances.
                                                               ii. Portable ventilation appliances.
                                                               iii. Replacement of any minor part that does not
                                                               alter approval of equipment or make such equipment
R105.2         Work exempt from permit                         unsafe.
                                                               iv. Portable evaporative coolers.
                                                               v. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing
                                                               10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that
                                                               are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746W) or
                                                               less.
                                                               vi. Portable fuel cell appliances that are not
                                                               connected to a fixed piping system and are not
                                                               interconnected to a power grid.
                                                               d. Plumbing:
                                                               i. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil,
                                                               waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any
                                                               concealed trap, drainage, water, soil, waste or
                                                               vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes
                                                               necessary to remove and replace the same with new
                                                               material, such work shall be considered as new
                                                               work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection
                                                               made as provided in this code.
                                                               ii. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of
                                                               leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the
                                                               removal and reinstallation of water closets,
                                                               provided such repairs do not involve or require
                                                               the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes
                                                               or fixtures.
                                                               Exemptions from the permit requirements of this
                                                               Building Code shall not be deemed to grant
                                                               authorization for any work to be done in any
                                                               manner in violation of the provisions of the
                                                               Village Code or any other laws or ordinances of
                                                               the Village.
                                                               Delete section and substitute: “A permit shall
                                                               expire if the work covered by the permit:
                                                               (a)   is not commenced within six months after
                                                               issuance of the permit, or
                                                               (b)   is suspended or abandoned for a period of
                                                               six months or more, or
                                                               (c)   is not completed within 18 months after
                                                               issuance of the permit, unless the work under the
                                                               permit is limited to fences, impervious surfaces,
                                                               or work with a value of less than $50,000, in
                                                               which case the permit shall expire if the work is
                                                               not completed within 12 months. An extension must
                                                               be applied for prior to the expiration of the
                                                               permit for which extension is sought, and may be
R105.5         Expiration                                      granted by the Building Commissioner because of
                                                               delays resulting from strikes, fire, windstorm or
                                                               other circumstances beyond the applicant’s
                                                               control; provided, however, that no single
                                                               extension shall exceed six months, and the total
                                                               duration of all extensions granted shall not
                                                               exceed 12 months. If no such extension is granted
                                                               and the work is not completed, the applicant shall
                                                               be required to apply for a new permit under the
                                                               provisions of this Code. No permit fees shall be
                                                               refunded because of the expiration of any permit
                                                               pursuant to the provisions of this section. Fees
                                                               for all extensions shall be in amounts established
                                                               by the Board of Trustees by resolution from time
                                                               to time.”
                                                               Add the following after the first sentence.
                                                               “Construction documents for all new one- and two-
                                                               family residences, additions, and substantial
R106.1         Submittal documents                             alternations shall be prepared by, or under the
                                                               supervision of, and signed and sealed by a
                                                               professional architect or engineer registered or
                                                               licensed in the State of Illinois.
                                                               Exception: The building official is authorized to
                                                               waive the submission of construction documents and
                                                               other data not required to be prepared by a
                                                              registered design professional if it is found that
                                                               the nature of the work applied for is such that
                                                               reviewing of construction documents is not
                                                               necessary to obtain compliance with this code.”
                                                               Add new subsection: “All applications for building
                                                               permits shall be accompanied by a permit closeout
                                                               escrow in amounts established by the Board of
                                                               Trustees by resolution from time to time. The
                                                               escrow shall be held by the Village for the
                                                               duration of the work under the permit and returned
                                                               to the permittee or property owner of record only
                                                               after the completion and final inspection and
                                                               approval of all work under the permit within the
                                                               term of the permit or any lawful extension
                                                               thereof. If the completion, final inspection and
                                                               approval of the work does not occur prior to the
                                                               expiration of the permit or any lawful extension
                                                               thereof, the Village must send notice to the
R108.4.1       Permit closeout escrow                          property owner of record and the permittee stating
                                                               that the escrow will be forfeited to the Village
                                                               unless the owner of record or permittee, within 30
                                                               days after the notice date, takes corrective
                                                               action by: (i) completing the work and obtaining
                                                               final inspection and approval; (ii) obtaining a
                                                               lawful extension of the permit term; or (iii)
                                                               otherwise arranging to complete the work in a
                                                               manner acceptable to the Village Manager. If the
                                                               property owner of record or permittee fails to
                                                               take such corrective action within 30 days, the
                                                               escrow will be retained by the Village to cover
                                                               the costs and expenses associated with the
                                                               administration of any final inspections and
                                                               approvals of the work.”
                                                               Add new subparagraph: “1. If any re-inspection is
                                                               required to verify that corrective work has been
R109.1         Types of inspections                            done in compliance with this code, a fee shall be
                                                               charged to the owner for each re-inspection. The
                                                               fee shall be in amounts established by the Board
                                                               of Trustees by resolution from time to time.”
                                                               Delete section and substitute: “Within 10 working
                                                               days following receipt of a request by the holder
                                                               of a permit, the Building Commissioner may review
                                                               and determine whether the request meets the
                                                               requirements to issue a temporary certificate of
                                                               occupancy of a portion of the work covered under
                                                               the building permit, before the completion of the
                                                               entire work covered by the permit, provided that
                                                               such temporary certificate of occupancy may be
                                                               issued only where such portion or portions shall
                                                               be occupied safely prior to full completion of the
                                                               structure without endangering life or public
                                                               welfare. Such temporary certificates of occupancy
                                                               shall be issued for a period of no more than six
                                                               months, One and Two Family Dwellings, Article III
                                                               - 3 unless an extension is granted by the Building
                                                               Commissioner. To obtain a temporary certificate of
                                                               occupancy, the holder of a building permit must:
R110.4         Temporary occupancy                             (a)   Sign a written agreement with the Village
                                                               stipulating remaining work to be done and/or
                                                               deficiencies which must be corrected. Such
                                                               agreement may contain additional stipulations as
                                                               may from time to time be deemed in the best
                                                               interest of the Village by the Building
                                                               Commissioner. Such agreement shall be co-signed by
                                                               the owner, contract purchaser and/or the tenant;
                                                               and
                                                               (b)   Post an additional cash deposit or
                                                               irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the
                                                               Village Manager, in an amount equivalent to (1.)
                                                               110 percent of the estimated cost of completing
                                                               and/or remedying all items stipulated to in the
                                                               agreement (which amount shall be not less than an
                                                               amount established by the Board of Trustees by
                                                               resolution from time to time) plus (2.) a
                                                               temporary certificate of occupancy fee in amounts
                                                               established by the Board of Trustees by resolution
                                                               from time to time.
                                                               Failure by the holder of a temporary certificate
                                                               of occupancy to obtain a final certificate of
                                                               occupancy by the date established by the Building
                                                               Commissioner shall result in automatic forfeiture
                                                               of the related cash deposit or irrevocable letter
                                                               of credit. The Building Commissioner may, but
                                                               shall not be obligated to, use such forfeited
                                                               funds to complete the work indicated on the
                                                               inspection report attached to the temporary
                                                               certificate of occupancy, which was issued for the
                                                               premises. Such forfeiture shall not impair the
                                                              right of the Village to enforce any and all
                                                               remedies available to it by reason of any
                                                               violation, including the right to recover a fine
                                                               or penalty or seek injunctive relief. In the event
                                                               that the Building Commissioner uses such forfeited
                                                               funds, he shall assess and deduct an
                                                               administrative fee equal to 10 percent of the
                                                               amount of forfeited funds used. Any balance
                                                               remaining in the cash deposit or irrevocable
                                                               letter of credit not required to complete the work
                                                               shall be refunded to the depositor upon issuance
                                                               of a final certificate of occupancy.”
R112           Board of Appeals                                Delete entire section.
                                                               Add new subsection: “If the Building Commissioner
                                                               issues a stop work order pursuant to Section
                                                               R114.1, the owner shall pay a fee established by
R114.1.1       Fees for stop work order                        the Board of Trustees by resolution from time to
                                                               time for removal of the stop work order, in
                                                               addition to any fee payable under Section R109.1
                                                               for re-inspection of the work.”
                                                               Add the following definition: “ENGINEERED
                                                               STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS. A prefabricated structural
                                                               element designed to carry structural loads in the
                                                               form of a joist, beam, girder, header, wall panel
                                                               and/or stud, used in the construction of a
                                                               dwelling unit, formed primarily by a system of
R202           Definitions                                     repetitive wood or cold-formed steel framing
                                                               members. Examples of wood components are:
                                                               structural composite lumber, glue laminated beams,
                                                               truss-type open-web or perforated floor joists, I-
                                                               joists, end-jointed lumber (without HRA adhesive),
                                                               structural insulted panels, and wood structural
                                                               panels.”
R301.1.4       Intermodal Shipping Containers                  Delete entire section.
                                                               Insert under each category:
                                                               “Ground snow 30 lbs./sq. ft.
                                                               load
                                                               Wind Speed     90 miles per hour
                                                               Wind Design
                                                               Topographical  0
                                                               effects
                                                               Special Wind   N/A
                                                               Region
                                                               Wind-borne     N/A
                                                               debris zone
                                                               Seismic Design B
                                                               Category
                                                               Weathering     Severe
Table R301.2   Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria         Frost Line     42 below grade
                                                               Depth
                                                               Termite        Moderate to heavy
                                                               Winter Design
                                                               Temperature    68°F to -10°F with 50% humidity
                                                               for Heating
                                                               Facilities
                                                               Ice Barrier
                                                               Underlayment   Yes
                                                               Required
                                                               Flood Hazards  N/A
                                                               Air Freezing   1,500
                                                               Index
                                                               Mean Annual    50°F”
                                                               Temperature
                                                               Amended to read as follows: Detached garages are
R309.5         Fire sprinklers                                 not required to be sprinklered when complying with
                                                               R313.3 as amended herewith.
                                                               Add new subsection: “Where provided, attached
                                                               garages shall be protected by fire sprinklers
                                                               where the garage wall has been designed based on
                                                               Table R302.1(2), Footnote a. Sprinklers in garages
                                                               shall be connected to an automatic sprinkler
R309.5.1       Fire sprinklers                                 system that complies with NFPA 13D. Garage
                                                               sprinklers shall be residential sprinklers or
                                                               quick-response sprinklers, designed to provide a
                                                               density of 0.05 gpm/ft2. Garage doors shall not be
                                                               considered obstructions with respect to sprinkler
                                                               placement.”
                                                               Amended to read as follows: “All window well
                                                               openings shall be covered or protected with a 3
                                                               ft. tall guardrail, provided the minimum net clear
                                                               opening size complies with R310.1.1 to R310.2.3,
R310.4.4       Bars, grilles, covers and screens               and such devices shall be releasable or removable
                                                               from the inside without the use of a key, tool,
                                                               special knowledge or force greater that that
                                                               required for the normal operation of all openings
                                                               including the escape and rescue opening. Covers to
                                                               be designed to support a two-hundred-pound load.”
                                                               An emergency escape and rescue opening is required
                                                               where existing basements undergo alterations,
R310.6         Alterations or repairs of existing basements    remodeling or repairs that exceed 33% of the net
                                                               basement area, or when new sleeping rooms are
                                                               created.
                                                               Exceptions are as follows:
                                                               “1.   An automatic residential fire sprinkler
                                                               system shall not be required for additions or
                                                               alterations to existing buildings that are not
                                                               already provided with an automatic residential
                                                               sprinkler system.
                                                               2.   An automatic residential fire sprinkler
                                                               system is not required when one the following
                                                               conditions are met:
                                                                  a.   When solid dimensional lumber is used to
                                                               construct the floor/roof/wallframing systems (i.e.
                                                               2”x members), protected by at least one layer of
                                                               5/8-inch gypsum wall board on all ceilings and
                                                               walls.
                                                                  b.   When engineered structural components such
               One- and two-family dwelling automatic fire     as I-joists, glue laminated lumber and open-web
R313.2         systems                                         floor and roof trusses, to construct any portion
                                                               of a floor/roof/wall-framing system or assembly,
                                                               the entire framing system shall be protected by at
                                                               least one layer of 5/8-inch firecode (Type C or X)
                                                               gypsum wall board. See definition of ‘Engineered
                                                               Structural Components’ in Chapter 2, Section R202
                                                               as amended.
                                                                  c.   Floor framing constructed of combustible
                                                               truss-type open-web perforated members shall have
                                                               draftstops installed so the area of concealed
                                                               space shall not exceed 500 sq. ft., per Section
                                                               R302.12 – Draftstopping, as amended by this code.
                                                                  d.   Solid wood core doors not less than 1-3/
                                                               8 inches in thickness or 20minute rated doors
                                                               shall be used for doors to bedrooms, dens,
                                                               studies, offices with closets, mechanical rooms,
                                                               laundry rooms, and basements.”
                                                               An approved audible and visual device, located on
                                                               the exterior of a one- or two-family dwelling in
                                                               an approved location, shall be connected to each
                                                               automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler
                                                               waterflow alarm devices shall be activated by
R313.2.2       Outside alarm indicators                        water flow equivalent to the flow of a single
                                                               sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed
                                                               in the system. Where a fire alarm system is
                                                               installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler
                                                               system shall actuate the building fire alarm
                                                               system.
                                                               Amended to read as follows: “Smoke alarms shall
                                                               comply with NFPA 72, Illinois Fire Safety (425
                                                               ILCS 60/) Smoke Detector Act, and Section R314. A
R314.1         General                                         smoke alarm/detector shall be installed at the top
                                                               of all interior staircases within a dwelling unit.
                                                               A smoke alarm/detector shall be installed at the
                                                               top of a common interior staircase or stairwell
                                                               when the stair serves two dwelling or more units.”
                                                               Amended to read as follows: “Carbon monoxide
R315.1         General                                         alarms shall comply with Illinois Public Safety
                                                               (430 ILCS 135/) Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detector
                                                               Act, and Section R315.”
R316.9         Weather protection                              Insulation shall not be installed until the
                                                               building envelope has been protected from weather.
                                                               Delete all references to “Chapter 11 of the
R320           Accessibility                                   International Building Code,” and replace with
                                                               “the Illinois Accessibility Code, current
                                                               edition.”
                                                               Add new subsection: “One or two family dwelling
                                                               homes with access roads greater than 150 feet
                                                               (measured from the street access point to the
                                                               front door of the home) hereafter constructed
                                                               shall be accessible to fire department apparatus
                                                               by way of an approved fire apparatus access road
                                                               with asphalt, concrete or other approved driving
                                                               surface capable of supporting the imposed load of
                                                               fire apparatus and must comply with the following:
                                                               1.   The access road must be at least 12 feet wide
R320.2         Access roads                                    for emergency vehicle access.
                                                               2.   If a gate is installed or going to be
                                                               installed, it must provide clearance of 12 feet
                                                               horizontally and 11 feet vertically.
                                                               3.   If the gate is secured, a Knox gate and key
                                                               switch must be installed.
                                                               4.   The access road shall be engineered to
                                                               support the superimposed load of a typical
                                                               emergency response vehicle, unless other
                                                               provisions are made and approved by the Fire
                                                               Chief.”
                                                               The design, construction, installation,
                                                               alteration, repair and maintenance of limited-use
                                                               and limited-application elevators, private
R321.1         Elevators and platform lifts                    residence elevators, private residence inclined
                                                               elevators, and their components shall conform to
                                                               ASME A17.1/CSA B44 - Part 5, ASME A17.3, and ASME
                                                               A18.1.
R321.2         Platform lifts                                  Delete entire subsection.
                                                               Add new subsection: Building elevation standards.
                                                               The lowest floor elevation for any new building
                                                               construction which includes a basement, cellar or
                                                               crawlspace on a previously developed property
R401.4         Soil tests                                      shall not be lower than at least 18 inches above
                                                               the seasonal high groundwater elevation. The
                                                               seasonal high groundwater elevation for the
                                                               subject property shall be determined by a
                                                               qualified professional.
402.1          Wood foundations                                Delete entire subsection.
403.1          General                                         In the first sentence delete “wood foundations.”
                                                               Provide steel dowel bar anchorage for porch and
                                                               terrace slabs exceeding 1,000 square feet,
                                                               concrete or masonry steps and concrete area wells
                                                               which adjoin foundation walls. For shallow
                                                               foundations adjacent to a basement and for
R404.1.3.3.7.9 Steel dowel bars                                attached garages, embed four ½ inch round hooked
                                                               bars, four feet long, into the main wall, two near
                                                               the top and two near the bottom of the attached
                                                               wall. For intersecting walls of additions to
                                                               existing structures, provide ½-inch round bars, 24
                                                               inches long, spaced 18 inches on center vertically
                                                               and embedded not less than 4 inches.
404.2          Wood foundation walls                           Delete entire subsection.
R504           Pressure Preservative Treated–Wood Floors (On Delete entire section.
               Ground)
                                                               All dwellings shall have a drainage controlled
                                                               method of water disposal from roofs that will
R801.3         Roof drainage                                   collect and discharge roof drainage to the ground
                                                               surface not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the
                                                               foundation walls or to an approved drainage
                                                               system.
                                                               Add new subsection: “All one- or two-family
                                                               dwellings shall have no less than a Class C roof
                                                               covering as classified in accordance with the
R904.3         Roof Assemblies–Materi als                    standards of the ASTM. Permits shall be required
                                                               for the installation and replacement of roofing
                                                               materials. All roofing contractors shall be
                                                               licensed by the state.”
                                                               Chapter 11 deleted in its entirety. (Superseded by
Part IV –    Energy Conservation                             §
                                                               150.305 of the Village Code.)
                                                               Chapters 25 through 33 deleted in their entirety.
Part VII –   Plumbing                                        (Superseded by §
                                                               150.195 of the Village Code.)
                                                               Chapters 34 through 42 deleted in their entirety.
Part VIII –  Electrical                                      (Superseded by §
                                                               150.215 of the Village Code.)
                                                               Amended the first sentence to read as follows:
AF101.1        General                                         “This appendix contains requirements for new
                                                               construction and the provisions of the Illinois
                                                               Nuclear Safety Radon Awareness Act (420 ILCS 46).”
Appendices                                                    Adopt by Reference
               Appendix AA                                     Sizing & Capacities of Gas Piping
                                                               Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances
               Appendix AB                                     Equipped With Draft Hoods, Category 1 Appliances
                                                               And Appliances Listed For Use With Type B vents
               Appendix AC                                     Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-vent
                                                               Venting Systems
               Appendix AF                                     Radon Control Methods
               Appendix AO                                     Automatic Vehicular Gates
               Appendix AT [RE]                                Solar Ready Provisions - Detached One-and Two-
                                                               Family Dwellings and Townhouses
 
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1211, passed 1-22-2018; Ord. 1241, passed 4-
15-2019; Ord. 1336, passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§§ 150.187 THROUGH 150.194 RESERVED.
PLUMBING
§ 150.195 ADOPTION OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE.
   The Village of Kenilworth adopts by reference the provisions of the Illinois
Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code Part 890, subject only to the additions,
deletions and modifications specifically set forth in §
150.196 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1153, passed 9-21-2015; Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 150.196 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS
PLUMBING CODE.
   The following sections of the Illinois Plumbing Code are hereby amended,
deleted, or modified as hereinafter set forth:
Section Number Section Title Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Section    Section Title                    Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number
                                            Add new subsection: “Plumbing and drainage systems in all buildings, public
                                            and private, shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this
890.110(e) General Regulations              ordinance by a licensed plumber in accordance with the provisions of the
                                            State of Illinois Plumbing License Law. If a plumbing contractor is found to
                                            be using unlicensed plumbers, the contractor’s plumbing permit will be
                                            revoked.”
890.110(f) Overhead Sewers                  Add new subsection: “All new buildings with basements, floors, rooms, or
                                            occupancy areas below grade shall have overhead plumbing with ejector pumps.”
                                            Amended by replacing with the following approved materials:
                                            “a)   Cast iron, bell and spigot with compression joints
                                            b)   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC), SDR 26
Section    Appendix A, Table A, “Approved c)   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe, schedule 40
890        Materials for Building Sewers” d)   Note: Ductile iron pipe ASTM A377 shall be installed for all new
                                            sanitary and storm sewer services that penetrate the foundation wall through
                                            a sleeve to a point that the piping is being supported on approved load
                                            bearing soil or compacted fill”
Section    Appendix A, Table A, “Approved Delete: “PVC pipe with cellular core ASTM F891-2010, ASTM F1760-2011"
890        Materials for Drainage/Vent”
Section    Appendix A, Table A, “Approved Amended by replacing with the following approved materials:
890        Materials for Water Service      “a)   Copper/Copper Tubing – Type K only – ASTM B 88-2009
           Pipe”                          b)   Ductile Iron, Class 55 or greater”
                                            Add new subsection: “Subject to other provisions of the Illinois Plumbing
                                            Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890 et seq., and the Lawn Irrigation Contractor and
                                            Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 892 et seq., all
890.610(d  WaterSense Devices               new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed on properties
)                                           after September 1, 2015, and connected to the Village water supply system
                                            shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the United States
                                            Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled
                                            fixtures are available.”
890.1910   Inspections                      Add new subsection:
                                            All plumbing work shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the
                                            Building Commissioner, the plumbing inspector under the supervision of the
890.1910.5 Inspections Required             Building Commissioner, or any other designee of the Building Commissioner.
                                            The plumbing contractor shall be on site when the rough plumbing inspection
                                            is conducted by the Village.”
                                            “The fees to be charged for a permit for the installation and alteration of
890.1960   Fees                             plumbing systems shall be established by the Board of Trustees by resolution
                                            from time to time.”
 
(Ord. 1153, passed 9-21-2015; Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed
12-9-2024)
§§ 150.197 THROUGH 150.204 RESERVED.
MECHANICAL
§ 150.205 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
   The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, 2021 edition, published
by the International Code Council, Inc., are hereby adopted by reference,
subject only to the additions, deletions and modifications specifically set
forth in §
150.206 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 725, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-
15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 150.206 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL
MECHANICAL CODE.
   The following sections of the aforesaid International Mechanical Code, 2021
edition, are hereby amended, deleted or modified as hereinafter set forth:
 
Section Section   Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number  Title
101.1   Title     Insert “the Village of Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois” for “[name of
                  jurisdiction].”
        Schedule  Delete sentence and delete bracketed text and substitute “Fees established by
109.2   of Permit the Village of Kenilworth Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time.”
        Fees
109.6   Refunds    
109     Means of  Delete entire section.
        appeal
                  Add new subsection: “Except as hereinafter provided, the portion of any metal
                  or factory-built chimney rising above the roof of the building, and any other
                  part of such chimney to be located, in whole or in part, on the exterior of the
                  building, shall be enclosed in a fire resistance-rated shaft constructed in
                  accordance with the shaft requirements of the building code. The exterior
                  surfaces of such shaft shall be covered with a material, or shall be painted
        Enclosure and maintained, so that the exterior of the shaft shall present an attractive
805.9   of        appearance consistent with the architectural style, construction, and materials
        Exterior  of the building. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the exterior shaft required by
        Elements  this section shall not be required to cover any chimney cap, hood, screen, or
                  other device installed at the top of a metal chimney and intended to increase
                  draft, control sparks or ashes, protect the chimney from the elements, or
                  prevent the entry into the chimney of birds, insects, and animals. Solely for
                  purposes of this application of any requirement of this code relating to the
                  termination height of a chimney, any exterior shaft required by this section
                  shall not be considered part of the building or roof.”
 
(Ord. 725, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-
15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§§ 150.207 THROUGH 150.214 RESERVED.
ELECTRICAL
§ 150.215 ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The provisions of the National Electrical Code, 2020 edition, published by
the National Fire Protection Association, are hereby adopted by reference,
subject only to the additions, deletions and modifications specifically set
forth in §
150.218 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 726, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-
15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 150.216 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No electrical equipment shall be installed, altered or used without
first filing an application with the Community Development Department and
obtaining all required permits.
   (B)   All applications shall be accompanied by plans, specifications and
schedules in sufficient detail to show the location and capacity of all
lighting facilities, fire alarm systems, electrical equipment and light and
power circuits required for all service equipment of the building or structure.
(Ord. 726, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.217 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   No electrical contractor shall perform any work regulated by this
subchapter without the required electrical license.
   (B)   The electrical license issued by another municipality shall be
submitted to the Community Development Department.
(Ord. 726, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009)
§ 150.218 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL
CODE.
   The following sections of the aforesaid National Electrical Code, 2020
edition, are hereby amended, deleted or modified as hereinafter set forth:
Section Number Section Title Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Section Section Title  Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number
                       Exception to (12): A sump pump or ejector pump installation included with a
210.8   Sump pump or   dedicated single receptacle outlet, sized in accordance with the manufacturer's
(A)(12) ejector pump   instructions, which receptacle is located within three feet (3') of the sump pump
                       and is clearly marked "FOR SUMP PUMP USE ONLY"
                       Add new subsection: “All outdoor lighting lampholders, fixtures, and other
                       artificial light sources shall be installed, shielded, directed, and locked into
        Outdoor        position in accordance with outdoor lighting guidelines adopted from time by the
225.28  Lighting       Building Commissioner and otherwise so as to direct the light source, to the
        Guidelines     fullest extent reasonably practicable, away from neighboring residential
                       properties and so as to minimize the amount and intensity of artificial fight
                       that is directed or reflected onto or toward neighboring residential properties.”
                       Add new subsection F: “When alterations to existing buildings are made resulting
                       in a change in the number of occupant spaces (or tenant spaces), the following
                       changes shall be made to their services:
        Alterations to (1)   When existing buildings with additional services are altered from multiple
230.2   Special        occupancies and combined into one occupant space all other services shall be
(F)     Occupancies    removed and reduced to one service.
                       (2)   When subdividing existing single occupant spaces into multiple occupants,
                       each occupant space shall be provided with its own electrical service. Circuits
                       that originally crossed over into adjacent occupancy spaces shall be removed in
                       their entirety, within the new space.”
                       Add new subsection:
                       “A.   In new one family dwelling construction, the electrical service shall have
                       a minimum rating of 200 amps and an electrical distribution panel sized for 40
                       circuits. An interior disconnecting means shall be provided in addition to the
                       exterior disconnect. Fuse box pullouts shall not be used as a service disconnect.
                          (1)   All service conductors shall be installed underground.
                          (2)   System design drawings shall be submitted for all services greater than
                       200 amps at the time of permit application.
        Service           (3)   Half-size breakers are not approved for use in new construction.
230.11  entrance       B.   Electric service upgrades in existing one family dwelling shall have a
        conductors     minimum ampere rating and an electrical distribution panel sized for 30 circuits
                       and minimum 100 amps.
                          (1)   In existing residential dwelling units half-size breakers are limited to
                       manufacturer's specifications. Half-size breakers shall not be permitted in
                       existing commercial or industrial units.
                       C.   All service entrance conductors shall be installed in rigid metal conduit or
                       intermediate metal conduit. The use of a sub-panel shall require the written
                       approval of the Building Commissioner or his/her designee after submission and
                       approval of complete load calculations. Mini breakers shall not be permitted.
        Wiring Methods Amend to read as follows: “Service entrance conductors shall be installed in
        for 1,000      accordance with the applicable requirements of this code covering the type of
230.43  Volts,         wiring methods used and shall be limited to the following methods:
        Nominal, or    (1)   Rigid metal conduit (RMC)
        Less           (2)   Intermediate metal conduit (IMC)
                       (3)   Rigid nonmetallic conduit (RNC)”
        Aluminum or
250.64  Copper-Clad    Amend as follows: “The grounding electrode conductor shall be copper. The use of
(A)     Aluminum       aluminum or copper clad aluminum for the purpose of grounding is prohibited.”
        Conductors
                       Delete and substitute: “The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a
        Readily        readily accessible location on the exterior of all buildings or structures.
230.70  Accessible     Larger electrical services (over 1,000-amps, 3 Ph) can locate the service
(A)(1)  Location       disconnecting means on the interior within the main distribution panel or
                       switchgear, so long as an outdoor means of disconnect is still provided for use
                       by the Village (e.g. 'shunt trip' switch).”
        Connecting
        Receptacle
250.146 Grounding      At end of paragraph, add: “All receptacles to comply with this article.”
        Terminal to
        Box
        Aluminum       No aluminum or copper-clad aluminum wire shall be used, except as approved for
310.3   Conductor      commercial service to an electrical meter.
        Material
Article Armored Cable: Delete entire Article 320.
320     Type AC
Article Flat Cable
322     Assemblies:    Delete entire Article 322.
        Type FC
Article Flat Conductor
324     Cable: Type    Delete entire Article 324.
        FCC
        Nonmetallic-
Article Sheathed
334     Cable: Types   Delete entire Article 334.
        NM, NMC, and
        NMS
        Service-
Article Entrance       Delete entire Article 338.
338     Cable: Types
        SE and USE
        Underground
Article Feeder and
340     Branch-        Delete entire Article 340.
        Circuit Cable:
        Type UF
                       Amended by adding the following sentence: Flexible metal conduit shall not exceed
348.10  Uses Permitted six feet in length except by written approval by the Building Commissioner or
                       his/her designee.
        Electrical
Article Nonmetallic    Delete entire Article 362.
362     Tubing: Type
        ENT
Article Nonmetallic    Delete entire Article 378.
378     Wireways
Article Nonmetallic    Delete entire Article 382.
382     Extensions
Article Surface
388     Nonmetallic    Delete entire Article 388.
        Raceways
Article Concealed
394     Knob-and-tube  Delete entire Article 394.
        Wiring
Article Open Wiring on Delete entire Article 398.
398     Insulators
        Luminaries
410.16  (Fixtures) in  In dwelling units, all closets that are at least 23 inches deep and all utility
(C)(6)  Clothes        rooms and pantries, shall be illuminated.
        Closets
                       Add the following subsection: “When stationary generators are provided and
                       installed remotely from the exterior main means of electrical service disconnect,
                       signage identifying the presence of a generator shall be permanently placed
                       immediately next to the building’s main means of electrical service disconnect,
445.18  Disconnection  meter and switch gear, reading as follows: “WARNING! THIS ELECTRICAL SERVICE IS
(B)     Signage        EQUIPPED WITH AN AUTOMATIC BACKUP GENERATOR. REMOVING THE METER OR DISCONNECTING
                       THE SERVICE MAY CAUSE THE GENERATOR TO START WITHOUT NOTICE. GENERATOR LOCATION
                       INDICATES BELOW [] NORTH, [] SOUTH, [] EAST, [] WEST, DO NOT REMOVE THIS DECAL
                       (Electrical contractor’s name and phone number)”, or similar wording (or color)
                       as approved by the Fire Code Official. Size must have a red or orange border and
                       a minimum size is 4-inches x 6-inches.”
Article Agricultural   Delete entire Article 547.
547     Buildings
        Mobile Homes,
Article Manufactured
550     homes, and     Delete entire Article 550.
        Mobile Home
        Parks
        Recreational
Article Vehicles and   Delete entire Article 551.
551     Recreational
        Vehicle Parks
        Marinas,
        Boatyards,
        Floating
Article Buildings, and Delete entire Article 555.
555     Commercial and
        Noncommercial
        Docking
        Facilities
        Low Voltage    Add new section: Low voltage wiring for residential furnace or HVAC equipment
720.12  Wiring         shall be installed in conduit in areas made inaccessible by building construction
                       or where subject to damage.
                       Amended by deleting the following sections and subsections:
                       a.   80.2 Definitions. Chief Electrical Inspector.
                       b.   80.15 Electrical Board. Delete subsections (A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (F) and (H).
                       c.   80.19(D) Annual permits.
                       d.   80.19(F)(3) Inspections.
        Administration e.   80.19(F)(4) Approvals.
Annex H and            f.   230.11 Overhead Service-drop conductors.”
        Enforcement    Except as otherwise permitted by
                       153.085, all outdoor cables, wiring and connections, transformers, switching
                       equipment, switching cubicles, meters and other outdoor equipment used in the
                       distribution of electric power or telephonic communications shall be buried
                       beneath the surface of the soil, and in line with the standards referenced in
                       153.085.
 
(Ord. 726, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-
15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024; Ord. 1385, passed 5-19-2025)
§§ 150.219 THROUGH 150.229 RESERVED.
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 150.230 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   (A)   The provisions of the International Fire Code, 2021 edition, published
by the International Code Council, Inc. are hereby adopted by reference,
subject only to the additions, deletions and modifications specifically set
forth in §
150.231 of this subchapter.
   (B)   The following model codes described in the following divisions (A)(1)
through (A)(5) are each adopted by reference, except as modified by the
exclusions, amendments and additional provisions set forth in this section.
      (1)   Standards for the Installation of Automatic Sprinkler Systems,
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Publication 13, 2022 Edition.
      (2)   Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Low-Rise
Residential Occupancies, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
Publication 13R, 2022 Edition.
      (3)   Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and
Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes, National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Publication 13D, 2022 Edition.
      (4)   Standards for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems,
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Publication 14, 2024 Edition.
      (5)   National Fire Alarm and Signal Code, National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Publication 72, 2022 Edition.
      (6)   Standard for the Installation of Stationary Energy Storage Systems,
NFPA 855, 2023 Edition.
   (C)   Rules of construction. In the event any provision of the codes adopted
by reference in this subchapter conflict with state law, with any other
ordinance of the village, or with any other provision of this code, the
provision requiring the highest standard for protection of life or property, as
determined by the Fire Chief, shall prevail.
(Ord. 727, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-
15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 150.231 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE
CODE.
   The following sections of the aforesaid International Fire, Code 2021,
edition are hereby amended, deleted or modified as hereinafter set forth:
Section Number Section Title Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Section       Section Title  Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number
101.1         Title          Insert “the Village of Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois” for [name of
                             jurisdiction].”
108           Board of       Delete entire section.
              appeals
                             Amend subsection as follows:“An operational permit shall remain in effect until
105.3.1       Expiration     reissued, renewed, or revoked, or for such a period of time as specified in the
                             permit.”
              Authority to
110.1         disconnect     Delete “…in writing…” in the last sentence.
              service
              utilities
                             Add the following definition: “FOOD TRUCK AND MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: A vendor with a
Section 202   General        selfcontained food service operation, located in a readily movable motorized
              Definitions    wheeled vehicle, towed vehicle or food cart, used to store, prepare, display and/or
                             serve food intended for individual portion service.”
                             Delete and substitute:
                             A.   “Outdoor fires in general. All outdoor fires, recreational or otherwise, shall
                             be subject to the following requirements:
                                i.   All outdoor fires shall be under continuous competent supervision.
                                ii.   No outdoor fire, including but not limited to, fires in outdoor
                             fireplaces, outdoor pizza ovens, fire pits and similar devices, shall be used in
                             such a manner or location that it causes any building fire alarm to activate or
              Outdoor fires; that it otherwise creates a hazardous or objectionable condition.
              outdoor           iii.   All outdoor pizza ovens must be equipped with a chimney with a spark
307.4.3       fireplaces,    arrestor installed in good working condition.
              outdoor pizza  B.   Outdoor fireplaces, outdoor pizza ovens and fire pits. All portable outdoor
              ovens and fire fireplaces, outdoor pizza ovens, fire pits and similar devices, and all such
              pits           devices that are permanently installed, shall be located and operated at least
                             fifteen (15) feet from any building. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the operation
                             of a permanent outdoor fireplace, outdoor pizza oven, fire pit or similar device
                             that was lawfully installed before July 17, 2012, shall be permitted, provided that
                             such operation complies with the above Section 307.4.3.a.
                             C.   Authority to extinguish. The Building Commissioner is authorized to order the
                             extinguishment of any outdoor fire that is not in compliance with this code or that
                             otherwise creates a hazardous or objectionable condition.”
                             Add the following subsections and paragraphs:
                             1.   319.2 Generator safety. The following requirements shall apply:
                                 a.   All fuel tanks are to be filled to proper capacity for continuous service
                             prior to the start of the event.
                                b.   Generators shall be shut-down and cooled prior to refueling.
                                c.   All electrical appliances and generators shall comply with the Electrical
                             Code (NFPA70 - 2014).
              Food Truck and    d.   Generators attached to the vehicles shall be enclosed in a vented housing
              Mobile Food    and away from public access.
Section 319   Vendor            e.   Cords in the walkways or exit paths must be covered to prevent trips/falls.
              Prevention        f.   Generators shall be properly grounded.
              Codes          2.   319.4 Wood/charcoal cooking. The following requirements shall apply:
                                a.   Wood/charcoal shall be stored not less than 3 feet from cooking area.
                                b.   Fuel should not be stored near food supply, combustible materials, ignition
                             sources or chemicals.
                                c.   Ashes must be placed into a closed metal container a minimum of 3 feet from
                             the cooking area.
                                d.   Ashes should not be disposed of in public waste containers.
                              
                             Delete and substitute: “Assigned numbers for new and existing buildings shall be
                             provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be
                             legible and places in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting
                             the property and displayed by the owner or occupant within 30 days after notice
505.1         Address        from the Building Commissioner. Address identification characters shall contrast
              Identification with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical
                             letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less than 4
                             inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch. Where access is by means of a
                             private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument,
                             pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.”
                             Delete and substitute: “In addition to the premise’s identification, all buildings
                             except for one- and two-family dwellings shall have their address posted on any
                             rear and/or side door. The signage shall include the address, the name of the
505.2         Rear and side  street and business name or building name. The sign shall be installed at a height
              access         of approximately five feet above the standing surface. The sign shall be installed
                             immediately to the side of the door, so it is visible with the door in the open or
                             closed position. All other installation locations shall be approved by the Fire
                             Chief.”
505.3         Address        Add new subsection: “Address identification shall be maintained.”
              Maintenance
                             Add new second paragraph:
                             ”The owner of any building or structure that is not a single-family or two-family
                             dwelling, and that is protected by an automatic sprinkler system and/or an
                             automatic fire detection system shall purchase, install and maintain an emergency
                             key access system consisting of a locked box of a type and in a location prescribed
              Emergency key  by the Fire Chief. The key box shall contain:
506.1         access         1.   Keys to locked points of ingress whether on the interior or exterior of such
              requirement    building or structure;
                             2.   Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms;
                             3.   Keys to locked electrical equipment rooms;
                             4.   Keys to elevator controls;
                             5.   Keys to the fire alarm equipment; and
                             6.   Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Chief.”
              Emergency key  Add new subsection: “Security gates restricting access to private residences shall
506.1.3       access to      provide, install and maintain a ‘Knox’ emergency key access system, either a key
              gates          box or key switch, allowing first responders access to their property.”
                             Add new subsection: “Christmas trees stored or displayed for sale shall be outside
                             of buildings at a distance of at least 10 feet from any building or structure,
                             except that such trees may be stored closer to a blank masonry wall with the
                             permission of the owner of such wall. No Christmas trees may be stored or displayed
              Storage and    within 35 feet of any gasoline pump. Trees remaining on hand after December 25th of
              display of     any year shall be removed from the premises not later than December 31st of the
806.1.5       Christmas      same year.”
              trees           3404.2.13.1.4 Tanks abandoned in place. Delete entire section.
                              Appendices Adopt by Reference:
                             Appendix B: Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings
                             Appendix C: Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution C. Appendix D: Fire Apparatus
                             Access Roads
                             Appendix I: Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions.”
                             “A standpipe and hose system, installed in accordance with the standards set forth
              Standpipe      in Standard for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems, NFPA Publication
905.3.1       Height         14, 2016 Edition, shall be installed in all buildings, other than one- and two-
                             family dwellings, that are more than two stories in height, regardless of the
                             height of any such buildings measured in linear terms, such as feet or meters.”
                             Delete in entirety and substitute: “No person shall have, store, sell, transport or
              Storage and    give away to any user or consumer any gunpowder, dynamite, blasting power,
5601.2        sale of        nitroglycerine, rocket fuel or any other explosive of like nature, within the
              explosives     limits of the Village, except that this regulation shall not prohibit the storage
                             of loaded shells for small arms nor the hand loading of small arms ammunition for
                             private personal use (but not for resale), or use by law-enforcing agencies.”
                             Delete in entirety and substitute: “No person shall use or discharge any gunpowder,
              Use of         dynamite, blasting powder, nitroglycerine, rocket fuel or other explosive of like
5601.3        explosives     nature, within the limits of the Village, excepting for blasting operations in
                             accordance with the terms and conditions of a permit to be issued by the Fire Chief
                             in his or her reasonable discretion.”
                             Add the following:
                             A.   “Possession and Sale Prohibited. No person shall possess, sell, offer for
                             sale, loan or give away, to any retail dealer, consumer or user in the Village, any
                             article or substance of an explosive nature designed or intended to be used as
                             fireworks, including but not limited to any toy pistol, toy gun, toy cannon, blank
                             cartridge, firecracker, sparkler, rocket, torpedo squib or colored fire, except in
                             accordance with a permit for a supervised public display issued by the Village
                             Manager pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Trustees.
              Possession and B.   Use. No person shall use, give away, offer for sale, sell, fire, discharge or
5610          sales of       set off within the limits of the Village any article, or any substance of any
              fireworks      explosive nature, including without limitation blank cartridges, firecrackers,
              prohibited     sparklers and colored fire designed or intended to be used as fireworks except in
                             accordance with a permit for supervised public display issued by the Village
                             Manager pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the Council. Sky lanterns are
                             prohibited to be used within the Village. Storage of fireworks for permitted public
                             display shall be in accordance with the 2021 International Fire Code and shall be
                             limited to a period of not more than 15 days prior to date of use.
                             C.   Violations and penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be
                             subject to a fine and/or penalty established by the Board of Trustees by resolution
                             from time to time.”
              LP-gas         Add paragraph 5:
              cylinder       “5. The outside storage of LPG containers pending their use, sale or resale,
6109.15       exchange for   including containers stored outside as part of a cylinder exchange program, shall
              resale         not exceed a combined total of 120 gallons (twenty-four 25-pound cylinders) water
                             capacity.”
              Tanks
3404.2.13.1.4 abandoned in   Delete entire section
              place
                             Adopt by Reference:
                             A.   Appendix B: Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings
Appendices                   B.   Appendix C: Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution
                             C.   Appendix D: Fire Apparatus Access Roads
                             D.   Appendix I: Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions.”
 
(Ord. 727, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-
15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§§ 150.232 THROUGH 150.244 RESERVED.
LIFE SAFETY
§ 150.245 ADOPTION OF THE NFPA 101 LIFE SAFETY CODE.
   The provisions of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101 Life
Safety Code, 2024 edition, published by the National Fire Protection
Association, are hereby adopted by reference, subject only to the additions,
deletions and modifications specifically set forth in § 150.246 of this code.
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed
12-9-2024)
§ 150.246 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE NFPA 101 LIFE SAFETY
CODE.
 
Section   Section     Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number    Title
                      Add new subsection: “Whenever any existing building is damaged by fire or other
                      cause to the extent that the cost of restoration to its condition immediately
          Restoration prior to the occurrence shall exceed 50 percent of the cost of the restoration
1.3.3     of damaged  of the entire building new or whenever alterations or additions are made to any
          buildings   existing building which are equivalent to more than 50 percent of the value of
                      such building, the construction or alteration shall include all changes
                      necessary to bring the building into conformity with the Life Safety Code.”
                      Delete first sentence and substitute: “Exit doors shall be installed to swing
7.2.1.4.2             with exit travel, regardless of the number of persons served, except where the
(1)       Exit Doors  Fire Chief has determined that compliance is unreasonably difficult to
                      accomplish, and that non-compliance does not pose a life safety hazard, and the
                      following:”
 
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019)
§§ 150.247 THROUGH 150.289 RESERVED.
FUEL GAS
§ 150.290 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
   The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 edition, published
by the International Code Council, Inc., are hereby adopted by reference,
subject only to the additions, deletions and modifications specifically set
forth in §
150.291 of this code.
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed
12-9-2024)
§ 150.291 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS
CODE.
   The following sections of the aforesaid International Fuel Gas Code, 2021
edition, are hereby amended, deleted or modified as hereinafter set forth:
 
Section Section   Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number  Title
101.1   Title     Insert “the Village of Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois” for “[name of
                  jurisdiction].”
        Fee       Delete “in the following schedule.” Also delete bracketed material and
106.5.2 schedule  substitute “Fees established by the Village of Kenilworth Board of Trustees
                  by resolution from time to time.”
106.5.3 Fee       Delete subsection.
        refunds
108.4   Violation Delete entire subsection.
        penalties
 
(Ord. 1010, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed
12-9-2024)
§§ 150.292 THROUGH 150.304 RESERVED.
ENERGY CONSERVATION
§ 150.305 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   The Village of Kenilworth hereby adopts by reference the provisions of the
International Energy Conservation Code, 71 Ill. Admin. Code Subpart B and
Subpart C, including all published errata of the 2021 International Energy
Conservation Code, or current edition, subject only to the additions, deletions
and modifications specifically set forth in §
150.306 of this code.
(Ord. 1039, passed 5-17-2010; Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed
12-9-2024)
§ 150.306 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY
CONSERVATION CODE.
   The following sections of the aforesaid International Energy Conservation
Code, 2021 or current edition, are hereby amended, deleted or modified as
hereinafter set forth:
 
Section Section      Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number  Title
101.1   Title        Insert “the Village of Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois” for “[name of
                     jurisdiction].”
                     Add new subparagraph: “1. If any re-inspection is required to verify that
104.3.1 Reinspection corrective work has been done in compliance with this code, a fee shall be
        and testing  charged to the owner for each re-inspection. The fee shall be in amounts
                     established by the Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time.”
        Schedule of  Delete “in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the applicable
107.2   permit fees  governing authority.” and substitute “Fees established by the Village of
                     Kenilworth Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time.”
                     Add new subsection: “All applications for building permits shall be
                     accompanied by a permit closeout escrow in amounts established by the Board of
                     Trustees by resolution from time to time. The escrow shall be held by the
                     Village for the duration of the work under the permit and returned to the
                     permittee or property owner of record only after the completion and final
                     inspection and approval of all work under the permit within the term of the
                     permit or any lawful extension thereof. If the completion, final inspection,
        Permit       and approval of the work does not occur prior to the expiration of the permit
107.4.1 closeout     or any lawful extension thereof, the Village must send notice to the property
        escrow       owner of record and the permittee stating that the escrow will be forfeited to
                     the Village unless the owner of record or permittee, within 30 days after the
                     notice date, takes corrective action by: (i) completing the work and obtaining
                     final inspection and approval; (ii) obtaining a lawful extension of the permit
                     term; or (iii) otherwise arranging to complete the work in a manner acceptable
                     to the Village Manager. If the property owner of record or permittee fails to
                     take such corrective action within 30 days, the escrow will be retained by the
                     Village to cover the costs and expenses associated with the administration of
                     any final inspections and approvals of the work.”
        Fees for     Add new subsection: “If the Building Commissioner issues a stop-work order,
108.5   stop-work    the owner shall pay a fee established by the Board of Trustees by resolution
        order        from time to time for removal of the stop-work order.”
 
(Ord. 1039, passed 5-17-2010; Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed
12-9-2024)
§§ 150.307 THROUGH 150.424 RESERVED.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
§ 150.425 REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to erect a
building for habitation on any lot or parcel of land within the village unless
a highway, road, street or way for public service, facilities improved with
water mains and sanitary sewers is provided to serve that parcel of land.
(1959 Code, § 16-27)
§ 150.426 STREET WIDTHS.
   There shall be dedicated for street purposes a portion of the lot or parcel
of land as is necessary to supply the builder’s portion of any streets which
are necessary to adequately serve the lot or parcel of land and the needs of
the area in which it is located. In no event shall any street when completely
dedicated be less than 50 feet in width.
(1959 Code, § 16-28)
§ 150.427 WATER MAINS.
   The water system of the village shall be extended in a manner that every lot
or parcel of land covered by this subchapter may be serviced by means of a
house connection within its own frontage. Water mains shall be not less than
six inches internal diameter and valves of a make in conformity with those
being generally used in the village shall be installed in 48-inch valve vaults
constructed of six-inch concrete block. The valves will be so placed that in
the event of any single break it will not be necessary to shut down more than
800 feet of pipe. Water mains shall be connected to the existing water system
in a way that the system will be circulating. House service stubs are to be
installed extending outside of the paved area at the time of the water main
installation before a permanent type of roadway is constructed.
(1959 Code, § 16-29)
§ 150.428 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Fire hydrants shall be installed so that they will be located at intervals
of not exceeding 400 feet. All fire hydrants shall have a six-inch barrel and
shall be provided with 2 two and one-half inch hose connections and with an
auxiliary valve. Fire hydrants shall be of a type in conformity with those
being generally used in the village.
(1959 Code, § 16-30)
§ 150.429 SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   A complete system of sanitary sewers shall be constructed in a manner
that every lot or parcel of land covered by this subchapter may be serviced by
means of a house connection within its own frontage. Manholes shall be at
intervals of not exceeding 200 feet.
   (B)   Before a permanent type of roadway is constructed, house service stubs
are to be installed extending outside of the paved area.
   (C)   The design of sanitary sewers shall be in conformity to general
practice within the village and shall be subject to the approval of the Village
Manager.
(1959 Code, § 16-31)
§ 150.430 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS; REJECTION OR CONDEMNATION OF WORK.
   (A)   (1)   All materials and each part or detail of the work referred to in
this subchapter shall be subject at all times to inspection by the Village
Manager, or his or her authorized representatives, and the builder will be held
strictly to the true intent of the specifications in regard to quality of
materials, workmanship and the diligent execution of the improvement.
      (2)   The inspection may include mill, plant or shop inspection, and any
material furnished under these specifications is subject to the inspection.
      (3)   The Village Manager, or his or her representatives, shall be
allowed access to all parts of the work, and shall be furnished with
information and assistance by the builder as is required to make a complete and
detailed inspection.
   (B)   (1)   All work which has been rejected or condemned shall be remedied
or removed and replaced in an acceptable manner by the builder at his or her
own expense.
      (2)   Upon failure on the part of the builder to comply promptly with an
order of the Village Manager made under the provisions of this chapter, the
Village Manager shall, after giving written notice to the builder, have the
authority to cause defective work to be remedied.
   (C)   It is the intent that first-class materials shall be used throughout
the work, and that they shall be incorporated in a manner as to produce
completed construction which is workmanlike and acceptable in every detail.
(1959 Code, § 16-32)
§ 150.431 COMPLIANCE WITH SUBCHAPTER PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING
PERMIT.
   No building permit shall be issued to erect a building for habitation on any
lot or parcel of land covered by this subchapter until the requirements of this
subchapter are complied with.
(1959 Code, § 16-33)
§ 150.432 VARIATIONS.
   The Board may approve variations from requirements of this subchapter in
specific cases which do not affect the general plan, intent or the spirit of
the subchapter.
(1959 Code, § 16-34)
§§ 150.433 THROUGH 150.439 RESERVED.
DRAINAGE AND GRADING
§ 150.440 PURPOSE.
   The regulation of drainage and grading in this subchapter is intended to
accomplish the following benefits:
   (A)   Protect and enhance the quality of life and the general welfare of the
village and its residents, and conserve and enhance the village’s physical and
aesthetic environment;
   (B)   Protect and maintain property values in a manner that ensures each
property owner’s enjoyment of his or her property;
   (C)   Provide for enhanced design of improvements to the natural environment
of the village;
   (D)   Stabilize topsoil by preventing or minimizing soil erosion and
sedimentation; and
   (E)   Assist in controlling stormwater run-off.
(Ord. 1178, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 150.441 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future or past tense, and words in the singular include the plural. Words not
defined in this section shall have their usual and customary meaning.
   DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE AREA. A low-lying area where stormwater collects; only
regulated when the total storage volume of an individual depressional storage
area exceeds five cubic feet.
   ILLINOIS URBAN MANUAL. The Illinois Urban Manual, 2013 edition, published by
the Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE or IMPERVIOUS AREA. Any improvements on a lot that
prohibit or substantially retard the drainage of stormwater directly into the
soil below, as well as any hard-surfaced, compacted area that does not readily
absorb or retain water, including but not limited to: buildings, driveways,
sidewalks, patios, decks and similar structures; stone, brick, asphalt and
concrete surfaces; graveled areas; swimming pools; and basketball or tennis
courts or other hard play surfaces.
   LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer licensed in the State of
Illinois, under the Professional Engineering Practice Act of 1989 (225 ILCS
325/1 et seq.).
   LOWEST FLOOR ELEVATION. The elevation of the lowest enclosed area of a
building, such as a basement floor elevation.
   MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES. Ordinary repairs, in-kind replacement, or
replacement with alternate materials, provided that the activity does not
result in a change in:
      (1)   The area of land covered by an impervious surface;
      (2)   The size of a pipe; or
      (3)   The elevation of the ground surface.
   MAJOR PROJECT. A regulated activity that disturbs 400 square feet or more of
the ground surface.
   MINOR PROJECT. A regulated activity that disturbs less than 400 square feet
of the ground surface.
   NAVD88. The North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
   REGULATED ACTIVITY. Any activity described in §
150.442.
(Ord. 1178, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 150.442 REGULATED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person, unless specifically exempted, shall
commence any regulated activity without first obtaining from the village a
drainage and grading permit.
   (B)   Regulated activity defined. Unless it is exempted in subsection (C)
below, any development, redevelopment, construction, grading or landscaping is
considered a regulated activity if it is reasonably expected to:
      (1)   Cause an increase in the ground surface elevation;
      (2)   Cause an obstruction in the flow of stormwater runoff from any
property;
      (3)   Cause a change in the direction or location of stormwater runoff
from a property; or
      (4)   Disturb 200 square feet or more of the ground surface. Development,
redevelopment, construction, grading or landscaping that disturbs less than 200
square feet, but is part of a larger common project that, as a whole, disturbs
200 square feet or more, is considered a regulated activity.
   (C)   Exemptions from permit requirement. Projects that consist solely of
one or more of the following activities shall be exempt from the requirement to
obtain a drainage and grading permit pursuant to this §
150.442:
      (1)   Performing maintenance activities;
      (2)   Changing the discharge direction of a downspout;
      (3)   Gardening and/or planting bushes and trees, provided that the
activity does not obstruct the flow of stormwater runoff or cause a change in
the direction or location of stormwater runoff from any property;
      (4)   Removing dead or dying vegetation;
      (5)   Performing other activities determined in writing by the code
official to have a negligible impact on the quantity, velocity, or direction of
stormwater runoff from a property; or
      (6)   Any activity in the waters of Lake Michigan.
(Ord. 1178, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 150.443 PERMIT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Permit fee required. No drainage and grading permit shall be issued
pursuant to this subchapter unless a drainage and grading fee is paid by the
applicant. The drainage and grading permit fee shall be in the amount
established in the annual fee ordinance.
   (B)   Deposit. All drainage and grading permits for major projects shall be
subject to deposit of a late work fee escrow, unless the major project is
required to submit such a deposit pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   Expiration of permit. A drainage and grading permit shall expire if
the work covered by the drainage and grading permit:
      (1)   Is not commenced within six months after the issuance of the
drainage and grading permit;
      (2)   Is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months or more; or
      (3)   Is not completed within six months for minor projects, or 12 months
for major projects.
   (D)   Permit extensions. An extension must be applied for prior to the
expiration of the drainage and grading permit for which extension is sought,
and may be granted by the code official because of delays resulting from
strikes, fire, windstorm or other circumstances beyond the applicant’s control;
provided, however, that no single extension shall exceed three months for minor
projects and six months for major projects, and the total duration of all
extensions granted shall not exceed 12 months. If no such extension is granted
and the work is not completed, the applicant shall be required to apply for a
new drainage and grading permit under the provisions of this code. No permit
fees shall be refunded because of the expiration of any drainage or grading
permit pursuant to the provisions of this section. Fees for all extensions
shall be in amounts established by the Board of Trustees in the annual fee
ordinance from time to time.
   (E)   Permit requirements.
      (1)   Any person issued a drainage and grading permit must retain at the
work site, throughout the duration of the regulated activity, the engineering
plans bearing the approval stamp of the code official.
      (2)   The code official may require additional or alternate soil erosion
and sediment control measures beyond those specified on the approved
engineering plans, based on site specific considerations and the effectiveness
of the installed control measures.
      (3)   A foundation survey shall be submitted upon completion of every
building foundation. The foundation survey shall include dimensions from the
as-built foundation to each property line as well as the as-built top-of-
foundation elevation, including all steps and foundation openings.
      (4)   An as-built plan shall be submitted upon completion of every
regulated activity. For major projects, the as-built plans shall be submitted
with a signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the project
was completed in substantial conformance with the approved engineering plans.
      (5)   A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued and the deposit
shall not be returned, if applicable, until the code official has approved the
as-built plans and completed a final inspection.
(Ord. 1178, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 150.444 PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All applications for drainage and grading permits shall be submitted on
forms provided by the code official, in a number of copies as the code official
shall require, and shall include the following:
   (A)   Documentation demonstrating that the applicant has an ownership
interest in the subject property, or written authorization by the property
owner to proceed with the regulated activity.
   (B)   A plat of survey for the subject property.
   (C)   Engineering plans showing all aspects of the regulated activity. The
engineering plans shall include:
      (1)   A north arrow;
      (2)   A drawing scale;
      (3)   A benchmark and datum, which benchmark for major projects shall be
referenced to NAVD88;
      (4)   The property lines for the subject property;
      (5)   All easements recorded against or affecting the subject property;
      (6)   Existing and proposed ground elevations on the subject property and
extending ten feet beyond the limits of the proposed regulated activity for a
minor project, or ten feet beyond the limits of the subject property for a
major project. One-foot contour intervals shall be shown for all projects.
When, in the judgement of the code official, one-foot contour intervals are
insufficient to show the drainage patterns, 0.5-foot contour intervals shall be
shown;
      (7)   Buildings and other structures located on the subject property;
      (8)   Village sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water mains located on
or adjacent to the subject property;
      (9)   Private storm drains;
      (10)   Utility service lines;
      (11)   Existing and proposed trees and shrubs;
      (12)   Existing and proposed top-of-foundation elevations;
      (13)   Existing and proposed lowest floor elevations;
      (14)   Locations and elevations of existing and proposed downspouts,
foundations, and window wells on the subject property;
      (15)   Locations and elevations of downspouts, foundations, and window
wells on adjacent properties within ten feet of the lot line;
      (16)   Existing and proposed impervious areas;
      (17)   Existing and proposed pervious or porous pavements;
      (18)   Areas of temporary ground disturbance;
      (19)   Stockpile locations for spoil materials;
      (20)   Soil erosion and sediment control measures;
      (21)   Specifications for seeding or other methods of site stabilization;
      (22)   Details of construction;
      (23)   Dimensions of the proposed regulated activity; and
      (24)   Signature and seal of a licensed professional engineer.
   (D)   All applicable consultations, waivers, approvals, and permits from
federal, state, and local authorities.
   (E)   The site-specific seasonal high groundwater elevation, as determined
by a qualified professional engineer, if the regulated activity lowers the
lowest floor elevation of the previous or pre-existing building.
   (F)   Detention calculations, prepared by a licensed professional engineer,
if applicable.
   (G)   Depressional storage area calculations, prepared by a licensed
professional engineer, if applicable.
(Ord. 1178, passed 10-17-2016; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 150.445 DRAINAGE AND GRADING STANDARDS.
   (A)   General standards.
      (1)   All regulated activities shall meet or exceed the applicable
minimum standards of federal, state, regional, or other local agencies having
jurisdiction over the work governed by the permit, including, without
limitation, the latest edition of the Cook County Watershed Management
Ordinance.
      (2)   No regulated activity shall be allowed to alter the ground surface
such that runoff will be diverted onto or detained on an adjacent property that
the permittee does not have the right to use.
      (3)   No regulated activity shall be allowed to significantly alter
existing drainage patterns or discharge concentrated stormwater runoff onto an
adjacent property.
      (4)   All downspouts shall discharge in accordance with §
52.039 of this code.
      (5)   Concentrated discharges to the ground surface, such as those from
storm drains, downspouts, and sump pumps, shall discharge in accordance with §
52.039. No concentrated discharge created on or after November 1, 2016 shall be
constructed within 25 feet of a village sidewalk or ten feet of an adjacent
property line, except in cases where the owner of the subject property has an
ownership interest in, or an easement on, the adjacent property.
      (6)   No pavement created on or after November 1, 2016 shall be
constructed within two feet of a property line, except pavement necessary for
authorized driveway access from the property to a public or private right-of-
way, or in cases where the owner of the subject property has an ownership
interest in, or an easement on, the adjacent property.
      (7)   Depressional storage areas that will be filled or drained by a
regulated activity shall be replaced on the subject property as a new
depressional storage area or as part of a stormwater detention system.
      (8)   Ground slopes shall be no steeper than 25%, unless permanent ground
treatments that do not require mowing are used.
   (B)   Soil erosion and sediment control standards.
      (1)   Acceptable control measures include, but are not limited to: silt
fence, ditch checks, erosion control blanket, stabilized construction
entrances, and inlet protection. Control measures shall meet the minimum
standards and specifications of the Illinois Urban Manual, unless otherwise
modified by the code official pursuant to the applicable procedures of this
code. If the minimum standards and specifications of the Illinois Urban Manual
conflict with the other provisions of this code, the requirements that provide
the greatest protection to the public, as determined by the code official,
shall govern and control.
      (2)   Soil disturbance shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize
erosion. Areas that are not to be disturbed shall be protected from
construction equipment or other disturbance until final stabilization is
achieved.
      (3)   Soil stabilization measures shall consider the time of year, site
conditions, and the use of temporary or permanent control measures.
      (4)   Adjacent properties shall be protected from erosion and
sedimentation. Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed at concentrated
discharge locations as necessary to prevent erosion.
      (5)   Sediment control measures shall be installed prior to the
disturbance of upland areas.
      (6)   Stabilization of disturbed areas shall be initiated immediately
whenever any clearing, grading, excavating or other earth disturbing activities
have permanently ceased on the site, or temporarily ceased on the site for a
period exceeding seven days.
      (7)   All temporary control measures shall be removed within seven days
after final stabilization of the site is achieved, or after the temporary
measures are no longer necessary, as determined by the code official. Trapped
sediment shall be removed and disturbed areas shall be permanently stabilized.
   (C)   Stormwater detention standards.
      (1)   Stormwater detention shall be required on the subject property for
the following regulated activities:
         (a)   Construction of any new residence, including construction of a
new residence on an existing foundation;
         (b)   Construction of any new commercial building; and
         (c)   Construction of a “substantial alteration,” as this term is
defined in
Chapter 153 of this code, as amended.
      (2)   The required volume of stormwater detention shall be determined
using the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago’s Modified
Rational Method with the data and design conditions listed below:
         (a)   The rainfall intensity shall be based on the Illinois State
Water Survey, Bulletin 75 Precipitation Frequency Study for Illinois, published
in 2020.
         (b)   The allowable release rate for existing and proposed conditions
shall be based on a runoff coefficient of 0.15 and the rainfall intensity for a
three-year storm event.
         (c)   The composite runoff coefficient for the proposed conditions
shall be based on the maximum impermeable lot coverage allowed by
Chapter 153 of this code, as amended.
         (d)   The required volume of stormwater detention shall be the
difference in the storage volume calculated for existing and proposed
conditions for a 100-year storm event.
      (3)   Stormwater storage volume located within the void space of best
management practices, such as a rain garden or the aggregate base of permeable
pavement, may be credited toward the required stormwater detention volume
according to the following standards:
         (a)   The maximum void space shall be 36% for gravel and 25% for
engineered soil.
         (b)   No more than 25% of the required stormwater detention volume may
be provided within the aggregate base of permeable pavement.
         (c)   No more than 25% of the required stormwater detention volume may
be provided within a rain garden.
      (4)   The volume of depressional storage areas that will be filled or
drained by a regulated activity may be replaced as part of a stormwater
detention system.
      (5)   All runoff from the new impervious areas of the site shall be
routed to the stormwater detention facility. The system shall convey the 100-
year peak rate of runoff from the impervious areas to the facility, with a
minimum of six inches of freeboard against overflowing off-site.
   (D)   Building elevation standards.
      (1)   The first floor elevation for any new single-family residential
construction on a previously developed property shall not exceed the first
floor elevation of the previous residence, unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director to account for a documented environmental condition
associated with the property.
      (2)   The lowest floor elevation for any new building construction which
includes a basement, cellar or crawlspace on a previously developed property
shall not be lower than at least 18 inches above the seasonal high groundwater
elevation. The seasonal high groundwater elevation for the subject property
shall be determined by a qualified professional.
(Ord. 1178, passed 10-17-2016; Ord. 1365, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 150.446 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection from drainage hazards required by these regulations
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations; however, on occasion, extreme storms may occur and
result in greater flood heights and drainage hazards. Furthermore, flood
heights or drainage hazards may be increased by other man-made or natural
causes. These provisions do not imply that land outside of mapped flood hazard
areas, or that uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
drainage hazards. These provisions shall not create liability on the part of
the village, nor any officer or employee thereof, for any damage that results
from reliance on these regulations, activities for which a permit is issued
pursuant to this subchapter, or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 1178, passed 10-17-2016)
§§ 150.447 THROUGH 150.449 RESERVED.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 150.450 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The provisions of Chapters 1, 2, 3, and 8 of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2021 edition, published by the International Code Council,
are hereby adopted by this reference, subject only to the additions, deletions
and modifications specifically set forth in §
150.451 of this subchapter. Appendices adopted as part of this code are:
Appendix A: Boarding Standard.
(Ord. 1142, passed 5-18-2015; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 150.451 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY
MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2021
edition, are hereby amended, deleted or modified as hereinafter set forth:
Section Number Section Title Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Section  Section Title  Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number
101.1    Title          Insert “the Village of Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois” for “[name of
                        jurisdiction].”
                        Delete: “International Plumbing Code and NFPA 70. Nothing in this code shall be
102.3    Application of construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the International Zoning
         other codes    Code” and substitute: “and other codes as adopted in
                        Chapter 150 of the Kenilworth Village Code.”
102.6    Historic       Delete entire section.
         buildings
         Code           Delete entire section 103, entitled “Code Compliance Agency” and insert a new section
103      Compliance     entitled “Fees”, as follows:
         Agency
                        The fees for services performed by the Village in carrying out its responsibilities
103.1    Fee Schedule   in connection with this International Property Maintenance Code, 2021 edition, shall
                        be in the amount set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
         Reinspection   The fee to be paid for the third inspection of any single phase of compliance as
103.2    fees           required by the code official, and for each subsequent inspection, shall be in the
                        amount set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
         Placard        The fee for the code official to remove a placard indicating that a structure or
103.3    removal fee    equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, unfit for human occupancy,
                        unlawful or condemned shall be in the amount set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
         Occupancy      The fee for an inspection to approve occupancy of a structure shall be in the amount
103.4    inspection     set forth in the annual fee ordinance, and shall be paid prior to issuance of a
                        certificate of occupancy for the structure.
                        The fee for repairs, temporary safeguards, removal of hazardous conditions,
         Administrative demolition, or any other remedial action taken by the Village pursuant to this code
103.5    fee            shall be in the amount equal to the costs incurred by the Village to take such
                        action, plus an administrative fee in the amount set forth in the annual fee
                        ordinance.
                        Add to section: “The Code Official is hereby authorized to use the police power of
105.1    General        the Village in such manner and to such extent as the character of the violation and
                        the urgency, hazards, rights, and interests of the public health and safety may
                        justify and demand for the case involved.”
                        Delete last sentence of section and substitute: “If entry is refused or permission to
105.3    Right of entry enter not otherwise obtained, the Code Official shall have recourse to the remedies
                        provided by law to secure entry.”
105.6    Department     Delete entire section.
         records
                        Delete last sentence and substitute: “The Village Board of Trustees shall be notified
106.1    Modifications  in advance of the intent to grant modifications to this code and the details of
                        action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the Village files.”
                        Delete section and substitute: “Any person failing to comply with a notice of
                        violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a
                        misdemeanor. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the Code Official may
         Prosecution of institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or
109.3    violation      abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
                        occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the
                        order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having
                        jurisdiction on such premises may be charged against the real estate upon which the
                        structure is located and may be a lien upon such real estate.”
                        Delete entire section and substitute: “Any person violating any provision of this
109.4    Violation      Code may be subject to the penalty provisions of §
         penalties      10.99 of the Kenilworth Village Code, except where another specific penalty is
                        provided.”
109.5    Abatement of   Add as the first sentence of the section: “Timely abatement of the violation is the
         violation      preferred method of corrective action.”
                        Delete entire section and substitute: “Notice shall be deemed to be properly served
                        if a copy thereof is (a) delivered personally; or (b) sent by first class and
                        certified or registered mail addressed to the last known address with return receipt
         Method of      requested; or (c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by local law. If the
111.4.2  service        notice is returned showing that the notice was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be
                        posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.
                        Service of such notice, by personal delivery, or by first class and certified or
                        registered mail upon the owner’s agent or upon the person responsible for the
                        structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.”
111.6    Transfer of    In the first sentence of the section add “either” between “until” and “the
         ownership      provisions.”
111.1    General        Delete “shall” and substitute “may.”
                        Delete entire section and substitute: “An unsafe Structure is one that is found to be
         Unsafe         dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the Occupants of
111.1.1  Structures     the Structure or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such
                        faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is
                        possible.”
         Dangerous      Delete from subsection 7: “, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or immoral
111.1.5  Structure or   persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or Structure for committing a
         Premises       nuisance or an unlawful act.”
112.6    Hearing        Delete entire section.
                        Delete entire section and substitute: “The Code Official may order the Owner of any
                        Premises upon which is located any Structure, which in the Code Official’s judgment
                        after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to
                        be dangerous or unsafe, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the Structure, to
                        demolish and remove such Structure; or if such Structure is capable of being made
113.1    General        safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for
                        future repair or to demolish and remove at the Owner’s option; or where there has
                        been a cessation of normal construction of any Structure for a period of more than
                        two years, the Code Official may order the Owner to demolish and remove such
                        Structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future
                        repair shall not extend beyond one year, unless approved by the Code Official.”
113.3    Failure to     Delete entire section.
         comply
113.4    Salvage        Delete entire section.
         materials
                        Delete entire section and substitute: “Any person affected by a decision of the code
107.1    Application    official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal
         for appeal     to the Village Board of Trustees, provided that a written application for appeal is
                        filed within 10 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served.”
108.1    Membership of  Delete entire section.
         board
107.4    Administration Delete “board” and substitute: “Village Board of Trustees.”
         Failure to     Delete: “liable to a fine of not less than [amount] dollars or more than [amount]
110.4    comply         dollars” and substitute: “subject to the penalty provisions of §
                        10.99 of the Kenilworth Village Code.”
                        Delete: “International Existing Building Code,”
         Terms defined  Delete: “International Plumbing Code”, and substitute: “Illinois Plumbing Code.”
201.3    in other codes Delete: “International Zoning Code or NFPA 70” and substitute “and other codes as
                        adopted in
                        Chapter 150 of the Kenilworth Village Code.”
                        Delete: “Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are
301.2    Responsibility responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the
                        dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or Premises which they occupy and
                        control.”
                        Delete section and substitute: “All exterior property and Premises shall be
302.1    Sanitation     maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant, tenant and owner
                        shall each keep and be responsible and liable for keeping that part of the exterior
                        property that each controls in a clean and sanitary condition.”
                        Insert “seven inches” for “[jurisdiction to insert height in inches].” Delete “Upon
                        failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the
302.4    Weeds          jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter
                        upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the
                        costs of such removal shall be paid by the Owner or agent responsible for the
                        property.”
302.5    Rodent         Delete “approved.”
         harborage
302.8    Motor vehicles Insert “the exterior of” after “stored on” and before “any Premises.”
302.9    Defacement of  Delete title of section: “Defacement of property” and substitute: “Graffiti and
         property       vandalized properties.”
                        Add new subsection: “For purposes of this Section 302.9, the word “graffiti” shall
                        mean any sign, symbol, marking, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture or
302.9.1  Definitions    letter that is inscribed, engraved, drawn or otherwise placed on the surface of any
                        building, structure, wall, or pavement (including, without limitation, driveways,
                        sidewalks, and pathways) without the consent of the owner thereof.”
         Removal of     Add new subsection: “The owner of any property in the Village shall remove, or cause
         graffiti and   the removal of, all graffiti from the property, and shall clean, repair, paint, and
302.9.2  restoration by otherwise restore the affected building, structure, wall, or pavement so that no
         owner; notice  graffiti is visible from any public or private right-of-way, within five business
                        days after receipt from the Village of a notice thereof.”
                        Add new subsection: “Any person who violates this Section 302.9 shall be subject to
302.9.3  Penalty        the penalty provisions of §
                        10.99 of the Kenilworth Village Code.”
                        In the Exception, before “Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover,” insert “Swimming
303.2    Enclosures     pools, spas, and hot tubs for which a permit was issued prior to May 28, 2015, shall
                        not be required to install enclosures unless a new permit is required for substantial
                        modifications to the swimming pool, spa, or hot tub.”
304.1.1  Unsafe         Delete: “or the International Existing Building Code” and substitute “and the
         conditions     International Residential Code.”
304.2    Protective     Delete: “Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces
         Treatment      repainted.”
304.6    Exterior walls Delete: “and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.”
304.9    Overhang       Delete last sentence.
         extensions
         Stairways,     In second sentence, delete “imposed loads” and substitute: “intended loads or loads
304.10   decks, porches otherwise required to be supported by applicable law.”
         and balconies
304.11   Chimneys and   Delete last sentence.
         towers
304.13.1 Glazing        Delete “All glazing” and substitute “All exterior glazing.”
304.14   Insect screens Delete entire section.
304.15   Doors          Delete: “Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 702.3.”
                        Delete: “Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s
304.18.1 Doors          specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section,
                        a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.”
304.18.2 Windows        Delete entire section.
305      Interior       Delete entire section 305 entitled “Interior Structure.”
         Structure
306      Component      Delete entire section 306 entitled “Component Serviceability.”
         Serviceability
307.1    General        Delete “and interior” from the first sentence.
308.2    Disposal of    Delete “in approved containers” and substitute “in containers.”
         rubbish
         Rubbish
308.2.1  storage        Delete entire subsection.
         facilities
         Disposal of    Delete entire section and substitute: “Every occupant of a Structure shall dispose of
308.3    garbage        garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in a garbage disposal
                        facility or garbage containers.”
308.3.1  Garbage        Delete entire subsection.
         facilities
308.3.2  Containers     Delete entire subsection.
 
(Ord. 1142, passed 5-18-2015; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§§ 150.452 THROUGH 150.459 RESERVED.
EXISTING BUILDINGS
§ 150.460 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, 2021 edition,
published by the International Code Council, Inc., are hereby adopted by this
reference, subject only to the additions, deletions and modifications
specifically set forth in §
150.461 of this code.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 150.461 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL EXISTING
BUILDING CODE.
   The following sections of the aforesaid International Existing Building
code, 2021 edition, are hereby amended, deleted, or modified as hereinafter set
forth.
Section Number Section Title Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Section Section      Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number  Title
101.1   Title        Insert “the Village of Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois” for “[name of
                     jurisdiction]”.
                     Adopted as part of this code are:
101.2.1 Appendices   Appendix B: Supplementary Accessibility Requirements for Existing Buildings
                     Appendix C: Guidelines for the Wind Retrofit of Existing Buildings
                     Resource A: Guidelines on Fire Ratings of Archaic Materials and Assemblies.
        Right of     Delete last sentence of section and substitute: “If entry is refused or
104.6   entry        permission to enter not otherwise obtained, the Building Commissioner shall
                     have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.”
104.7   Department   Delete subsection
        records
                     Delete and substitute:
                     "Permits shall not be required for the following work:
                     a. Building:
                     i. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops, and similar
                     finish work.
                     ii. Construction or installation of temporary motion picture, television, and
                     theater stage sets and scenery. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a film
                     production permit shall be required as provided in Chapter 5.20 of the Village
                     Code.
                     iii. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-
                     family dwellings.
                     b. Electrical: A permit shall not be required for the replacement of switches,
                     receptacle outlets, light fixtures, light fixtures with ceiling fans, ceiling
                     fans, or overcurrent protection devices (breakers, fuses, etc.) where all work
                     is executed in compliance with the adopted version of the National Electrical
                     Code. A permit shall be required to extend any branch circuit or feeder
                     circuit. In addition, a permit shall be required for the replacement or
                     relocation of any electrical service panel, feeder panel, branch circuit panel,
                     or for any new electrical work.
                     c. Mechanical:
        Work exempt  i. Portable heating appliances.
105.2   from permit  ii. Portable ventilation appliances.
                     iii. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or
                     make such equipment unsafe.
                     iv. Portable evaporative coolers.
                     V. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less
                     of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746W) or less.
                     vi. Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
                     system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
                     d. Plumbing:
                     i. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided,
                     however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe
                     becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with
                     new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be
                     obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
                     ii. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or
                     fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
                     repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of
                     valves, pipes or fixtures.
                     Exemptions from the permit requirements of this Building Code shall not be
                     deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
                     violation of the provisions of the Village Code or any other laws or ordinances
                     of the Village.
108.2   Schedule of  Add the following sentence: “Fees are established by the Village of Kenilworth
        permit fees  Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time.”
108.6   Refunds      Delete subsection.
Section Board of     Delete entire section
112     Appeals
                     Delete section and substitute: “Any person failing to comply with a notice of
                     violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty
                     of a misdemeanor. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the Building
                     Commissioner may institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
113.3   Prosecution  restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
        of violation termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
                     provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any
                     action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises may be
                     charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and may be
                     a lien upon such real estate.”
        Violation    Delete entire section and substitute: “Any person violating any provision of
113.4   penalties    this Code may be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 10.99 of the
                     Kenilworth Village Code, except where another specific penalty is provided.”
                     Add the following before the first sentence: “An unsafe Structure is one that
                     is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public
115.1   Conditions   or the Occupants of the Structure or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated,
                     structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that
                     partial or complete collapse is possible.”
                     Delete entire section and substitute: “Notice shall be deemed to be properly
                     served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered personally; or (b) sent by first
                     class and certified or registered mail addressed to the last known address with
                     return receipt requested; or (c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by
115.4   Method of    local law. If the notice is returned showing that the notice was not delivered,
        service      a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
                     affected by such notice. Service of such notice, by personal delivery, or by
                     first class and certified or registered mail upon the owner’s agent or upon the
                     person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon
                     the owner.”
Section Fire Escapes Delete entire section.
405
Section Historic     Delete entire section.
408     Buildings
                     Delete entire subsection and substitute: “Altered elements of existing
410.8.2 Elevators    elevators shall comply the current provisions of the State of Illinois Elevator
                     Safety Rules and standards for conveyances and the Illinois Accessibility Code,
                     current edition.”
                     Delete entire subsection and substitute: “Platform (wheelchair) lifts complying
410.8.3 Platform     with the Illinois Accessibility Code and installed in accordance with the
        Lifts        Illinois Elevator Safety Rules shall be permitted as a component of an
                     accessible route.”
Section Historic     Delete entire section.
508     Buildings
                     Amend section as follows: “Electrical wiring and equipment undergoing repairs
607.1   General      shall be repaired or replaced with new wiring materials, connectors, supplies
                     and equipment allowed in NEC, 2020 edition.”
                     Amend section as follows: “Plumbing materials and supplies shall not be used
609.1   Materials    for repairs that are prohibited in the Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014 or current
                     edition.”
                     Level 1 alterations to existing buildings or structures are permitted without
708.1   Minimum      requiring the entire building or structure to comply with the energy
        requirements requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code, as amended by the
                     Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
                     Amend section as follows: “Where the occupancy of an existing building or part
                     of an existing building is changed such that the new occupancy is subject to
1010.1  Increased    increased or different plumbing fixture requirements, or to increased water
        Demand       supply requirements in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014 or
                     current edition, the new occupancy shall comply with the intent of the
                     respective Illinois Plumbing Code provisions.”
                     Amend section as follows: “If the new occupancy is a food-handling
        Food-        establishment, all existing sanitary waste lines above the food or drink
1010.2  Handling     preparation or storage areas shall be panned or otherwise protected to prevent
        Occupancies  leaking pipes or condensation on pipes from contaminating food or drink. New
                     drainage lines shall not be installed above such areas and shall be protected
                     in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014 or current edition.”
        Interceptor  Amend section as follows: “If the new occupancy will produce grease or oil-
1010.3  Required     laden wastes, interceptors shall be provided as required in the Illinois
                     Plumbing Code, 2014 or current edition.”
                     Amend section as follows: “If the occupancy group is changed to Group I-2, the
1010.5  Group I-2    plumbing system shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Illinois
                     Plumbing Code, 2014 or current edition.”
Chapter Historic     Delete entire chapter.
12      Buildings
 
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§§ 150.462 THROUGH 150.549 RESERVED.
SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS
§ 150.550 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.
   The provisions of Chapters 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, and 10 of the International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2021 edition, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., are hereby adopted by this reference, subject only to the
additions, deletions and modifications specifically set forth in §
150.551 of this code.
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 150.551 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING
POOL AND SPA CODE.
   The following sections of the aforesaid International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code, 2021 edition, are hereby amended, deleted, or modified as hereinafter set
forth:
Section Number Section Title Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Section Section     Additions, Deletions and Modifications
Number  Title
101.1   Title       Insert “the Village of Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois” for “[name of
                    jurisdiction]”.
                    Delete the subsection and substitute: “The provisions of this code shall apply
                    to the construction, alteration, movement, renovation, replacement, repair and
101.2   Scope       maintenance of residential swimming pools and residential spas. The pools and
                    spas covered by this code are either permanent or temporary, and shall be only
                    those that are designed and manufactured to be connected to a circulation
                    system and that are intended for swimming, bathing or wading.”
102.5   Historic    Delete entire section.
        buildings.
        Illinois    Add subsection:
102.7.2 Plumbing    Whenever a reference is made to the International Plumbing Code, such reference
        Code        shall be deemed to refer to the applicable section of the Illinois Plumbing
                    code, as adopted by the Village of Kenilworth.
        Right of    Delete last sentence of section and substitute: “If entry is refused or
104.6   entry       permission to enter not otherwise obtained, the Building Commissioner shall
                    have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.”
104.7   Department  Delete entire section.
        records
                    Delete section and substitute: “A permit shall expire if the work covered by
                    the permit:
                    a.   is not commenced within six months after issuance of the permit, or
                    b.   is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months or more, or
                    c.   is not completed within 18 months after issuance of the permit, unless the
                    work under the permit is limited to fences, impervious surfaces, or work with a
                    value of less than $50,000, in which case the permit shall expire if the work
                    is not completed within 12 months.
                    An extension must be applied for prior to the expiration of the permit for
105.4.3 Expiration  which extension is sought, and may be granted by the Building Commissioner
                    because of delays resulting from strikes, fire, windstorm or other
                    circumstances beyond the applicant’s control; provided, however, that no single
                    extension shall exceed six months, and the total duration of all extensions
                    granted shall not exceed 12 months. If no such extension is granted and the
                    work is not completed, the applicant shall be required to apply for a new
                    permit under the provisions of this Code. No permit fees shall be refunded
                    because of the expiration of any permit pursuant to the provisions of this
                    section. Fees for all extensions shall be in amounts established by the Board
                    of Trustees by resolution from time to time.”
108.2   Schedule of Add the following sentence: “Fees are established by the Village of Kenilworth
        Permit Fees Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time.”
108.6   Fee refunds Delete subsection.
                    Delete section and substitute: “Any person failing to comply with a notice of
                    violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty
                    of a misdemeanor. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the Building
        Prosecution Commissioner may institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
113.4   of          restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
        violation   termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
                    provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any
                    action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises may be
                    charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and may be
                    a lien upon such real estate.”
                    Delete entire section and substitute: “Any person violating any provision of
107.4   Violation   this Code may be subject to the penalty provisions of §
        penalties   10.99 of the Kenilworth Village Code, except where another specific penalty is
                    provided.”
Section Means of    Delete entire section.
1111    Appeals
                    Add: “PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL - means a manmade rigid or semi-rigid receptacle
                    for water having a depth at any point greater than 18 inches, used or intended
Section Definitions to be used for swimming, wading or bathing and constructed, installed or
202                 maintained in or above the ground, and which is used exclusively by the owner
                    or occupant of the lot or premises in the Village on which it is located, his
                    or her family and his or her guests.”
                    Delete subsection and substitute: “Electrical requirements for residential
302.1   Electrical  swimming pools and residential spas shall be in accordance with the National
                    Electrical Code - NFPA 70, 2020 edition, and as applicable in accordance with
                    Section 102.7.”
        Water       Delete subsection and substitute: “Piping and fittings used for water service,
302.2   service and makeup and drainage piping for residential swimming pools and spas shall comply
        drainage    with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014 or current edition. Fittings
                    shall be approved for installation with the piping installed.”
                    Delete subsection and substitute: “The provisions of this section shall apply
                    to the design of barriers for residential swimming pools and spas. These design
                    controls are intended to provide protection against the potential drowning and
                    near drowning by restricting access to such vessels. These requirements provide
305.1   General     an integrated level of protection against potential drowning through the use of
                    physical barriers and warning devices.
                    Exceptions:
                    1.   Spas and hot tubs with a lockable safety cover that complies with ASTM F
                    1346.”
                    Add new subparagraph: “A fence on an adjoining property or building or existing
                    wall complying with the requirements in this section may be used as part of the
305.2.1             enclosure, with the approval of the Building Commissioner, if the resultant
(5)                enclosure is sufficient to make the pool inaccessible to small children. If at
                    any time said existing fence or wall being used as part of the enclosure is
                    removed, the enclosure of the pool shall immediately be made to meet the
                    requirements of the section at the pool owner’s expense.”
 
(Ord. 1241, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 1374, passed 12-9-2024)
§§ 150.552 THROUGH 150.998 RESERVED.
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
   (B)   Tree preservation.
      (1)   Damage or removal. Any person who damages or removes a protected
tree or heritage tree in violation of §§
150.155 through
150.167 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $750 per violation, with
every damaged or removed tree constituting a separate violation. In addition to
the applicable fine, any damaged or removed trees shall be replaced in
accordance with the requirements set forth in §§
150.164 and
150.165.
      (2)   Other violations of §§
150.155 through
150.167. Any person who violates any other provision of §§
150.155 through
150.167 or any of the specific construction activity protective measures set
forth in §
150.167 shall be fined not less than $100 for the first violation, $200 for the
second violation and $300 for any successive violation within the same 12-month
period. Where impact on, damage to or removal of a protected tree or heritage
tree is reasonably likely to occur that has not been authorized under §§
150.155 through
150.167, a stop-work order may be issued in addition to a citation for the
violation, and all work at the site must cease. Once the violation has been
abated and a $500 stop-work fee has been paid to the village to cover the cost
of administrative processing, the village shall release the stop-work order
within two business days, at which time work may resume. For purposes of this
provision, a person shall be deemed to have violated these regulations whenever
that person, or any contractor, subcontractor, agent or employee of that
person, shall have violated these regulations.
(Ord. 945, passed 10-11-2005)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION REGULATIONS
Section
   
151.01   Regulations of National Flood Insurance Program adopted
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Administration and enforcement
   
151.04   Duties of the Director
   
151.05   Base flood elevation
   
151.06   Occupation and use of flood fringe areas
   
151.07   Occupation and use of identified floodways
   
151.08   Occupation and use of floodplain areas where floodways are not
identified
   
151.09   Permitting requirements applicable to all floodplain areas
   
151.10   Other development requirements
   
151.11   Variances
   
151.12   Disclaimer of liability
   
151.13   Construction and other code provisions
   
151.14   Effect of regulations
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 REGULATIONS OF NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM ADOPTED.
   The rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program as
codified in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44, Chapter 1, Subchapter B,
Part 59, et seq., as amended, are adopted by reference and filed in the office
of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A non-habitable building, used only for parking of
vehicles or storage, that is on the same parcel of property as the principal
building and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
building.
   ACT. "An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams
of the State of Illinois," Illinois Revised Statutes 1991, Chapter 19,
Paragraph 52, et seq.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application pursuant to this chapter.
   APPROPRIATE USE. A use of the regulatory floodway that is listed in 17
Illinois Administrative Code 3708 and that will not cause a rise in the base
flood elevation and will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase
in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety.
Approved appropriate uses are specified in §
151.07(D).
   AVERAGE LOT GRADE. The mathematical average of the ground elevation as
measured at all of the corners of the buildable area of a parcel of land. As
used in this definition, the term "buildable area" shall have the same
definition as provided in § 17.04.020(B)(6) of this code.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one percent probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. The base flood is often referred to as the 100-year
flood.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The height in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified) of the crest of
the base flood. Application of the BFE at any location is as defined in §
151.05.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building, including any sunken room or sunken
portion of a room, having its floor below ground level (subgrade) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building.
   CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded areas, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, as well as widening, deepening,
straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation
from the bottom or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the clearing of
dead or dying vegetation, debris or trash from the channel. Channelization is a
severe form of channel modification typically involving relocation of the
existing channel (e.g., straightening).
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. An area of special flood hazard extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast, and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. A coastal high hazard area is identified on a community's FIRM by the
designation of Zone VE.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the special flood hazard area used to balance the loss
of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed
within the floodplain.
   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE. Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the Floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708, gives
assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed
according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously
agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter which indicates that
the Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood elevations,
flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an
effective flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as-
built plans are submitted and approved.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
   DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A facility that provides for storage of stormwater
runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any engineered change to real estate, including:
      (1)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building or
any addition to a building;
      (2)   Installing a manufactured home on a site or preparing a site for a
manufactured home;
      (3)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, or similar projects;
      (4)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
      (5)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or
culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving,
or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of
materials; deposits of solid or liquid waste;
      (6)   Any other human activity that might change the direction, height or
velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
   DEVELOPMENT. Does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no
increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
   DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING. The Village Manager or their designee.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been
elevated.
   EROSION. The general process where soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
   EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS. Organizations which are exempt from the operation of
this chapter pursuant to state law including state, federal or local units of
government.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 C.F.R.
59-79, effective as of October 1, 2000. This incorporation does not include any
later editions or amendments.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood also includes the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood
or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM). A map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that depicts the special flood hazard area within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or
may not depict floodways.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation, and determination of
flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN. That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the base flood. Floodplains may also include
detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, and the like. The
floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA).
      (1)   Floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village
of Kenilworth that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The SFHAs of
the village are generally identified as such on Map Number 17031C, Panel 0253J,
dated August 19, 2008 and Panels 0252K, and 0254K dated September 10, 2021, of
the countywide FIRM for Cook County, Illinois prepared by the FEMA.
      (2)   The SFHAs for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the one and one-half mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village
of Kenilworth and that may be annexed into the village are designated for the
Skokie River on Map Number 17031C, Panels, 0232J, 0234J, and 0253J, dated
August 19, 2008 and Map Number 17031C, Panels 0251K, 0252K, 0254K, 0258K, and
0260K dated September 10, 2021, of the countywide FIRM for Cook County,
Illinois, prepared by the FEMA.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION OR FPE. means the elevation of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood plus two feet of freeboard at any given location in
the special flood hazard area.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the based flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety of uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice
or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any building that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic
district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency;
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. Engineering analysis which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
   IDNR/OWR. The Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective flood
hazard boundary map or FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISIONS (LOMR). Letter from FEMA that revises base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FBFM or FIRM.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the building in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this code.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A building, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MINIMUM AVERAGE LOT GRADE. Is the number arrived at by applying the
following formula: (FPE-2') - [(Total Required Side Yard-12') x 0.0833].
   MITIGATION. Those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which
floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety and
welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and
sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
   MODERATE WAVE ACTION AREA (MoWA). A special flood hazard area subject to the
potential for breaking wave heights of greater than or equal to one and one-
half feet, but less than three feet, where the primary source of flooding is
astronomical tides, storm surges, seiches, and/or tsunamis. A MoWA is an area
within Zone AE on a FIRM that is between the inland limit of Zone VE and a
LiMWA, where identified. (Also known as "Coastal A Zone").
   NAVD. North American Vertical Datum of 1988; reference surface set by the
National Geodetic Survey is the vertical control datum based upon the general
adjustment of the North American Datum of 1988, established in 1991 by the
minimum-constraint adjustment of geodetic leveling observation in Canada, the
United States, and Mexico.
   NATURAL. When used in reference to channels, means those channels formed by
the existing surface topography of the Earth prior to engineered changes. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soiled and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is re-
established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions through regrading and revegetation.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by
the village and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
   PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS. All streams and lakes capable of being navigated
by watercraft.
   REGIONAL PERMITS. Regional permits are offered for pre-approved projects
which are considered minor projects that are permissible per Ill. Adm. Code
Part 3708 rules for Northeastern Illinois Designated Floodways. A complete
listing of the terms and conditions for specific project types can be obtained
from the IDNR/OWR website.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the state of
Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Land Surveyors Act of 1989, 225 ILCS
330/1 through 330/49.
   REGISTERED or LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER (P.E.). An engineer registered
in the State of Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Practice
Act of 1989, 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by
IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100- year frequency
flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth foot increase in stage due to the
loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10% increase in
velocities.
      (1)   The floodways are designated for the Skokie River on Map Number
17031C, Panel 0253J, dated August 19, 2008 and Panels 0252K, and 0254K dated
September 10, 2021, of the countywide FIRM for Cook County, Illinois, prepared
by the FEMA.
      (2)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that
are within the one and one-half mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
Village of Kenilworth and that may be annexed into the village are designated
for the Skokie River on Map Number 17031C, Panels, 0232J, 0234J, and 0253J,
dated August 19, 2008 and Map Number 17031C, Panels 0251K, 0252K, 0254K, 0258K,
and 0260K dated September 10, 2021, of the countywide FIRM for Cook County,
Illinois, prepared by the FEMA.
      (3)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the
designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map
and located on a site plan, using reference marks, to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated
floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for interpretation.
   REPAIR, REMODELING or MAINTENANCE. Development activities that do not result
in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a Building on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the building before the damaged occurred.
   RIVERINE FLOODPLAIN. Any Floodplain subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
   RUNOFF. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   SEDIMENTATION. The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Any base flood area subject to flooding
from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified
channel or ponding and shown on a flood boundary and floodway map, flood hazard
boundary map or flood insurance rate map as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO,
V30, VE, V, M, E or X.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other
improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the
first placement of permanent construction of a building on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, including the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   STATEWIDE PERMITS. Permits that are offered for pre-approved projects that
are considered minor projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR Part 3700
rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and permit requirements can
be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
   STRUCTURE. The results of a human change to the land construction on or
below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to a building, the installation of a manufactured home
on a site or the preparation of a site for a manufactured home, and
construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, bridges or culverts;
drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating; and the storage of
materials.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a building whereby
cost to repair the building to its before damaged condition equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of the building before the damage occurred, regardless
of actual repair work performed. The term includes flood related damages
sustained by a building on two separate occasions in a ten-year period, in
which the cost of the repairs, on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market
value of the building at the time of each such flood event.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a building, taken over a ten-year period in which the cost, as
substantiated by an executed contract that outlines the entire scope of work,
in which the percentage of improvements, figured (cumulatively) by dividing the
cost of each improvement by the market value of the building prior to the start
of construction of each improvement, equals or exceeds 50%.
      (1)   Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. This term includes buildings which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the building's continued
designation as a historic structure.).
    TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows
from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section, or vice versa.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. A registered professional engineer appointed by the
Village Manager.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this code.
   WMO or WATERSHED MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE. The Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago Countywide Watershed Management Ordinance, October
2013, as amended.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be in accordance
with this section.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body shall commence any
development activities, including new construction, substantial improvements,
and alterations of a watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact
with the floodplains until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the
Director. No permit shall be issued by the Director until the requirements of
this code have been met.
   (B)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body shall commence any
development of a critical facility on land below the 0.2% annual chance flood
elevation without first obtaining a floodplain development permit from the
Director.
   (C)   A local floodplain development permit shall not be issued by the
Director for development in a floodway without the applicant first obtaining a
state floodway permit from IDNR/OWR, except as noted in §
151.07.
   (D)   The Director shall review all proposed development by comparing field
surveyed topography of the site to the FIRM and shall make interpretations,
where needed, as to the location of the floodplain boundaries, floodway
boundaries, and BFE.
      (1)   Any development that is located on land below the BFE, located in
the mapped floodway, or associated with a Zone AO or VE is subject to the
requirements of this code. A LOMA-Floodway (LOMR-FW) shall be required before
issuing a floodplain development permit for land higher than the BFE if located
within a mapped floodway.
      (2)   Any development located on land below the BFE that was filled after
the date of the site's first floodplain designation on a flood map is subject
to the requirements of this code.
      (3)   Any development located on land below the BFE that is that is
hydraulically connected to the floodplain, but not shown on the current FIRM,
is subject to the provisions of this code.
      (4)   The Director shall maintain documentation of the pre-existing
ground elevation at the site and, if applicable, certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first FIRM identification in
the floodplain.
   (E)   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted, the Director shall require that
the minimum requirements of §
151.08 be met.
   (F)   (1)   A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid
unless the actual start of construction, for work authorized by such permit, is
commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences.
      (2)   The Director shall ensure that all development activities happen in
a timely manner. All permitted work shall be completed within 12 months after
the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire. Time extensions,
of not more than 180 days each, may be granted, in writing, by the Director.
Time extensions shall be granted only if the original permit is compliant with
this code and the FIRM and FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.
   (G)   Letters of map revision. The Director shall require a CLOMR prior to
issuance of a development permit for proposed floodway encroachments that will
cause an increase in the BFE; and proposed development which will increase the
BFE by more than one-tenth of a foot in riverine area where FEMA has provided a
BFE but no floodway.
   (H)   Once a CLOMR has been issued, the development permit may be issued for
site grading and structures necessary in the area of the map change to achieve
the final LOMR. Upon completion, the applicant shall submit as-built
certifications, as required by FEMA, to achieve a final LOMR prior to the
release of final development permits. Review §
151.06(G) for the construction of buildings in any floodplain issued a LOMR
based on fill.
   (I)   Application. An application for a floodplain development permit shall
be made on a form provided by the Director.
      (1)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn
to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a Registered P.E., licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; existing grade elevations, using the NAVD 88, and all proposed
changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings, additions to buildings,
sewage disposal and water supply facilities; floodplain limits based on
elevation or depth, as applicable; floodway limits, as applicable; location and
dimensions of all structures, including but not limited to fences, culverts,
decks, gazebos, agricultural structures, and accessory structures.
      (2)   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of §
151.09.
   (J)   To assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this
code, the Director may take any and all actions as outlined in §
151.99.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.04 DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.
   The Director shall be responsible for the general administration and
enforcement of this chapter, which shall include the following duties and
responsibilities.
   (A)   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a
floodplain using criteria listed in §
151.05 or for critical facilities, using the 0.2% annual chance flood
elevation, if defined.
   (B)   If the site is in a floodplain, determine whether the site in a
coastal high hazard area, moderate wave action area, floodway, flood fringe or
in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted.
   (C)   If the site within a flood fringe, require that the minimum
requirements of §§
151.06 and
151.09 be met.
   (D)   If The site within a floodway, require that the minimum requirements
of §§
151.07 and
151.09 be met.
   (E)   If the site is located within a floodplain for which no detailed study
has been completed and approved, require that the minimum requirements of §§
151.08 and
151.09 be met.
   (F)   If the site is within a coastal high hazard area (or moderate wave
action area), require that the minimum requirements of §
151.09 be met.
   (G)   Inspect all projects before, during and after construction to assure
proper elevation of the building and to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this code.
   (H)   Schedule, on an annual basis, an inspection of the floodplain and
document the results of the inspection.
   (I)   Review elevation certificates and floodproofing certificates for
accuracy and require incomplete or deficient certificates be corrected and
maintained in permit files including:
      (1)   Elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of a residential or non-residential building subject to §
151.09, or an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
horizontal structural member of the lowest floor, where required by §
151.09 .
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate certifying the elevation to which a non-
residential building has been dry floodproofed, using a floodproofing
certificate, for all buildings required to be dry floodproofed pursuant to §
151.09.
      (3)   Certification of structural design and methods of construction for
VE Zone construction as required by §
151.09.
      (4)   Certification of breakaway wall design, when applicable, as
provided in §
151.09.
   (J)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request all permit
records, including but not limited to base flood data, floodplain and
regulatory floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance
documentation, soil compaction records, conditional letter of map revision,
letter of map revision, letter of map amendment, as-built elevation,
floodproofing certificates and elevation certificates for all buildings
constructed subject to this code.
   (K)   Floodway permits. For all development projects in a floodway, ensure
that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR or a delegated
community, or written documentation is provided stating that a permit is not
required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq. Floodway permit
requirements are specified in §§
151.07 and
151.08.
   (L)   Permits for dams may be required from IDNR/OWR. The Floodplain
Administrator shall contact IDNR/OWR to determine if a permit is required and
for application details. Any work involving the construction, modification, or
removal of a dam, per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of
Dams), shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the issuing a local permit.
   (M)   Ensure any and all required federal, state, and local permits are
received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit, including,
but not limited to, permits pertaining to the Clean Water Act, Public Water
Supply, Endangered Species Act, and Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act.
   (N)   Establish procedures for administering and documenting determinations,
as outlined below, of substantial improvement and substantial damage made
pursuant to §
151.09.
      (1)   Determine the market value or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case
of repair, the market value of the building shall be the market value before
the damage occurred and before any repairs are made.
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building,
including the cost of volunteer labor and donated materials must be included.
      (3)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building,
including the cost of volunteer labor and donated materials must be included.
      (4)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or substantial damage.
      (5)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood-resistant construction requirements of the village and this code
is required.
   (O)   Cooperation with other agencies.
      (1)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this
code;
      (2)   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six months whenever a modification of the floodplain may
change the BFE or result in a change to the floodplain map;
      (3)   Submit reports as required for the NFIP; and
      (4)   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
   (P)   Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and
enforce the provisions of §
15.68, subject however to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any
ordinance changes.
   (Q)   Notify IDNR/OWR and adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to
the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
   (R)   If a variance is to be granted, the Director shall review the
requirements of §
151.11 to make sure they are met. In addition, the Director shall complete all
notifications requirements, prepare a staff report and recommendations.
   (S)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter, investigate violations, issue
notices of violation or stop work orders, and require corrective action, as
outlined in §
151.99.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.05 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   This chapter's protection standard is based on the regulatory flood profiles
for the Countywide Flood Insurance Study for Cook County dated September 10,
2021. If a BFE is unavailable for a particular site, then the protection
standard shall be according to the best existing available data from federal,
state or other sources. When a party disagrees with the best available data or
should no other data source exist, that party may finance the detailed
engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit
it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for approval.
   (A)   Base flood for Skokie River SFHA. The BFE for the SFHAs of the Skokie
River shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Countywide
Flood Insurance Study for Cook County prepared by the FEMA and dated September
10, 2021, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from
time to time.
   (B)   Base flood for SFHAs within the village's extraterritorial
jurisdiction. The BFE for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook
County that are within the one and one-half mile extraterritorial jurisdiction
or that may be annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the base
flood profiles in the Countywide Flood Insurance Study for Cook County prepared
by the FEMA and dated September 10, 2021, and such amendments to such study and
maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   (C)   Base flood for AH and AO Zones. The BFE for each SFHA delineated as an
AH Zone or AO Zone shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated Countywide
FIRM of Cook County and as described in § 601.4.B-C of the WMO.
   (D)   Base Flood for A Zones. The BFE for each of the remaining SFHAs
delineated as an A Zone on the Countywide FIRM of Cook County shall be
according to the best existing data available from federal, state, or other
sources. When no BFE exists, the BFE shall be determined according to § 601.6
of the WMO. Flood flows should be based on anticipated future land use
conditions in the watershed as determined from adopted local and regional land
use plans. Along any watercourse draining more than one square mile, the above
analyses shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval.
   (E)   The BFE for any Zone VE floodplain, and for a zone AE floodplain in an
area subject to flooding effects from Lake Michigan, shall be the highest
elevation specified on the FIRM among all flood zones affecting the proposed
development. Where development is proposed to encroach upon a riverine Zone AE
which is subject to flooding effects from Lake Michigan, the requirements of §
151.08 shall apply to the entire floodplain.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.06 OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.
   Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe is subject to the
provisions of this section and will only be permitted if protection is provided
against the base flood and if other applicable requirements of this chapter are
met. No use will be permitted if it adversely affects the capacity of drainage
facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet
the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of §
151.09.
   (A)   Floodplain development permit required. No person, firm, corporation
or governmental body, other than exempt organizations, shall commence any
development in the SFHA without first obtaining a floodplain development permit
from the Director.
   (B)   Application and site plan. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made on a form provided by the Director. The application shall
meet the requirements of Article 3 of the WMO and this chapter. For all
proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and
lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development
will be subject to the requirements of §
151.09. The drawing shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer.
   (C)   Review of application. Upon receipt of a floodplain development permit
application, the Director shall compare the elevation of the site to the BFE.
If, upon review, the Director determines that the development is located on
land that is higher than the base flood elevation of the current FIRM and that
has not been filled since the date of the site's first FIRM identification, the
property shall be considered outside of the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to
the requirements of this chapter. The Director shall maintain documentation of
the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that
this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first FIRM
identification.
   (D)   Duties and responsibilities of Director. The Director shall be
responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state,
and federal permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be
required for the proposed activity. The Director shall not issue a permit
unless copies of all other local, state and federal permits have been submitted
by the applicant.
   (E)   Preventing increased damages. No development in the flood fringe shall
create a threat to public health and safety.
   (F)   Use of fill to elevate site.
      (1)   Fill shall not be used to elevate a site unless the average lot
grade is equal to or greater than the minimum average lot grade.
      (2)   If fill is being used to elevate the site above the BFE, the
applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision from
FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in the letter of map revision or in this chapter, no
person who obtains a map revision removing a site from the floodplain shall be
entitled to build the lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE,
except as provided in §
151.06(G).
   (G)   Constructing lowest floor below BFE. A person who has obtained a
letter of map revision that removes a site in the flood fringe from the
floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, may apply
for a permit from the village to construct the lowest floor of a residential
building below the BFE in the flood fringe. The Director shall not issue such a
permit unless the applicant has complied with all of the criteria set forth in
the following paragraphs of this division.
      (1)   Compensatory storage shall be provided in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.
window wells, access ways) shall be at or above the FPE.
      (3)   The lowest grade adjacent to the foundation shall be at or above
the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet beyond the outside face of the
structure.
      (4)   The grade around the perimeter of the structures, measured at a
distance of 20 feet from the structure, shall be above the BFE.
      (5)   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets
all requirements of this division (G) and is at least five feet thick under the
basement floor slab. Nothing in this division (G) shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-
F permit, if such fill consists of material, including soil of similar
classification and degree of permeability, that meets the requirements of this
division (G).
      (6)   The fill material shall be compacted to at least 95% of standard
laboratory maximum dry density (standard proctor), according to ASTM Standard
D-698. Fill soils shall be fine-grained soils of low permeability, such as
those classified as CH, CL, SC, or ML according to ASTM Standard D-2487,
Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes.
      (7)   The fill material must be homogeneous i.e., all of one material,
and isotropic, i.e., having the engineering properties must be the same in all
directions.
      (8)   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by an Illinois Registered Professional Engineer or Registered Soils
Engineer, as warranted by the site conditions.
      (9)   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
five feet below the BFE.
      (10)   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab,
and a minimum of one-quarter horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply
shall be provided to remove the seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four
times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away
from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the
floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.
      (11)   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
      (12)   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic
pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
   (H)   Compensatory storage.
      (1)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically
equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the BFE, provided all of the
conditions § 602.7-9 of the WMO and of the following (H)(2) and (H)(3) of this
section shall be met.
      (2)   In no case shall the depth of excavation for any compensatory
storage in the front and side yards of the lot exceed 18 inches, as measured
from the previously existing natural grade. The rear yard may be permitted to
have a greater depth of excavation, if necessary.
      (3)   The use of mechanical means to drain the compensatory storage area
will not be permitted.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.07 OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.
   Any development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification
within a regulatory floodway is subject to the provisions of this section and
shall be permitted only if the criteria of this section and applicable
requirements of this chapter are met. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development
shall also meet the requirements of §
151.09.
   (A)   Floodplain development permit. No person, firm, corporation or
governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a
floodway without first obtaining a floodplain development permit from the
Director.
   (B)   Application. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be
made on a form provided by the Director, which shall include at least the
information required by Article 3 of the WMO.
   (C)   Review and approval of permit applications. The Director shall be
responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state,
and federal permits and approvals that may be required for the proposed
activity. The Director shall not issue the floodplain development permit unless
copies of all required federal and state permits have been submitted by the
applicant. A registered professional engineer under the employ or contract of
the village shall review and approve applications reviewed under this section.
   (D)   Preventing increased damages; list of appropriate uses. No development
shall be allowed in a floodway unless it is for appropriate uses that will not
cause a rise in the base flood elevation, will not create a damaging or
potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity and will not be a
threat to public health and safety. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17
Ill. Adm. Code 3708 and §
602.27 of the WMO will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the
construction or placement of any new buildings, structures, fill, building
additions, buildings on stilts, fencing (including landscaping or planting
designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically
defined above as an appropriate use.
   (E)   Engineering criteria for appropriate uses in the regulatory floodway.
Within the regulated floodway as identified on the Countywide FIRMs for Cook
County, the construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible;
provided that, the proposed project meets the requirements of §§ 602.7-9 and
25-28 of the WMO, along with the following engineering criteria, and is so
stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered
professional engineer; and provided that, any structure meets the protection
requirements of §
151.09:
      (1)   Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase flood
stages upstream. For appropriate uses, all effective regulatory floodway
conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to
and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory
floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
         (a)   Regulatory floodway conveyance,
            'K' = 1.486 AR2/3
                n
         where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of
the cross-section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter
(see Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw- Hill Book Company, New
York);
         (b)   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative
land cover;
         (c)   Transition section shall be provided and used in calculations of
effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency;
            1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length.
            2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length.
            3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length
shall be used.
            4.   Transition sections shall be provided between cross-sections
with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory floodway
delineation on adjacent properties.
            5.   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
      (2)   Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase downstream
flooding. Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory floodway
storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures
placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. Compensatory
storage for fill or structures shall meet the requirements of § 602.7-9 of the
WMO.
      (3)   Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase stream
erosion or flood heights. For all appropriate uses the proposed work will not
result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities,
unless a water resource benefit is realized and unless scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
      (4)   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway
approaches. The proposed structures shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up
to and including the 100-year frequency event, unless the area of the increased
flood stages is under the ownership or control of the applicant.
         (a)   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages shall be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in §
151.05.
         (b)   Lost floodway storage shall be compensated for in accordance
with §
151.07(E)(2).
         (c)   Velocity increases shall be mitigated in accordance with §
151.07(E)(3).
         (d)   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for
recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be obtained by
the applicant.
         (e)   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing conditions and proposed regulatory profile shall be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by §
151.07(E).
         (f)   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per §
151.07(E)(8).
      (5)   Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts and
approach roads.
         (a)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than one-tenth foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
         (b)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood states on upstream and downstream properties.
         (c)   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is
a source of flood damage and should be redesigned shall be prepared in
accordance with IDNR/OWR Rules 17 Ill. Adm. Code 3708 (Floodway Construction in
Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued.
         (d)   Hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage shall be required
to mitigate any potential increase in flow or flood elevations due to the
removal or modification of an existing bridge or culvert.
      (6)   On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water. Any
increase in upstream flood stages greater than zero feet when compared to the
existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event shall be contained within the area under the ownership or
control of the applicant. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not
required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR, dam safety section, for a dam safety
permit or waiver for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in
the stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as
defined in §
151.02 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code 3702
(Construction and Maintenance of Dams).
      (7)   Floodproofing of existing habitable, residential and commercial
structures. If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet from the outside of the building.
Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for
floodproofing activities.
      (8)   Excavation in the floodway. When excavation is proposed in the
design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for
lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios
shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be
used with the same efficiency.
         (a)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section,
the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every four feet of the flood stream's length;
         (b)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length;
         (c)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet for stream length
shall be used; and
         (d)   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and
downstream of the transition sections.
      (9)   Seeding and stabilization plan. For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
      (10)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations.
         (a)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory
floodway study, referenced in §
151.05, shall be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data
appears to be in error or conditions have changed, the IDNR/OWR shall be
contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data
to use.
         (b)   If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of the
proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a large drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood
elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the
receiving stream at normal water elevations.
         (c)   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
      (11)   Conditional letter of map revision. If the appropriate use would
result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and to FEMA
all the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional regulatory floodway map revision and received from IDNR/OWR a
conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before a permit is
issued. The final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by IDNR/OWR until
as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/
OWR. In the case of nongovernmental projects, the municipality in incorporated
areas and the county in an unincorporated area shall concur with the proposed
conditional regulatory floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be
given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a
conditional approval is issued. Once a CLOMR has been issued, a permit may be
issued for site grading and structures necessary in the area of the map change
to achieve the final LOMR. Upon completion, the applicant shall submit as-built
certifications, as required by FEMA, to achieve a final LOMR prior to the
release of final development permits. The regulatory floodway map will be
revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the as-built
plans, and the effective date of the LOMR is reached.
      (12)   Professional engineer's supervision. All engineering analyses
shall be performed by or under the supervision of an Illinois registered
professional engineer, retained by the applicant.
   (F)   State review in delegated communities. For those projects listed below
located in a regulatory floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
      (1)   IDNR/OWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile
due to a proposed bridge pursuant to §
151.07(E)(4).
      (2)   IDNR/OWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing
bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to §
151.07(E)(5).
      (3)   The IDNR/OWR will review alternative transition sections and
hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to §
151.07(E)(1), (E)(2), (E)(8).
      (4)   The IDNR/OWR will review and approve, prior to the start of
construction, any department projects, dams (as defined in §
151.99) and all other state, federal and local units of government projects,
including projects of the Village.
   (G)   Other permits. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter,
a floodplain development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be
issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation
that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5,
et seq.
   (H)   Dam safety permits. Any person performing work involving the
construction, modification or removal of a dam (as defined in §
151.02) pursuant to 17 Ill. Adm. Code 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams)
shall obtain an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit prior to the start of construction
of a dam. If the Director finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit,
the Director shall immediately notify the dam safety section of IDNR/OWR. If
the Director finds a dam that is believed to be in an unsafe condition, the
Director shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, IDNR/OWR, dam safety
section, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
   (I)   Activities that qualify for a regional permit from IDNR/OWR. The
following activities may be permitted without a registered professional
engineer's review, provided they meet the other requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   Underground and overhead utilities that:
         (a)   Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations;
         (b)   Do not require the placement of above ground structures in the
floodway;
         (c)   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe
or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing stream bed;
and
         (d)   In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are
placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch
debris.
      (2)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
         (a)   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope;
         (b)   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
         (c)   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall
location.
      (3)   Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences),
properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
      (4)   Construction of shoreline and streambank protection:
         (a)   When such construction does not exceed 1,000 feet in length;
         (b)   When materials used in such construction are not placed higher
than the existing top of bank; and
         (c)   When materials used in such construction are placed so as not to
reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.08 OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT
IDENTIFIED.
   In SFHA or floodplains (including AO Zones, AH zones and unnumbered A Zones)
where no floodways have been identified and no BFEs have been established and
which drains more than one square mile, no development shall be permitted
unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or
increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters and will not significantly
increase the BFE. The development must meet all applicable requirements of this
chapter and 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3700.The development shall also meet the
requirements of § 151.09.
   (A)   Floodplain development permit. No person, firm, corporation or
governmental body, not exempt by state law, shall commence any development in
an SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining a floodplain development permit
from the Director, as applicable. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made on a form provided by the Director.
   (B)   Duties of Director. The Director shall be responsible for obtaining
from the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal permits,
approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of
activity. The Director shall not issue the floodplain development permit unless
copies of all required local, state, and federal permits have been submitted to
the Director by the applicant.
   (C)   Preventing increased damages. No development in the SFHA, where a
floodway has not been determined, shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health,
safety, and welfare.
   (D)   Standards within riverine SFHAs. Within all riverine SFHAs where the
floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply.
      (1)   The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state
in writing and show through supporting plans, calculation and data that the
project meets the engineering requirements of the WMO and this chapter.
      (2)   A floodplain development permit shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a
permit is not required from IDNR/OWR.
      (3)   Dam safety permits. Any person performing work involving the
construction, modification or removal of a dam (as defined in §
151.02) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit or letter indicating a
permit is not required prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the
Director finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Director shall
immediately notify the dam safety section of IDNR/OWR. If the Director finds a
dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Director shall immediately
notify the owner of the dam, IDNR/OWR, dam safety section, and the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
      (4)   Activities that qualify for a regional or statewide permit from
IDNR/OWR. The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review or calculations of a base flood elevation and
regulatory floodway. Such activities shall meet the other requirements of this
chapter:
         (a)   Underground and overhead utilities that:
            1.   Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations;
            2.   Do not require the placement of above ground structures in the
floodway;
            3.   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the
pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing
streambed;
            4.   In the case of overhead utility lines, the lines shall be
constructed above the estimated 100-year flood elevation or attached above the
low chords of an existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No
supporting towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed in
such a fashion as not to catch debris.
            5.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a
minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation.
         (b)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
            1.   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope;
            2.   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
            3.   Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the
outfall location.
         (c)   Construction of shoreline and streambed protection:
            1.   When such construction does not exceed 1,000 feet in length;
            2.   When materials used in such construction are not placed higher
than the existing top of bank; and
            3.   When materials used in such construction are placed so as not
to reduce the cross- sectional area of the stream channel by more than 10%.
         (d)   The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar
structures.
         (e)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade.
         (f)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions and carports built at or below existing
grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters.
         (g)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70
square feet in size, nor ten feet in any one dimension (e.g., animal shelters
and tool sheds).
         (h)   The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not
increase the first floor area by more than 20%, which are located on the
upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do not extend
beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the floodwaters.
         (i)   Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
            1.   The affected length of stream is less than 1,000 feet;
            2.   The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream
channels; or
            3.    The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of that site.
      (5)   The flood-carrying capacity within any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
   (E)   Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a floodplain, (including
AO Zones, AH Zones and unnumbered A Zones) where no floodways have been
identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been
established and which drains more than one square mile, is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically
equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall meet the requirements of
§ 602.7-9 of the WMO.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.09 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   In addition to the requirements found in §§
151.06,
151.07 and
151.08 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways,
and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (Zones AO, AH,
AE, A1--A30, A99, VO, V1-V30, VE, V, M, E or X), § 601 and § 602 of the WMO and
the following requirements shall be met:
   (A)   Public health standards. No developments in the SFHA shall include
locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animals' wastes,
fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic
materials below the FPE unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and
anchored storage tank and certified by a P.E. or floodproofed building
constructed according to the requirements of §
151.09(D)(3).
   (B)   Water and sewer lines. New and replacement water supply systems,
wells, sanitary sewer lines and on-site disposal systems may be permitted
providing all manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are
watertight and shall meet the requirements of § 602.15-17 of the WMO. New and
replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems shall be
located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding.
   (C)   Carrying capacity and notification. For all projects involving channel
modification, fill or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained and the project shall meet the
requirements of § 606 and § 607 of the WMO. In addition, the village shall
notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a
permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
   (D)   Public utilities and facilities such as telecommunication, gas and
electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
   (E)   All other activities, defined as development, such as pools, fences,
filling, paving, etc., shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or
increase potential flood damages.
   (F)   Protecting buildings. All buildings located within the SFHA, shall be
protected from flood damage below the FPE. However, existing buildings located
within a regulatory floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate
use standards included in §
151.07. These building protection criteria apply to the following situations:
      (1)   New construction or placement of a new building.
      (2)   A substantial improvement to an existing building.
      (3)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site.
      (4)   A substantially damaged building under repair, the entire building
must meet the flood protection standards of this section. Substantial damage
shall be figured cumulatively during a ten-year period by comparing the cost to
repair the building to its pre-damage condition with the market value of the
building immediately prior to the damage, for each event in which the building
sustains damage, and adding the percentages of damage for each event.
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 consecutive days.
   (G)   Building protection methods. Building protection requirements may be
met by one of the following methods.
      (1)   Residential buildings. In Zones A, AO, AH, and AE, the lowest
floor, including basement, of new construction of residential buildings, and
substantially improved residential buildings, must be elevated to the FPE, and
are subject to the more specific additional requirements below:
         (a)   If fill, including grading to redistribute onsite material to
alter existing topography, is used as a means of elevation:
            1.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot
deep before compaction, must extend at least 20 feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the FPE in lieu of a geotechnical report, and shall meet
the requirements of § 602 of the WMO. The fill shall be protected against
erosion and scour and shall be composed of clean rock or soil and not include
debris or refuse material. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
            2.   a.   In order to construct a home with or without a basement,
on a permanent landfill, the following equation must be satisfied:
      Minimum Average Lot Grade =
(FPE-2') - [(Total Required Side Yard-12') x 0.0833].
               b.    Therefore, if the average lot grade elevation on a site is
above the elevation as defined by this equation, then a structure with its
lowest floor below the BFE may be constructed. Otherwise, the structure must be
protected in accordance with §
151.09(E)(2).
         (b)   If the building's lowest floor is elevated above ground level
with an enclosed or unenclosed area below the lowest floor:
            1.   The building shall be elevated on piles, walls, columns, or
other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters.
            2.   All enclosed areas below the FPE shall provide for
equalization of hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters. A minimum of two permanent openings shall be provided on at
least two walls located below the BFE and no more than one foot above finished
grade. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, or the
design must be certified by a Registered P.E, as providing the equivalent
performance in accordance with accepted standards of practice. Refer to FEMA
TB1, Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures, for additional
guidance.
            3.   All electrical lines, switches, receptacles, and fixtures must
be located above the FPE except to the minimum extent required by applicable
building or life-safety codes. Any switches, receptacles, and/or fixtures
required by applicable building or life-safety codes to extend below the FPE
shall be rated, or located in enclosures rated, for prolonged submersion.
            4.   The building, foundation, and supporting members shall be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
building resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy, and be designed so as to minimize exposure to current,
waves, ice, and floating debris.
            5.   All building components below the FPE shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage.
            6.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the FPE
provided they are waterproofed.
            7.   The area below the FPE shall be used solely for parking,
storage, or building access and not later modified or occupied as habitable
space.
      (2)   Nonresidential buildings. In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, the lowest
floor (including basement) of new construction of nonresidential buildings, and
substantial improvement of nonresidential buildings, must either (1) be
elevated to or above the FPE, subject to the more specific additional
requirements of §§
151.09(G)(1)(a) through 151.09(G)(1)(b) above; or (2) be structurally dry-
floodproofed, provided a Registered P.E. or architect has developed and/or
reviewed the structural design, specifications, and plans for construction, and
the Registered P.E. or architect submits a FEMA floodproofing certificate,
certifying that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the requirements of ASCE 24-14, and
the following conditions:
         (a)   Below the FPE, the building and attendant utility and sanitary
facilities shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydraulic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice.
         (c)   Floodproofing measures shall be incorporated into the building
design and shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside
source of electricity.
         (d)   The building, utility, and sanitary facilities' design and
construction will prevent the effect of sewer backup into the building.
         (e)   For purposes of this division, levees, berms, floodwalls and
similar works are not considered floodproofing.
      (3)   In a coastal high hazard area (Zone VE) and in any area of Zone AE
designated as a moderate wave action area, the building protection requirements
of this §
151.09(E) must be met according to the following criteria:
         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on pilings or columns so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is
elevated to or above the FPE, and the pile or column foundation and structure
attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on
all building components.
            1.   Water loading values used shall be those associated with the
base flood.
            2.   Wind loading values shall be those defined according to
American Society of Civil Engineers 7-16 Minimum design loads and associated
criteria for buildings and other structures, or other equivalent standard.
         (b)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction,
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of §
151.09(E)(4)(a).
         (c)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with
non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or insect screening
intended to collapse without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system.
            1.   A breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance
of not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds per square foot.
            2.   Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading
resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or where so required
by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional
engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet all of the
following conditions:
               a.    Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load
less than that which would occur during the base flood; and
               b.   The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all building components (structural and non-structural).
Water loading values shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind
loading values shall be those defined according to American Society of Civil
Engineers 7-16 Minimum design loads and associated criteria for buildings and
other structures, or equivalent standard.
               c.   All space enclosed by breakaway walls, open wood lattice-
work, or insect screening below the lowest floor shall be used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.
      (4)   In Zones A, AO, AH and AE, detached accessory structures and
detached garages may be constructed with the lowest floor below the FPE in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The building shall not be used for human habitation, must not
include areas intended or used for cooking, and must not include bathrooms,
toilet rooms, or shower rooms.
         (b)   All areas below the BFE shall be constructed with flood
resistant materials.
         (c)   The structure must have at least two permanent openings on at
least two walls not more than one foot above grade and below the BFE, with one
square inch of opening for every one square foot of floor area.
         (d)   The building shall be located outside of the regulatory floodway
unless the building can be constructed and placed on a building site so as not
to block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage, can meet the appropriate use
criteria of §
151.07, and all other requirements of §§
151.06,
151.07 and
151.08.
         (e)   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation and
overturning.
         (f)   All electrical lines, switches, receptacles, and fixtures must
be located above the FPE except to the minimum extent required by applicable
building or life-safety codes. Any switches, receptacles, and/or fixtures
required by applicable building or life-safety codes to extend below the FPE
shall be rated, or located in enclosures rated, for prolonged submersion.
         (g)   The building shall be valued at less than $25,000 as
substantiated by a signed contract be no more than one-story in height, and
shall have a roofed lot coverage of less than 500 square feet.
         (h)   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain other rooms, greenhouses or similar uses. All
flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.)
shall be stored above the FPE.
         (i)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented, and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications of building with the lowest floor
below the BFE.
      (5)   Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may
remain in use, but may not be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered,
except to the extent such enlargement, replacement or alteration is permitted
by §
151.07. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural
or man-made disaster may be restored provided the value of the damage is less
than 50% of the structure's market value before it was damaged, and provided
that the restoration conforms to all applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Retaining walls and grading requirements.
      (1)   When retaining walls are used either to bridge the grade
differential between the FPE of the clay building pad for a new structure and
the existing average lot grade on the site, or to create a vertical surface for
any portion of a side of a compensatory storage area, the cumulative height of
the retaining walls in the front and side yards shall not exceed 24 inches.
      (2)   When slopes are used to provide a transition between the existing
grade and the proposed grade for the top of the permanent fill, or for the
construction of a compensatory storage basin, those slopes will be limited to a
maximum of one to six, or one foot of vertical rise for every six feet of
horizontal run.
      (3)   If a proposed construction or development project cannot meet the
requirements of this division, then the use of permanent fill to elevate the
structure out of the SFHA shall be prohibited and the structure shall be
protected in accordance with §
151.09(E)(2).
      (4)   In floodplain Zones AO and AH, drainage paths shall be provided to
guide water around and away from the buildings.
      (5)   Within a coastal high hazard area or within a moderate wave action
area, bulkheads, seawalls, revetments, and other erosion control structures
shall not be connected to the foundation or superstructure of a building, and
shall be designed and constructed so as not to direct floodwaters or increase
flood forces or erosion impacts on the foundation or superstructure of any
building.
      (6)   Man-made alterations of sand dunes within a coastal high hazard
area (Zone V, V1-30, or VE) or within a moderate wave action area are
prohibited unless an engineering report documents that the alterations will not
increase potential flood damage by reducing the wave and flow dissipation
characteristics of the sand dunes.
      (7)   Non-structural fill within a coastal high hazard area (Zone V, V1-
30, or VE) or within a moderate wave action area shall be permitted only if an
engineering report demonstrates that the fill will not cause wave runup,
ramping, or deflection of floodwaters that cause damage to buildings.
      (8)   The use of fill for structural support of buildings within a
coastal high hazard area (Zone V, V1-30, or VE) or within a moderate wave
action area is prohibited.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.10 OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   The Village Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent
that they are known, in all official actions by the Council related to land
management, use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions and annexation agreements within the SFHA shall be
reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with §§
151.06,
151.07,
151.08 and
151.09 and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new
subdivisions shall include a signed statement by and Illinois Registered
Professional Engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the
drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (see 765 ILCS 205).
   (B)   Proposals for new subdivisions and additions to subdivisions shall
include BFE data and floodway delineations. Where this information is not
available from an existing study, the applicant's registered professional
engineer shall be responsible for calculating the BFE pursuant to §
151.05(D) and submitting it to the IDNR/OWR for review and approval as best
available regulatory data.
   (C)   New streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included
within parks or other public grounds.
   (D)   The Village Council shall not approve any annexation agreement or any
plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement
or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.11 VARIANCES.
   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a regulatory
floodway, as defined in §
151.02. However, when a development proposal is located outside of a regulatory
floodway, and whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Director or to
the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago for a variance.
Only the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago may grant
variances from the requirements of the WMO. The Director shall review the
applicant's request for a variance from village standards that exceed the
requirements of the WMO and shall submit his or her recommendation to the
Village Council.
   (A)   No variances shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following criteria have been met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA.
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
welfare.
      (5)   There will be no additional threat to beneficial stream uses and
functions, including aquatic habitat.
      (6)   There will be no nuisance created.
      (7)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      (8)   The activity is not in a regulatory floodway.
      (9)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a
general problem.
      (10)   The provisions of §§
151.06(E) and
151.08(D) are met.
   (B)   The Director shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance of
the requirements of §
151.09 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will do any of
the following:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as $25 for one hundred dollars $100 of insurance coverage.
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property.
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that he or she will acknowledge in writing that he or she assumes the risk
and liability.
   (C)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or
building listed on the National Register of Historical Places or documented as
worthy of preservation by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of divisions (A)
and (B) of this section.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that development, whether inside or outside of the SFHA,
will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on
the part of the village or any officer or employee of the village for any flood
damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made under this chapter.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.13 CONSTRUCTION AND OTHER CODE PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed additional requirements to
minimum standards required by other provisions of this code. In case of
conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.14 EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter is intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where the requirements of
this chapter and other ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or with the conditions
of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. In
addition, upon due investigation, the Director may determine that a violation
of the minimum standards of this chapter exist.
   (A)   The Director shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. The
notice constitutes a suspension of any floodplain development permit. The
notice shall include a statement informing the owner that any such violation
may be considered a willful act to increase flood damages and may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended. The notice shall
contain a brief description of the violations, section of the chapter violated,
the requirement to stop all work in violation of this chapter, and a statement
informing the violator that they may contest the notice in writing within ten
days, correct the violation in ten days, or apply for a permit, as applicable.
   (B)   If the owner fails to respond to the notice or to correct the
violation within ten days after the issuance of the notice, the village may
file an action in the Circuit Court of Cook County seeking issuance of an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or entry of such other order
as the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense.
   (D)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (E)   The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the village from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
with such action shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 1284, passed 8-16-2021)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
152.01   General requirements
   
152.02   Procedure
   
152.03   Tentative plat
   
152.04   Minimum conforming standards required
   
152.05   Approval of tentative plat by Plan Commission
   
152.06   Final plat to be submitted
   
152.07   Final plat
   
152.08   Approval of final plat
   
152.09   Fees and recording
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. In order that the public health, safety, welfare and
convenience of the inhabitants of the village may be promoted, protected and
assured by the furnishing of adequate police and fire protection, waste
collection, water supply, drainage and sewage disposal, no parcel of land
within the corporate limits of the village shall be divided or subdivided into
smaller parcels or lots for sale for building purposes, the subsection or
paragraph constituting a land subdivision as herein defined, nor shall any land
be dedicated or made the subject of easement for public or private streets or
any other public use, unless the owner or owners thereof shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter; and until the provisions have been complied with,
no building shall be constructed on the land nor shall a permit for the
building be issued by the Building Commissioner of the village, nor shall any
public improvements as herein defined be constructed by the owner or owners or
accepted for operation and maintenance by the village.
   (B)   Recording. The owner or owners of land located within the corporate
limits of the village, or any other person, firm or corporation making a land
subdivision as defined herein, within the village, shall record or register a
map or plat of the same in the Recorder’s office or the office of the Register
of Titles of the county, as provided by law, except that the recording or
registration of a map or plat of subdivision need not be made in any case of a
subdivision involving only a rearrangement of the division lines of real estate
already included within a duly recorded or registered subdivision, not
involving any change in public or private street lines and not creating any
subdivided parcel or lot which does not abut upon a public street or upon a
private street connecting with a public street, which private street the owner
of any subdivided parcel or lot, by virtue of a recorded or registered
instrument, has a right to use for access to the subdivided parcel or lot.
   (C)   Approval. Before any land subdivision shall be entitled to record or
shall be valid, it shall be approved by the Plan Commission and Board of
Trustees of the village.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FRONTAGE. All the property fronting on one side of a street, measured
along the street, between an intersecting or intercepting street and another
intersecting or intercepting street, a right-of- way in excess of 30 feet, an
end of a dead-end street, a watercourse or a village boundary.
      LAND SUBDIVISION. Any change or rearrangement in the boundary or division
lines of any parcel or parcels of real estate, or any public thoroughfare.
      LOT FRONTAGE. Any front lot line or side lot line abutting a public
street.
      LOT LINE. Any line bounding a lot.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot along a public street; provided
that in the case of a corner lot, the front line shall be the shorter lot
boundary along a public street.
      LOT LINE, REAR.
         (a)   In the case of lots that are generally rectangular or
trapezoidal in shape, the lot line that is most distant from and most parallel
to the front lot line; or
         (b)   In the case of all other lots, either:
            1.   Those lot lines that serve as all or part of the rear lot line
for more than one contiguous lot; or
            2.   Where no lot line serves as all or part of the rear lot line
for more than one contiguous lot, an imaginary line 20 feet in length, entirely
within the lot and parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot
line.
      LOT, THROUGH. A lot having lot lines on two non-intersecting streets or
on substantially parallel sections of two intersecting streets.
      PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any sewer, water main, pavement, sidewalk or similar
facility, provided to serve the residents of a land subdivision and for which
the village is responsible for maintenance and operation.
(1959 Code, § 32-1) (Ord. 951, passed 4-10-2006; Ord. 956, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 152.02 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   General. The procedure for obtaining the approval of the Plan
Commission and Board of Trustees of a plat of subdivision shall be as follows.
A tentative plat shall be submitted to the Administrative Official, and shall
be referred to the Plan Commission for detailed examination, change or
amendment and for approval or disapproval. If approved, a final plat embodying
the details of the approved tentative plat shall then be prepared and submitted
to the Plan Commission. Upon approval of this final plat, the Commission shall
recommend it to the Village Board for final approval. Upon obtaining final
approval by the Village Board, the Village Clerk shall endorse on the original
and on the duplicate the fact that the same has been approved and shall attach
his or her signature and the corporate seal of the village thereto, whereupon
the plat of subdivision shall be entitled to record or registration as provided
by law.
   (B)   Notice.
      (1)   Notice of the initial meeting of the Plan Commission at which any
application for relief under this chapter is to be considered shall be provided
as required by this section. The applicant shall notify, in writing, by first
class mail or hand delivery, all property owners within 400 feet of the
boundaries of the property that is the subject of the application, excluding
measurement of streets and rights-of-way, not less than 15 days or more than 30
days in advance of the scheduled Plan Commission meeting date.
      (2)   The mailing of notice, addressed to the name and address on the
most recent county real estate tax records, shall be deemed a satisfaction of
this notice requirement.
      (3)   The required mail notice for applications under this chapter shall
contain, at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   The street address, legal description or detailed location
description of the property, if any, that is the subject of the application;
         (b)   A statement describing the name of the subdivision and the
number of lots proposed, and other relief proposed;
         (c)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (d)   The name and address of the legal owner, and beneficial owner if
any, of the property; and
         (e)   The Plan Commission meeting date, time and location.
      (4)   At the Plan Commission meeting, the applicant shall present to the
Commission an affidavit, certification or other evidence satisfactory to the
Commission, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Commission, that the
notice requirement of this section has been satisfied.
(1959 Code, § 32-2) (Ord. 958, passed 6-12-2006; Ord. 1355, passed 4-15-2024)
§ 152.03 TENTATIVE PLAT.
   Each tentative plat submitted to the village shall be in duplicate and shall
meet the following requirements.
   (A)   It shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet or less to the inch.
   (B)   It shall show the boundaries of the property to be subdivided, its
legal description, section and half-section lines, existing permanent
buildings, water courses and other features pertinent to proper subdivision.
   (C)   All existing public and private streets and alleys adjacent to or
intersecting the proposed subdivision shall be shown, with names and widths
indicated.
   (D)   Areas and principal dimensions of proposed lots, minimum front, side
and rear yard setback lines
required by the zoning regulations of the village, and the names of proposed
streets or ways shall be shown.
   (E)   It shall show the name of the proposed subdivision, the name of the
owner, sponsor and subdivider and the consent of any trustee or mortgagee.
   (F)   It shall show any additional information deemed necessary by the Plan
Commission in any individual case, to enable it to intelligently pass on the
proposed subdivision.
(1959 Code, § 32-3) (Ord. 1355, passed 4-15-2024)
§ 152.04 MINIMUM CONFORMING STANDARDS REQUIRED.
   Subdivisions shall conform with the following minimum standards.
   (A)   Street system.
      (1)   Access shall be provided to any lot or subdivided parcel within the
subdivision by passage over a public street.
      (2)   The arrangement, widths, courses and extent of the streets shall be
such as to provide at least two lanes for vehicular travel and shall permit
free and unobstructed passage of fire apparatus and of police vehicles.
      (3)   Streets that are in alignment with other streets already existing
and named shall bear the names of the existing streets.
   (B)   Street and alley widths; dead-end streets.
      (1)   The width of public streets shall conform to the width of existing
public streets in the village.
      (2)   Where it is desirable to subdivide land which because of size,
shape or location, does not lend itself to treatment under the usual street
pattern, and where the Plan Commission deems it desirable in the public
interest, access to lots may be provided by means of dead-end streets, not over
300 feet in length and serving not more than four lots. These dead-end streets,
other than those serving one lot only, shall terminate in an open space
preferably circular, having a minimum radius of 55 feet.
      (3)   Alleys shall be provided at the rear of all lots zoned for
commercial use and shall be at least 16 feet wide.
   (C)   Blocks. No block shall be longer than 1,500 feet long between street
lines. Blocks over 750 feet in length shall have a crosswalk near the middle of
the block having a dedicated width of not less than ten feet.
   (D)   Lots.
      (1)   All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to street lines, or
radial to curved street lines, unless in the judgment of the Plan Commission a
variation of the requirements would enhance public safety or convenience. No
subdivision shall create a through lot or a lot with any lot frontage that is
less than the following distance in the following zoning districts:
 
Zoning District Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)
R-1             75
R-2             65
R-3             40
R-4             40
 
      (2)   Lots held in one ownership of record at the time of the passage of
the zoning ordinance of the village (Ordinance 577), shall not be resubdivided
into lots containing less than the area required by the zoning ordinance in the
district in which the lots are situated, and lots located in the area
designated as the R-l Residence District under the zoning ordinance shall not
be resubdivided into lots of less than 70 feet in width; and the areas shall be
exclusive of property dedicated for or made the subject of easements for public
or private streets or passageways.
   (E)   Easements.
      (1)   Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than five feet
in width shall be provided on each side of the rear lot lines and along side
lot lines where necessary, of each lot, for poles, wires and electric conduits.
      (2)   Easements of a width deemed by the Plan Commission to be adequate,
shall be provided along or across lots where necessary for the extension of any
utilities, including storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, gas mains and
electric poles, wires or conduits.
   (F)   Variations and exceptions. Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of
an unusual size or shape or is surrounded by the development or unusual
conditions that the strict application of any requirement of this chapter would
result in real difficulties and substantial hardships or injustices, the Plan
Commission may recommend to the Village Board, and the Village Board may vary
or modify the requirements to enable subdivision to be made in a reasonable
manner not detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare or convenience.
(1959 Code, § 32-4) (Ord. 580, passed 8-11-1969; Ord. 951, passed 4-10-2006;
Ord. 956, passed 5-8-2006)
§ 152.05 APPROVAL OF TENTATIVE PLAT BY PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   When the tentative plat is satisfactory to the Plan Commission, it
shall approve the same by motion and the following legend shall be affixed to
both copies of the plat:
The general plan of the subdivision shown on this plat has received the
tentative approval of the Plan Commission of the Village of Kenilworth, and the
Commission is ready to receive a final plat for consideration.
   The Plan Commission of the Village of Kenilworth
   Date......By..........Its Chair
   (B)   One copy of the tentative plat shall thereupon be returned to the
subdivider and the second copy shall be retained by the Plan Commission.
(1959 Code, § 32-5) (Ord. 1265, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 152.06 FINAL PLAT TO BE SUBMITTED.
   After the Plan Commission has approved the tentative plat, the subdivider
shall submit to the Plan Commission a final plat as hereinafter provided,
accompanied by the following:
   (A)   Complete plans, profiles and specifications for construction of public
improvements in the proposed subdivision, consisting of sanitary and storm
sewers, water mains, pavements and sidewalks, together with all appurtenances
thereto, accompanied by a certificate of approval by the Village Manager
stating that the improvements conform with the minimum village standards, or
with the official village plan, if a plan has been adopted, or specifying in
what particulars the standards or plan are not met, and giving an estimate of
the cost of the improvements, including the cost of engineering and inspection;
   (B)   A statement by the subdivider agreeing to construct, at his or her own
expense and within a reasonable time to be fixed by the Plan Commission, the
improvements in subsection (A) above specified, in accordance with the plans,
profiles and specifications (subject to approval of the final plat by the
Village Board), and if the improvements are located upon private lands that the
same will be maintained without cost to the village, and if the improvements
are located upon lands dedicated for public use, that the same shall become the
property of the village;
   (C)   A duly executed corporate completion bond posted with the village by
the subdivider in an amount equal to the Village Manager’s estimate of costs of
the improvements, and certified by the Village Attorney as a good, valid and
enforceable bond, securing the satisfactory completion of all the improvements
in strict accordance with the provisions of the plans, profiles and
specifications submitted pursuant to subsection (A) above; and
   (D)   Evidence satisfactory to the Plan Commission showing that all taxes
and special assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been fully
paid.
(1959 Code, § 32-6)
§ 152.07 FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat submitted to the Plan Commission shall be in strict accord
with the approved tentative plat. It shall conform with the requirements of
this chapter for tentative plats and also with the following requirements.
   (A)   It shall be drawn on tracing cloth and be accompanied by one print.
   (B)   Date of preparation, scale and a properly oriented north sign shall be
shown.
   (C)   It shall contain and show all the certificates, scale and signatures
required by law, including a certification by a state registered land surveyor
to the effect that he or she has surveyed and staked the subdivision and
certifies the plat to be a true and correct representation of the same.
   (D)   All dimensions of lots, boundaries, streets and other features shall
be shown in detail, giving full information on all lines, angles and curves.
   (E)   All survey monuments and bench marks shall be shown and described and
stakes shall be shown at all intersections or lot lines.
   (F)   An identification system shall be shown for all lots and blocks.
   (G)   There shall be a statement of dedication properly conveying all lands
to be dedicated as public streets or for other public uses, and each tract
shall be so designated on the plat. There shall also be a certificate of title
certifying the ownership of all lands to be so dedicated.
   (H)   Building or setback lines provided by the zoning regulations of the
village shall be shown, with all necessary dimensions, and any and all private
restrictions and trusteeships and the period of their existence, which
restrictions, if of a length as to make the lettering thereof on the plat
impracticable, may be shown on a separate instrument if reference is made
thereto on the plat.
   (I)   Easements shall be shown with dimensions and a statement in each case
as to the purpose for which the easement is granted.
(1959 Code, § 32-7)
§ 152.08 APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   If the final plat is approved by the Plan Commission, the following
certificate, executed by its Chair and attested by its Secretary, shall be
placed on the plat:
      Approved by the Plan Commission of the Village of Kenilworth, Cook
County, Illinois, this           day of            , 20    .
      Signed                        Chair
      Attest                         Secretary
   (B)   The Plan Commission shall then transmit the approved final plat to the
Village Board, together with the following:
      (1)   A letter of transmittal calling attention to variations, if any, as
approved by the Commission and stating the reasons for the variations;
      (2)   The subdivider’s agreement to construct public improvements and his
or her completion bond; and
      (3)   Plans, specifications and all other documents, certificates and
papers pertaining to the final plat, the subdivision platted thereon and the
improvements to be installed therein.
   (C)   When the Village Board is satisfied with the final plat and with all
improvements, conditions and documents pertaining to the subdivision, it shall
approve the same by resolution and shall authorize and direct the President to
sign and the Clerk to attest the following certificate, and the Clerk to affix
the corporate seal:
      Approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois, this           day of          , 20    .
      Signed                                      
               Village President
      Attest                                        
               Village Clerk
(VILLAGE SEAL)
(1959 Code, § 32-8) (Ord. 1265, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 152.09 FEES AND RECORDING.
   (A)   Fee established; lien. Every application filed pursuant to this
chapter shall be subject to a non-refundable application and filing fee in the
amounts established by resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees from time to
time, plus the actual cost, as hereinafter defined, incurred by the village in
processing the application. The owner of the property which is the subject of
the application and, if different, the applicant, shall be jointly and
severally liable for the payment of the fee. By signing the application, the
owner shall be deemed to have agreed to pay the fee and to consent to the
filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject property to ensure collection
of any fee, plus the costs of collection, which has not been paid within 30
days following the mailing of a written demand for the payment to the owner at
the address shown on the application. Any lien filed pursuant to this
subsection may be foreclosed in the manner provided by statute for mortgages or
mechanics liens.
   (B)   Recoverable costs. For purposes of calculating the fee due pursuant to
subsection (A) above, the actual costs incurred by the village in processing an
application shall be deemed to consist of the following items of direct and
indirect expense:
      (1)   Legal publication (direct cost);
      (2)   Recording secretarial services (direct cost);
      (3)   Court reporter (direct cost);
      (4)   Administrative preparation and review (hourly salary times a
multiplier to be established from time to time by the Village Manager at a
level sufficient to recover 100% of the direct and indirect cost of the
service);
      (5)   Document preparation and review (hourly salary times a multiplier
to be established from time to time by the Village Manager at a level
sufficient to recover 100% of the direct and indirect cost of the service);
      (6)   Professional and technical consultant services (direct cost);
      (7)   Legal review, consultation and advice (direct cost);
      (8)   Copy reproduction (direct cost); and
      (9)   Document recordation (direct cost).
   (C)   Fee payment and escrow.
      (1)   Initial payment and escrow. Every application filed pursuant to
this chapter shall be accompanied by the required fee plus an additional amount
for recoverable costs as provided in subsection (B) above, as fixed from time
to time by administrative order of the Village Manager, to be deposited in an
application fee escrow. No interest shall be payable on any escrow.
      (2)   Charges against escrow. From the date of filing of any application
pursuant to this chapter, the village shall maintain an accurate record of the
actual costs, as hereinabove defined, of processing the application. The
Village Manager shall, from time to time, draw funds from the escrow account
established for the application to pay the costs and shall transfer the funds
to the appropriate village accounts. The Manager shall maintain an accurate
record of all drawings.
      (3)   Additional escrow deposits. Should the Village Manager at any time
determine that the escrow account established in connection with any
application is, or is likely to become, insufficient to pay the actual costs of
processing the application, the Manager shall inform the applicant of that fact
and demand an additional deposit in an amount deemed by him or her to be
sufficient to cover foreseeable additional costs. Unless and until the
additional amount is deposited by the applicant, the Village Manager may direct
that processing of the application shall be suspended or terminated.
      (4)   Final settlement. As soon as reasonably feasible following final
action on an application, the Village Manager shall cause a final accounting to
be made of the escrow deposits made in connection with the application and the
actual cost of processing the application and shall make a final charge of the
costs against the escrow deposits. A copy of the accounting shall be provided
to the owner and the applicant. If the amount in the escrow account is
insufficient to pay the total actual costs, a written demand for payment of the
balance due shall be mailed to the owner and the applicant. If unused balance
remains in the escrow account after paying the total actual costs, it shall be
returned to the applicant.
   (D)   Condition of all applications, approvals and permits; time periods. No
application filed pursuant to this chapter shall be considered complete unless
and until all fees and deposits due pursuant to this section have been paid.
Every approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall,
whether or not expressly so conditioned, be deemed to be conditioned upon
payment of fees as required by this section. Where this chapter provides that
the passage of time without decision or action shall be deemed an approval or a
recommendation for approval, time periods shall be tolled during any period of
nonpayment, but shall otherwise continue to run. The failure to fully pay any
fee or deposit, when due, shall be grounds for refusing to process an
application and for denying or revoking any permit or approval sought or issued
with respect to the land or development to which the unpaid fee or deposit
relates.
   (E)   Specified public bodies exempt. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to, and no fee shall be required of, any public body or agency
deriving the majority of its revenues from taxes levied within the village.
(1959 Code, § 32-9) (Ord. 951, passed 4-10-2006)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Construction of chapter
   
153.003   Definitions
   153.004 through 153.014   Reserved
Zoning Districts
   
153.015   Establishment of Districts
   
153.016   Map
   
153.017   Changes in map
   153.018 through 153.029   Reserved
General Requirements and Provisions for All Districts
Part A. General Matters
   
153.030   Certain general requirements
   
153.031   Roomers and boarders prohibited
   
153.032   Special uses
   
153.033   Permitted obstructions in yards
   
153.034   Fences
   
153.035   Antennas and antenna support structures
   
153.036   Accessory uses and structures
   
153.037   Temporary uses
   
153.038   Wind energy systems (WES)
   
153.039    Adult-use cannabis business establishments prohibited
   153.040 through 153.044   Reserved
Part B. Kenilworth Sign Code
   
153.045   Statement of purpose and intent
   
153.046   Title and scope
   
153.047   Compliance required
   
153.048   Definitions
   
153.049   Signs exempt from requirement to obtain building permit and
certificate of appropriateness
   
153.050   Prohibited signs in all zoning districts
   
153.051   General regulations and standards for allowed signs in all zoning
districts
   
153.052   Regulations and standards for permanent allowed signs in the “B”
Business District
   
153.053   Regulations and standards for allowed signs in all districts other
than the “B” Business District
   
153.054   Application for building permit and certificate of appropriateness
   
153.055   Administrative sign permits
   
153.056   Request for variation
   
153.057   Nonconforming signs
   
153.058   Review of permanent signs
   
153.059   Sign maintenance
   
153.060   Administration and enforcement; violations
   153.061 through 153.064   Reserved
Residential District Regulations
   
153.065   Permitted and special uses
   
153.066   Lot area and lot width
   
153.067   Maximum height of buildings
   
153.068   Maximum size; maximum lot coverage
   
153.069   Minimum size of principal building
   
153.070   Minimum yard requirements
   153.071 through 153.074   Reserved
Supplemental Regulations Applicable to All Residential Districts
   
153.075   Visibility at intersections
   
153.076   Location of accessory structures on lot
   
153.077   Exceptions to height regulations
   
153.078   Structures to have access
   
153.079   Location of private swimming pools
   
153.080   Parking and storage of vehicles
   
153.081   Parking or storage of commercial and recreational equipment
   
153.082   Air conditioning equipment and appurtenances
   
153.083   Solar panels
   
153.084   Air-supported and similar structures
   
153.085   Electrical and telephone equipment
   
153.086   Electrical generators
   153.087 through 153.094   Reserved
B Business District Regulations
   
153.095   Permitted and special uses in B Business District
   
153.096   Maximum height
   
153.097   Minimum yard requirements
   
153.098   Restrictions on permitted and special uses
   
153.099   Visibility at intersections
   153.100 through 153.109   Reserved
S School District Regulations
   
153.110   Permitted uses
   
153.111   Maximum height of buildings
   
153.112   Minimum yard requirements
   153.113 through 153.124   Reserved
P Park and Playground District
   
153.125   Permitted uses
   153.126 through 153.139   Reserved
M-1 Mahoney Park District
   
153.140   Permitted uses
   153.141 through 153.154   Reserved
M-2 Municipal Lands District
   
153.155   Permitted uses
   
153.156   Extensions of uses; new uses
   153.157 through 153.169   Reserved
R Railway Right-of-Way, Parkway and Automobile Parking District
   
153.170   Permitted uses
   153.171 through 153.184   Reserved
Off-Street Automobile Parking Requirements
   
153.185   General statement of requirements
   
153.186   Restrictions
   
153.187   Parking areas and driveways
   
153.188   Collective provisions; control
   
153.189   Size; improvements; screening; signs
   
153.190   Repair work
   
153.191   Requirements of size, access and marking of spaces
   
153.192   Schedule of parking requirements
   153.193 through 153.204   Reserved
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
   
153.205   Intent
   
153.206   Nonconforming lot in residence district
   
153.207   Nonconforming uses of land
   
153.208   Nonconforming structures used for a permitted use
   
153.209   Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and land in
combination
   
153.210   Repairs and maintenance
   
153.211   Uses permitted as special uses not nonconforming uses
   153.212 through 153.224   Reserved
Administration and Enforcement: Building Permits and Certificates of Compliance
   
153.225   Administration and enforcement
   
153.226   Certificate of compliance
   
153.227   Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans,
permits and certificates of compliance
   153.228 through 153.239   Reserved
Zoning Administration, Applications and Procedures
   
153.240   Jurisdiction
   
153.241   Architectural Review Commission
   
153.242   Certificates of appropriateness
   
153.243   Appeals
   
153.244   Variations
   
153.245   Special uses
   
153.246   Planned unit developments
   
153.247   Application requirements
   
153.248   Successive applications
   
153.249   Notice requirements
   153.250 through 153.259   Reserved
Appeals From the Board of Appeals
   
153.260   Who may appeal
   153.261 through 153.274   Reserved
Duties of Administrative Official, and of Board of Appeals and Board of
Trustees on Matters of Appeal
   
153.275   Procedures as to questions of interpretation and enforcement
   
153.276   Duties of Board of Trustees
   153.277 through 153.289   Reserved
Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses
   
153.290   Establishment of schedule of fees; payment required
   
153.291   Recoverable costs
   
153.292   Fee payment and escrow
   
153.293   Condition of all applications, approvals and permits; time periods
   
153.294   Specified public bodies exempt
   153.295 through 153.304   Reserved
Amendments
   
153.305   Amendments of chapter
   153.306 through 153.319   Reserved
Provisions of Chapter Declared to be Minimum Requirements
   
153.320   Provisions are minimum requirements
   153.321 through 153.334   Reserved
Complaints Regarding Violations
   
153.335   Handling of complaints of violations of chapter
 
   
153.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Appearance Plan
   
Appendix B: Zoning maps
   
Appendix C: Kenilworth Design Guidelines—Business District
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   This chapter, including the zoning map made a part hereof, shall be known
and may be cited as the Kenilworth Zoning Ordinance, 1969.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.002 CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER.
   In the construction of this chapter, the provisions of §
153.003 shall be applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise.
The present tense includes the future tense; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular; the masculine gender
includes the feminine and neuter; the word shall is mandatory and the word may
is permissive.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
 § 153.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED WES. A WES that has not been repaired to operating condition
within the applicable time frame set forth in §
153.038(B)(11), or for which the owner has not made all submissions required
pursuant to §
153.247(D)(10).
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE. A structure or use on the same lot with and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent or purpose to,
the principal structure or principal use.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. The Administrative Official designated by ordinance
of the village to administer and enforce this chapter.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cannabis cultivation center,
craft grower, infusing organization, processing organization, dispensing
organization, transporting organization, or any other form or type of business
classified as a “Cannabis Business Establishment” in the Illinois Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as may be amended from time
to time.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way, not over 20 feet wide, which affords a
secondary means of access to abutting properties.
   AMBIENT SOUND. The all-encompassing sound at a given location, usually a
composite of sounds from many sources near and far. For the purpose of this
subsection, the “ambient sound level” shall mean the quietest of ten 10-second
average sound levels measured when there are no nearby or distinctly audible
sound sources (such as, dogs or jets). Daytime ambient measurements should be
made during mid-morning weekday hours, while nighttime measurements should be
made after midnight.
   ARTISAN AND MAKER SPACE. A workspace or shop where communal or individual
space is used for hobbyists, artisans and makers. Such spaces may include, wood
and metal working tools, digital media, laser cutters, 3-D printers,
electronics, robotics, etc. The use may also include gallery and exhibition
space with a retail component.
   AUTOMOBILE GALLERIA. A business for the indoor and outdoor display and
retail sales of automobiles and automobile-related art, furniture and
memorabilia; including fully enclosed space for display and sales not exceeding
10,000 square feet nor combined enclosed and outdoor display and sales area
exceeding 12,500 square feet. Operation of facilities accommodating minor
service to, and washing of, and installation of accessories on automobiles is
permitted if the facilities are enclosed in a building; provided, however, that
the washing or polishing of motor vehicles by any automated, mechanized or
other production line method are each prohibited.
   BAKERY. A retail establishment whose principal business is the service and
sale of baked goods, pastries, cakes and a limited selection of food items
incidental thereto.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building included between the surface of the
lowest floor and the surface of the floor next above, any substantial part of
which is located below the adjoining grade.
   BAY WINDOW. A window or windows cantilevered from the exterior wall of a
building above grade or resting on a building foundation and which extends from
the primary exterior plane of the exterior wall and forms space with an
horizontal area within the building.
   BLADE. The portion of a WES that is designed to capture the wind, causing
the shaft to turn.
   BLADE TIP. The farthest extremes of a blade.
   BOUTIQUE HOTEL. A hotel in which lodging is offered to transient guests with
more upscale accommodations, and provides a common entrance, lobby, halls, and
stairways. These types of hotels are not part of a chain, and they offer a more
unique experience with many types of rooms, such as living rooms, social rooms,
and luxury environments.
   BLUFF. Any natural land area that has a drop in elevation from the top bluff
edge equal to or greater than two feet vertical for every ten feet horizontal,
and that is located between the high water mark at the edge of Lake Michigan
and the top bluff edge.
   BREW PUB. A full-service restaurant where beer is brewed or manufactured on
the premises, with the primary distribution being in the full-service
restaurant. The use may also include the sale of beer brewed or manufactured
on-premises.
   BUILDING. Any structure that provides shelter, including any covered porch,
deck or balcony, or similar structure with a permanent roof; provided, however,
that any porte cochere shall not be considered a BUILDING for the purposes of
maximum building size or building coverage.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the curb level to the
highest point of all roof surfaces, excluding any ornamentation. For buildings
set back from the street line, the height may be measured from the mean
elevation of the lot grade along the front of the building (without regard to
alterations of natural grade). Where this chapter specifies the maximum height
of a building measured alternatively in feet or number of stories, the maximum
building height shall be the lesser of the two specified alternatives.
   BUILDING-MOUNTED WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (BWES). Wind Energy Systems that are
structurally attached either onto the roof of or to the side of a building.
   CANDY STORE. A retail establishment whose principal business is the service
and sale of candy, confections and a limited selection of food items incidental
thereto.
   COFFEE SHOP. A retail establishment whose principal business is the service
and sale of coffees, teas and a limited selection of food items incidental
thereto.
   COVERED ENTRY. An unenclosed entrance area adjacent to an exterior door to a
single-family dwelling, with the perimeter determined by the outline of any
roof.
   CRAFT BREWERY/DISTILLERY/MEADERY/ WINERY. A commercial facility at which
fermented beverages are produced on-site, with or without an accessory tasting
shop.
   CURB LEVEL. The mean level of the established curb in front of a building.
   DAYTIME HOURS. The hours of the day from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
   DECIBEL (DB). The unit of sound level based on a reference where 0 dB
represents the threshold of hearing at 1000 Hz for a healthy young adult.
   DRIVEWAY. A private access way that provides direct vehicular access from a
street or alley to one or more lots or principal buildings or uses.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building, or portion thereof, containing two or
more dwelling units designed for occupancy of two or more families, each living
independently of the other family or families.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached residential dwelling unit, other than a
mobile home, designed for occupancy by one family only.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. A dwelling unit located in a single
building on a single lot containing not more than two dwelling units attached
by an unpierced vertical party wall extending from the basement to the roof of
the structure and oriented so that all exits open to the outside.
   DWELLING UNIT. A group of connected rooms constituting a separate
independent housekeeping establishment for a single family, physically
separated from any other dwelling unit in the same building and containing
independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of
Transportation, or the successor to its responsibilities.
   FALL-OUT AND BLAST SHELTER. An accessory building or structure wholly
underground, or within or attached to any permitted principal or accessory
building or structure with direct access therefrom, in which the fundamentals
for fall-out or atomic blast protection designed with shielding mass,
ventilation and space to live, are incorporated, and which is constructed of
the materials and in a manner as to afford substantial protection to occupants
from atomic blast or radioactive fall-out.
   FAMILY. One person or two or more persons, each related to the other by
blood, legal adoption or marriage, and not more than one individual not so
related who is a permanent guest, companion or attendant of the person or
persons, living together as a single housekeeping unit (in the principal
structure or in the principal structure together with accessory structures),
together with full-time domestic employees of those person or persons. A FAMILY
does not include roomers or boarders or domestic employees who are part-time
employees of others or relatives or guests of domestic employees.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States, or the
successor to its responsibilities.
   FLOOR AREA.
      (1)   For single-family dwellings constructed or structurally altered
prior to June 22, 1990 and any other building, except single-family dwellings,
regardless of the date of construction, the sum of the gross horizontal areas,
measured in square feet, without deduction for hallways, stairwells, closets,
walls, spaces and shafts for mechanical, electrical or plumbing equipment,
atria and similar spaces, of:
         (a)   The floors of all stories of a building (other than half stories
above the first story), measured at floor level from the exterior face of
exterior walls or roofs;
         (b)   Enclosed or covered porches, decks and balconies;
         (c)   The portion of any half story that constitutes the second story
of a building (other than an accessory structure) in which the vertical
distance from the finished floor of the second story to the bottom edge of the
roof rafters, dormer rafters, dormer rafters or ceiling joists above the
finished floor equals or exceeds five feet; and
         (d)   The portion of the basement of any building that is designed and
constructed primarily for, or is used primarily for, the storage or parking of
automobiles.
      (2)   FLOOR AREA shall exclude the following areas in a single-family
dwelling where the dwelling and the feature listed below both existed prior to
June 22, 1990, up to a maximum of 10% of the maximum floor area otherwise
allowed for the dwelling:
         (a)   Bay windows;
         (b)   Open porches; and
         (c)   Covered entries.
      (3)   For single-family dwellings constructed or structurally altered on
and after June 22, 1990, the sum of the gross horizontal areas, measured in
square feet, without deduction for hallways, stairwells, closets, walls, spaces
and shafts for mechanical, electrical or plumbing equipment, atria and similar
spaces, of:
         (a)   The floors of all stories of a building (other than half stories
above the first story), measured at floor level from the exterior face of
exterior walls or roofs;
         (b)   Enclosed or covered porches, decks and balconies;
         (c)   The portion of any half story that constitutes the second story
of a building (other than an accessory structure) in which the vertical
distance from the finished floor of the second story to the bottom edge of the
roof rafters, dormer rafters, dormer rafters or ceiling joists above the
finished floor equals or exceeds five feet; and
         (d)   The portion of the basement of any building that is designed and
constructed primarily for, or is used primarily for, the storage or parking of
automobiles.
   FRONTAGE. All the property fronting on one side of a street, measured along
the street, between an intersecting or intercepting street and another
intersecting or intercepting street, a right-of-way in excess of 30 feet, an
end of a dead-end street, a watercourse or a village boundary.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building constructed either as a part of the principal
building or detached therefrom which:
      (1)   Has a capacity of not more than the larger of three passenger
automobiles or a number of passenger automobiles equal to the largest whole
number (disregarding fractions) determined by dividing the total number of
square feet of the lot on which the garage is located by 3,500;
      (2)   Is intended primarily for and used primarily for storage of the
passenger automobiles and other property of the family resident upon the
premises; and
      (3)   Is not used for maintenance or repairing for remuneration of any
property of any kind.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private garage used for equipping,
repairing, hiring or storing motor driven vehicles, including collision service
such as body, frame and fender repairing of those vehicles.
   HARD SURFACE. A concrete, asphalt or macadam or comparable all-weather
dustless material surfaced area having a depth thickness of not less than four
inches.
   HEIGHT. When used in reference to a WES, HEIGHT shall mean the vertical
distance measured from grade to the highest point of the WES, including the top
of the extended blade. This definition of HEIGHT shall not apply to any other
structure governed by this chapter.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any combination of any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Any gainful activity (including, without limitation any activity
from which any of the persons who own or reside in the dwelling unit or its
premises derive any direct or indirect benefit in the form of money, property
or services) carried on at or from a dwelling unit or any accessory structure
by one who resides in the dwelling unit, provided that, in connection with the
conduct of the activity:
         (a)   No stock-in-trade or other commodity is displayed or sold on the
premises and all storage, repairs, processing or manufacturing of any stock-in-
trade or other commodity is undertaken inside a closed building;
         (b)   No person is employed or otherwise engaged on the premises in
the activity other than a member of the immediate family residing on the
premises;
         (c)   The premises is not occupied, used or enjoyed at any one time
(excepting temporary and occasional uses for charitable and fund-raising
purposes) by more than ten persons who are not members of the immediate family
residing on the premises;
         (d)   No equipment is used except the equipment as is customarily used
for domestic or household purposes; and
         (e)   No hazardous materials (as hereinafter defined) are used on the
premises in connection with the activity, except the materials, and only in
those quantities, as are customarily used for domestic or household purposes.
      (2)   Any other use of limited duration that the Administrative Official
may permit in any specific case, but only for the period of time stated in the
permit, upon approval thereof by the Board of Trustees (with conditions as the
Board of Trustees may deem advisable) at the request of a person who owns or
resides in the dwelling unit. For purposes of this definition, HAZARDOUS
MATERIALS means any substance that is toxic, corrosive, flammable, explosive,
radioactive, infectious, carcinogenic or mutagenic, or otherwise hazardous or
which contain petroleum hydrocarbons, polychlorinated biphenols, mercury or
lead, or which are intended for use as a pesticide or herbicide.
   HORIZONTAL AXIS WIND TURBINE (HAWT). A turbine for which the main rotor
shaft is arranged horizontally, and typically for which the main rotor shaft
and generator are located at the top of the tower on which the WES is mounted
and pointed into the wind in order to generate electricity.
   ICE CREAM SHOP. A retail establishment whose principal business is the
service and sale of ice cream, frozen novelty desserts, frozen confectionary
items and a limited selection of food items incidental thereto.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any improvements on a lot, including but not limited to,
buildings, driveways, sidewalks, patios, decks and similar structures,
pavements of any kind, and other structures and materials, that, in the
determination of the Administrative Official, prohibit or substantially retard
the drainage of stormwater directly into the soil below.
   KENILWORTH SIGN CODE OR SIGN CODE. Sections §§
153.045 through
153.060.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied by or intended for occupancy by one principal
building or principal use, together with any accessory buildings and the open
spaces as are required by this chapter, as a unit and having frontage on a
street or an approved private roadway. A LOT may or may not coincide with a lot
of record.
   LOT AREA. The gross area, measured in square feet, of a horizontal plane
bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines of the lot, but excluding (i) any
area occupied by the waters of Lake Michigan and (ii) any area between the
water line of Lake Michigan and the toe of the bluff line. For purposes of §
153.053, LOT AREA shall not include any area of a lot subject to a recorded
easement, covenant, reservation or other encumbrance for ingress to and egress
from any adjacent separate lot not abutting a public way.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot along a public street or approved
private roadway; provided that in the case of a through lot existing as of
April 10, 2006, the FRONT LOT LINE existing as of that date shall be the only
FRONT LOT LINE; and provided further that in the case of a corner lot the FRONT
LOT LINE shall be the shorter lot boundary along a street or approved private
roadway.
   LOT LINE, REAR.
      (1)   In the case of lots that are generally rectangular or trapezoidal
in shape, the lot line that is most distant from and most parallel to the front
lot line; or
      (2)   In the case of all other lots, either:
         (a)   Those lot lines that serve as all or part of the REAR LOT LINE
for more than one contiguous lot; or
         (b)   Where no lot line serves as all or part of the rear lot line for
more than one contiguous lot, an imaginary line 20 feet in length, entirely
within the lot and parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision
recorded in the office of the County Recorder or registered in the office of
the County Registrar of Titles.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having lot lines on two non-intersecting streets or on
substantially parallel sections of two intersecting streets.
   LOT WIDTH. The shortest distance between side lot lines measured by a line
passing between the two points at which the required front yard line intersects
the side lot lines; provided, however, that where a lot does not have two side
lot lines intersecting the front lot line, a rear yard line that intersects the
front lot line shall be used in place of a side lot line.
   LOW-FREQUENCY SOUND. Sound with frequencies below 100 Hz, including audible
sound and sound at a frequency below that of human hearing (for example,
infrasound).
   NACELLE. That part of a turbine containing the shaft, gear box and
generator.
   NAMEPLATE WATTAGE. The amount of energy produced from a WES at maximum or
optimum wind speeds within one hour, as indicated by the manufacturer.
   NIGHTTIME HOURS. The time between 10:00 p.m. on one calendar day and 7:00
a.m. on the next calendar day.
   NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY. A property that is not owned by the owner of the
property on which the WES is proposed or installed.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. “B” Business District, “S” School District, the
“P” Park and Playground District, the “M-1” Mahoney Park District, the “M-2”
Municipal Lands District, and the “R” Railroad Right of Way, Parkway and
Automobile Parking District.
   OPERABLE CONDITION. For any WES, the condition of being capable of operating
at full capacity while meeting all sound, shadow flicker and other applicable
conditions set forth in this chapter.
   PARKING, TANDEM. The arrangement of not more than two parking spaces in
depth, wherein one space is located directly in front of another space, so that
it is necessary to pass through one space in order to enter or leave the other
space.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A development guided by a total integrated design
plan in which one or more of the regulations set forth in this chapter may be
waived or varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site and building
design and location in the B Business Zoning District, in accordance with the
procedures and standards found in §
153.246.
   PORCH, OPEN. A one-story covered area attached to the exterior wall of a
single-family dwelling, and that:
      (1)   Is either enclosed with screens or unscreened, and open to the air
on at least one side; and
      (2)   Has no heating, ventilating or air conditioning system.
   PORTE COCHERE. A one-story covered and unenclosed structure extending from
the entrance of a building over an adjacent driveway to shelter those getting
in or out of vehicles.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING SETBACK LINE. In Districts R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4, the
minimum horizontal distance between the front or side of a building and the
front lot line or the side lot line abutting a street of the lot on which the
building is located, disregarding the structures and other things which by §
153.033 are permitted as obstructions in the front yard or side yard, as the
case may be, and further disregarding any portion of the building that is a
covered, unscreened and unenclosed porch not exceeding one story in height.
   REAR BUILDING LINE. For lots abutting lake Michigan, the longest horizontal
distance between the real of a principal building and the front lot line of the
lot on which the principal building is located.
   RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE. A public eating place whose principal business is
the sale and service of food or beverages for consumption on the premises. This
shall not include a limited service restaurant as defined in this section. Only
incidental sales of food or beverages for off-premises consumption are
permitted in conjunction with the operation of a FULL SERVICE RESTAURANT.
   RESTAURANT, LIMITED SERVICE. A public eating place whose principal business
is the sale of food or beverages where the majority of the food sold is
prepared in advance at a location other than the same place and for immediate
consumption on the premises. Sales of food or beverages for off-premises
consumption are permitted in conjunction with the operation of these
establishments.
   SCHOOL. A place of pre-school or elementary instruction operated on a non-
profit basis.
   SETBACK LINE. The minimum horizontal distance between the front or side of a
building and the front or nearer side lot line of the lot on which the building
is located, disregarding the structures and other things which by §
153.033(A), (B) and (C) are permitted as obstructions in the front yard or side
yard, as the case may be.
   SHADOW FLICKER. The on-and-off strobe light effect caused by the shadow of
moving blades cast by the sun upon a turbine's blades.
   SHADOW FLICKER INTENSITY. The difference or variation in brightness at a
given location in the presence and absence of a shadow.
   SIGHT TRIANGLE. The triangular area located at the corner of a corner lot as
defined in §
153.075(A), to be referred to as a CORNER SIGHT TRIANGLE, or the triangular
area at the intersection of a driveway and a front lot line, as defined in §
153.075(B), to be referred to as DRIVEWAY SIGHT TRIANGLE.
   SILHOUETTE. The area covered by moving blades of a WES turbine, as viewed
from the front elevation, described in square feet.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (SWES). Free-standing, tower-mounted wind energy
systems.
   SOUND LEVEL. The A-weighted sound level in decibels (dB) (or the C-weighted
level, if specified).
   SPECIALTY FOOD AND BEVERAGE. An establishment whose primary business is the
sale of a single specialty type of food or beverage that is not considered a
complete meal (e.g., backed goods, candy, coffee, ice cream, or butchered
meats). The sale of other food, beverages or merchandise is incidental to the
sale of specialty food or beverage.
   STORY. The portion of a building (other than a basement) included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there
is no floor above, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above.
   STORY, HALF. A story that has:
      (1)   Top wall plates which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are
not more than two feet above the finished floor of the story;
      (2)   A roof line at or above each the exterior wall plate that shall not
be punctuated by dormers or similar structural features of an aggregate
dimension exceeding one-half of the length of the exterior wall; and
      (3)   A roof that;
         (a)   Is a gable, hip or gambrel roof;
         (b)   Is not a mansard roof;
         (c)   Has a maximum slope of 16 units vertical in 12 units horizontal
(16:12); and
         (d)   Does not have more than 25% of the exterior roof surface at a
slope of less than three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (3:12).
   STREET. A public right-of-way more than 20 feet wide which affords a primary
means of access to abutting property.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repair, which would
prolong the life of, replace or add a supporting member of a building, such as
a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, or any substantial change in the roof
or exterior walls.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. An engineer who is licensed and registered to practice
structural engineering in the state under the Illinois Structural Engineering
Act and whose principal professional practice is in the field of structural
engineering.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATION. The demolition, removal or addition of 50% or more
of:
      (1)   The floor area of any building or buildings on the same lot in any
district zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or B; or
      (2)   The structural elements of the walls or facade of a building or
buildings on the same lot facing a street in any district zoned R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4 or B.
   SUN GLINT. The reflection of sunlight off of a surface of the turbine,
tower, or other component of a WES.
   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. An accessory structure consisting of a receptacle
for water having a depth at any point of more than 18 inches, and a capacity of
more than 2,500 gallons, used or intended to be used for swimming, wading or
bathing, and constructed, installed or maintained either temporarily or
permanently, and whether portable or in a fixed location, in or above ground
and outside of a single- family dwelling, and which receptacle is used
exclusively by the owner or occupant of the property on which it is located,
his or her family and guests.
   TOE OF THE BLUFF LINE. The line drawn between the side lot lines of a lot as
follows: (i) where there is a sea wall at the base of the bluff, the line along
the base of the sea wall closest to Lake Michigan, or (ii) where there is no
sea wall, the line along the points at which the bluff meets the beach, which
line is extended to the side lot lines, or (iii) where there is no sea wall and
no beach, the edge of the waters of Lake Michigan.
   TOP BLUFF EDGE. The curvilinear line connecting the points of a bluff where
the previously unimproved and undisturbed land surface first begins to drop in
elevation at a rate equal to or greater than two feet vertical for every ten
feet horizontal.
   TOWER. The structure on which a turbine is mounted, which structure is a
component of a WES.
   TURBINE. The blades, nacelle and tail of a WES.
   USE. The USE of property is the purpose or activity for which the land, or
building thereon, is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is
occupied or maintained.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
   VERTICAL AXIS WIND TURBINE (VAWT). A turbine of which the main rotor shaft
is arranged vertically and that does not need to be pointed into the wind in
order to generate electricity.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Kenilworth, Cook County, Illinois.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (WES). A wind energy production, conversion and
distribution system consisting of a wind turbine, tower or other structure on
which the turbine is mounted, and associated electronic, electric, or other
mechanical equipment; provided, however, that such WES shall be limited to
building-mounted wind energy systems and small wind energy systems.
   YARD. An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground to the sky except obstructions permitted by this chapter, including
those permitted by §
153.033.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard on the same lot with a principal building between the
front of the building and the front lot line extending along the full length of
the front lot line between the side lot lines.
   YARD REAR. A yard on the same lot with a principal building between the rear
lot line and the portion of rear of the building which is closest to the rear
lot line extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side
lot lines.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard on the same lot with a principal building between the
side of the building and the nearer side lot line extending along the side lot
line from the front yard to the rear yard.
   YARD, TYPICAL PLOT PLAN. The following typical plot plan is illustrative of
the foregoing definitions of yards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d0c3e9c0d70e134eef310cfee403f41c4e9bd594/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1994.jpg]
 
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 946, passed 10-11-2005; Ord. 948, passed 2-
13-2006; Ord. 969, passed 12-11-2006; Ord. 976, passed 4-9-2007; Ord. 987,
passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 1004, passed 9-8-2008; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009; Ord.
1024, passed 8-10-2009; Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 1082, passed 5-21-
2012; Ord. 1177, passed 10-17-2016; Ord. 1270, passed 10-26-2020; Ord. 1318,
passed 10- 24-2022; Ord. 1340, passed 10-23-2023; Ord. 1356, passed 4-15-2024)
§§ 153.004 THROUGH 153.014 RESERVED.
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 153.015 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   The village is hereby divided into 11 districts designated as follows:
   (A)   R-1 Residence District;
   (B)   R-2 Residence District;
   (C)   R-3 Residence District;
   (D)   R-4 Residence District;
   (E)   B Business District;
   (F)   S School District;
   (G)   P Park and Playground District;
   (H)   M-1 Mahoney Park District;
   (I)   M-2 Municipal Lands District;
   (J)   R Railway Right-of-Way; and
   (K)   Automobile Parking District.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 153.016 MAP.
   The location and boundaries of the districts listed in §
153.015 are as indicated on the official zoning map of the village, located in
Appendix A, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made
a part of this chapter. The official zoning map shall be identified by the
signatures of the President and Clerk of the village and the seal of the
village shall be affixed thereto, under the statement:
   This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in §
153.016 of the Kenilworth Zoning Chapter adopted [date].
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.017 CHANGES IN MAP.
   No changes in the official zoning map shall be made until it is approved by
the Board of Trustees and entered on the official zoning map with an entry
signed by the President and Clerk of the village, under the seal of the
village, stating that:
   On [date] the following change was made in the official zoning map [brief
description of change].
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§§ 153.018 THROUGH 153.029 RESERVED.
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROVISIONS FOR ALL DISTRICTS
PART A. GENERAL MATTERS
§ 153.030 CERTAIN GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter:
   (A)   The regulations set by this chapter for each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
land within the district;
   (B)   No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied,
and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in conformity
with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located;
   (C)   No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered,
or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   To exceed the height herein permitted;
      (2)   To have a smaller floor area than the minimum herein specified;
      (3)   To accommodate or house a greater number of families than the
number herein permitted;
      (4)   To occupy a greater portion of lot area than that herein permitted;
or
      (5)   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
other open spaces than those herein required.
   (D)   No accessory building or other structure shall be constructed or
otherwise placed on any lot unless and until a permit for the principal
building on the lot has been issued, and no accessory building or structure
shall be permitted to remain on the lot in the event the permit is terminated
or permitted to expire prior to the completion of the principal building.
   (E)   No part of a yard, or other open space or off-street parking or
loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose
of complying with this chapter, shall be included as part of a yard, open space
or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other
building.
   (F)   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall
be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall
meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.031 ROOMERS AND BOARDERS PROHIBITED.
   The renting of rooms to roomers and the taking in of boarders is prohibited.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.032 SPECIAL USES.
   Special uses in any district may be authorized as provided in §
153.245.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.033 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN YARDS.
   The following are permitted as obstructions in a yard, as defined in §
153.003, when located in the yard or yards indicated:
   (A)   In any yard.
      (1)   Eaves, gutters, downspouts, cornices or similar ornamental
projections projecting not more than 12 inches into the required minimum yard;
      (2)   Trees, shrubs, fences, hedges, walls, arbors, trellises, poles and
other accessories, ornaments and furniture customarily used in the yard (that
is, front, side or rear, as the case may be), subject to compliance with height
limitations and other requirements of this chapter and of all other applicable
ordinances of the village;
      (3)   Removable awnings and temporary canopies;
      (4)   Open terraces without roofs which are not over one foot above the
average level of the adjoining ground and open steps not more than four feet
above grade; and
      (5)   Private driveways.
   (B)   In side yard.
      (1)   Open accessory off-street parking spaces, except, in the case of a
corner lot, a side yard abutting a street or an approved private roadway; and
      (2)   Unscreened unenclosed porches or entry platforms projecting not
more than four feet (including eaves, gutters, downspouts, roofs or canopies)
into the required minimum yard.
   (C)   In rear yard.
      (1)   Detached accessory buildings and structures located in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, including §§
153.076,
153.079 and
153.082;
      (2)   Unscreened unenclosed porches or entry platforms described in and
conforming to paragraph(B)(2) above; and
      (3)   Open accessory off-street parking spaces, except that in the case
of a corner lot, no parking space shall be located closer to the side lot line
abutting a street than the number of feet equal to the minimum depth required
for the side yard of the lot abutting a street.
   (D)   In front yard and side yard abutting a street.
Covered but otherwise open, unscreened and unenclosed front porches not
exceeding one story in height, where a principal building setback line is
established.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 946, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 153.034 FENCES.
   (A)   Permit required. No fence shall be constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged or structurally altered upon or within any lot or parcel of ground
within the village unless a permit therefor shall first be obtained from the
Administrative Official. Application for a permit to construct, reconstruct,
enlarge or structurally alter a fence shall be filed with the Village Manager
on forms provided by the village and shall show the height of all parts of the
fence, the materials to be used and other pertinent information and shall be
accompanied by a map or drawing showing the location of the proposed fence and
other structures on the lot as well as any existing fence along the same lot
line on an adjacent lot. A fee shall be paid for each permit issued, in an
amount as the Board of Trustees shall, by resolution, establish from time to
time.
   (B)   Regulation. No fence shall be constructed, reconstructed, repaired,
enlarged or structurally altered, and no permit therefor shall be issued by the
Administrative Official, unless the fence conforms to the requirements of this
section.
   (C)   Materials; construction. The design and construction of a fence shall
be compatible with the appearance and character of the neighboring properties
in the village. High quality materials and installation exhibiting clean lines
and structural integrity are required. No fence shall be erected or maintained
on any lot within the minimum front yard required for the lot by the zoning
regulations, or, in the case of a side yard abutting a street, within the
minimum side yard required for the lot by the zoning regulations, or otherwise
along the street frontage line or lines of the lot, or along the side lot line
or lines between the lot and the lot of another and within the street frontage
setback area required for the lot by the zoning regulations, unless:
      (1)   If constructed of masonry, the fence is constructed with open areas
equivalent to at least 30% of each square foot thereof;
      (2)   If constructed of materials other than masonry, the fence is
constructed with open areas equivalent to at least 60% of each square foot
thereof (exclusive of parts needed for structural support); or
      (3)   If the fence is constructed of wire, wire mesh or similar
materials, visibility of the fence from public ways is minimized by a natural
screen of sufficient height and density so as to render the fence inconspicuous
to an observer from public ways during all seasons of the year.
   (D)   Fences in front yards. No fence exceeding four feet in height shall be
erected or maintained on any lot within the minimum front yard required for the
lot by the zoning regulations, or in the case of a side yard abutting a street,
within the minimum side yard required for the lot by the zoning regulations, or
otherwise along the street frontage line or lines of any lot, or along the side
lot line or lines between any lot and the lot of another and within the street
frontage setback area required by the zoning regulations.
   (E)   Fences in side or rear yards.
      (1)   No fence exceeding six feet in height shall be erected or
maintained on any lot within the minimum side or rear yard required for the lot
by the zoning regulations or along the side or rear lot lines between any lot
and the lot of another. However, no fence along the side or rear lot line of
any lot shall exceed, at any point, the actual highest point (excluding
decorative elements permitted under subsection (F) below) of any portion of any
existing fence along the same lot line on an adjacent lot unless the owner of
the adjacent lot shall have given written consent (in form and substance
satisfactory to the Administrative Official) to the construction of a higher
fence.
      (2)   Notwithstanding whether or not the consent of the owner of the
adjacent lot has been given, minor deviations by a fence from the actual
highest point of any portion of an existing fence along the same lot line shall
be disregarded as necessary to allow installation of the fence with a uniform,
continuous profile over minor irregularities in the surface of the soil
directly beneath the fence, provided that:
         (a)   No deviation shall affect more than 10% in linear footage
(whether or not continuous) of the fence;
         (b)   No deviation from the actual highest point of any portion of the
existing fence shall exceed three inches; and
         (c)   No deviation shall be permitted in any case where the natural
grade of the surface of the soil has been raised or altered in order to avoid
limitations on permitted height that would otherwise be applicable to a fence.
   (F)   Height determined.
      (1)   The height of any fence shall be measured from the average of the
measurements from ground level on each side of the fence to the tallest point
of any structural, decorative or other element incorporated into the fence
(excluding decorative elements permitted under this subsection). Where there is
no existing fence along the same side or rear lot line, minor deviations from
the maximum permitted height of a fence shall be disregarded as necessary to
allow installation of the fence with a uniform, continuous profile over minor
irregularities in the surface of the soil directly beneath the fence, provided
that:
         (a)   No deviation shall affect more than 25% in linear footage
(whether or not continuous) of the fence;
         (b)   No deviation from the maximum permitted height shall exceed six
inches; and
         (c)   No deviation shall be permitted in any case where the natural
grade of the surface of the soil has been raised or altered in order to avoid
limitations on permitted height that would otherwise be applicable to a fence.
      (2)   Decorative elements, such as finials, on posts required for
structural support may extend to a height of up to six inches in excess of the
maximum height or tallest point allowed in this section for the fence or
portion thereof supported by the posts.
   (G)   Installation. The “finished side” of a fence on any part of a lot
abutting a street or public way shall face the street. The “finished side” of a
fence on any part of a lot abutting an adjoining property shall face the
adjoining property unless there is already a fence on the adjoining property.
For purposes of this subsection the “finished side” of a fence shall be deemed
to be the side not showing structural supports or the side designed or intended
to be the most attractive in appearance. If revealed structural supports are an
integral part of the design of the fence, the structural supports must be
centered on the line of the fence or equally visible on each side of the fence.
   (H)   Nonconforming fences. It is declared to be in the public interest and
the intent of this section to permit any fence lawfully existing as of the
effective date of this section but which fails to conform to this section to
continue to exist until removed or terminated, but not to encourage the
survival or the enlargement or expansion thereof. Pending the removal of any
nonconforming fence or the alteration thereof so as to conform to this section,
no nonconforming fence shall be structurally altered or enlarged so as to
increase the extent of any nonconformity. If any nonconforming fence is
damaged, destroyed or deteriorated by any means, so as to require replacement
or substantial restoration, the nonconforming fence shall not be rebuilt or
restored unless the fence, as rebuilt or restored, shall conform to the
requirements of this section. Ordinary repairs, maintenance or replacement of
parts of any nonconforming fence, other than structural supports, may be
undertaken.
   (I)   Exceptions. It is hereby declared to be in the public interest to
encourage the preservation of old wrought iron fences and masonry gate posts
and corner posts; any wrought iron fence and any masonry gate posts and corner
posts may be replaced, reconstructed or repaired substantially in accordance
with the original dimensions and design thereof notwithstanding any contrary
provision of this section. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
property in districts designated M-2, P or S. The maximum permitted height for
any fence located on any lot along a rear or side yard lot line and adjacent to
any property in districts designated M-2, P or S shall be one foot in excess of
the maximum height otherwise stipulated in this section for the fence,
notwithstanding any contrary provision of this section.
   (J)   Fence defined. For the purposes of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FENCE. Includes any barrier or wall of posts, rails, gates and/or other
members constructed of wood, metal, wire, masonry and/or other materials,
placed or used in whole or in part as a boundary or as an ornamental feature or
as means of protection, security, privacy or confinement, or otherwise serving
the functions commonly ascribed to a fence, but shall not include any wall
constructed of timbers, masonry or other materials for the principal purpose of
maintaining a terrace or controlling erosion; or any natural growing hedge,
shrub or other plant life.
   (K)   Natural vegetation in front yards.
      (1)   No natural growing hedge, shrub or other plant life that is placed
or used in whole or in part as a boundary or barrier and as a means of
protection or confinement with a height in excess of four feet shall be located
within eight feet of:
         (a)   1.   The front lot line;
            2.   Any side lot line abutting a street;
            3.   The interior line of the corner sight triangle on the lot,
with any hedge, shrub or other plant life along the line to be equally
allocated to the front lot line and side lot line abutting a street; or
            4.   The interior line of any driveway sight triangle on the lot,
with any hedge shrub or other plant life along the line to be allocated to the
lot line on which the sight triangle is located, for a distance extending more
than 30% of the front lot line or the side lot line, respectively.
         (b)   The side lot lines not abutting a street for a distance
extending more than 30% of the side lot line within the required front yard or
required side yard abutting a street.
      (2)   The distance of eight feet shall be measured from the centerline of
the hedge, shrub or other plant life to the applicable lot line or interior
line. This limitation shall not apply to the front yards or side yards of lots
abutting Ridge Road or Sheridan Road. Any vegetation existing on the lot as of
February 24, 2006 shall be considered legal nonconforming uses and,
notwithstanding §§
153.205 through
153.211, the vegetation may be replaced only if less than 75% of the vegetation
boundary or barrier is damaged or destroyed.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 948, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 1004, passed 9-8-
2008)
§ 153.035 ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANTENNA. Any structure or apparatus, including a parabolic dish, mesh
work or frame work, used for the purpose of transmitting or receiving
microwave, radio or television signals or any other electromagnetic signals,
together with all electrical connections therefor.
      ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any structure or apparatus utilized for the
principal purpose of supporting an antenna.
      BUILDING-MOUNTED ANTENNA. Any antenna mounted or affixed to the exterior
roof, walls or other exterior part of a building or affixed to an antenna
support structure affixed to the exterior roof, walls or other exterior part of
a building.
      EFFECTIVE SURFACE AREA. The area of the largest silhouette (flat plane)
of an antenna, measured in square feet; the effective surface area shall be the
area of the silhouette (flat plane) of each solid element of the antenna, with
the area of each solid element being the product of the length of the element
multiplied by the diameter or width of the element, plus the area of any spaces
in the silhouette (flat plane) that are bounded by solid elements of the
antenna.
      GROUND-MOUNTED ANTENNA. Any antenna mounted on the ground or mounted on
an antenna support structure mounted on the ground.
      LICENSED ANTENNA. Any antenna capable of transmitting and receiving
signals, the owner or operator of which is licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission for the use for which the antenna is intended.
   (B)   Installation requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, no antenna or antenna support structure shall be installed, erected or
maintained upon or within any lot or parcel of ground, or on the exterior of
any structure located thereon, except in accordance with the following
applicable requirements.
      (1)   All antennas and antenna support structures, regardless of size or
type, shall conform to the following requirements.
         (a)   All parts of the antenna and antenna support structure,
including attachments and wires, shall be located within the required setback
lines specified in the zoning regulations. No antenna or antenna support
structure, including guy or support wires, shall be installed in or extend into
a front yard or side yard. No antenna or antenna support structure, including
guy or support wires, shall be mounted on, attached to or supported by a wall,
side or roof of a building which faces the front yard (or, in the case of a
corner lot, a side yard abutting a street) of the property. All antenna and
antenna support structure installations must comply with all other provisions
of the zoning regulations and the village code, except that any ground-mounted
antenna, including guy or support wires, may be located closer than ten feet to
the principal building and closer than six feet to any other building on the
same lot.
         (b)   No antenna with an effective surface area of greater than eight
square feet nor any antenna or antenna support structure with any single
dimension exceeding eight feet shall be mounted on, attached to or supported by
a chimney or similar building appurtenance.
         (c)   No more than one antenna support structure with any single
dimension exceeding eight feet may be located on any lot.
         (d)   All antenna support structures must be grounded or bonded to a
grounding rod.
         (e)   Guy or support wires used in connection with any antenna or
antenna support structure shall be shielded to a height of six feet above the
ground by a plastic covering or other suitable material to prevent injury to
persons.
         (f)   All antennas and antenna support structures and the installation
thereof shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 80 mph without the use
of supporting guy wires.
         (g)   All electronic cables leading from a ground-mounted antenna and
its antenna support structure to any building shall be underground.
         (h)   The location and quality of the installation of the antenna and
antenna support structure must be amenable to safe maintenance and must not
present an attractive nuisance to children.
         (i)   The antenna and antenna support structure shall be installed in
all respects in compliance with the manufacturer’s specifications.
      (2)   In order to maintain the character, heritage and atmosphere of the
village and minimize the aesthetic effect of antennas and antenna support
structures upon adjacent properties, all antennas, other than licensed
antennas, with an effective surface area greater than eight square feet and all
antennas and antenna support structures with any single dimension exceeding
eight feet shall conform to the following additional requirements.
         (a)   The installation of the antenna and antenna support structure
shall be compatible with the appearance and character of the neighboring
properties in the village. High quality installation exhibiting clean lines and
structural integrity are required.
         (b)   No antenna or antenna support structure shall be installed so
that it is visible to an observer standing at any location on the surface of
the front yard (and, in the case of a corner lot, in a side yard abutting a
street) of the lot on which the antenna or antenna support structure is
installed or the front yard of any property adjacent to the lot on which the
antenna or antenna support structure is installed or the front yard (or in the
case of a corner lot, in a side yard abutting the street) of any lot all or any
portion of which is located directly across the street from the lot on which
the antenna or antenna support structure is installed.
         (c)   The design and installation of the antenna and antenna support
structure shall be such as to minimize its overall visibility from neighboring
properties and public ways during all seasons of the year. In order to minimize
the visibility of ground-mounted antennas a natural screen or fence shall be
erected if not already provided, so as to provide maximum reasonably achievable
screening as determined by the Administrative Official. The natural screen
should be at least four feet tall when planted, with dense plantings spaced no
more than two feet apart. A fence should also be at least four feet tall and
shall conform to all provisions of the zoning regulations and the municipal
code. Building-mounted antennas and antenna support structures shall be colored
to blend with their surroundings to the extent reasonably practicable.
         (d)   The smallest practicable antenna and antenna support structure
size shall be used in all applications.
         (e)   The highest point of any building-mounted antenna, including
antenna support structure, shall not be higher than the highest point of the
building upon which the antenna is to be mounted.
      (3)   All ground-mounted antennas, other than licensed antennas, and
related antenna support structures shall conform to the following additional
requirements.
         (a)   No ground-mounted antenna, combined with any related antenna
support structure, shall have an effective surface area greater than 30 square
feet.
         (b)   No part of any ground-mounted antenna or related antenna support
structure (other than required guy wires) shall be closer to any property line
than the height of the antenna, including the antenna support structure,
measured at its highest elevation.
         (c)   The lowest point of any ground-mounted antenna, exclusive of its
antenna support structure, shall not be more than two feet above the average
elevation of the lot in which the antenna shall be installed or erected or on
any ground or surface that has been raised, filled or landscaped for the
purpose of circumventing the height restrictions of this section.
      (4)   Licensed antennas and related antenna support structures shall
conform to the following additional requirements.
         (a)   No licensed antenna and related antenna support structure shall
exceed 70 feet in height, in the case of a ground-mounted antenna, or 20 feet
in height above the highest point of the building to which it is attached, in
the case of a building-mounted antenna.
         (b)   No licensed antenna and related antenna support structure (other
than required guy wires) shall be located nearer than one-half of the overall
height of the licensed antenna and antenna support structure to an adjacent
habitable building on any adjoining lot.
         (c)   No licensed antenna shall be installed with an effective surface
area of greater than 40 square feet.
   (C)   Permits for certain large antennas and antenna support structures and
antennas.
      (1)   No antenna with any single dimension exceeding eight feet or with
an effective surface area exceeding eight square feet shall be installed,
erected, moved, replaced, added to or structurally altered without a permit
therefor issued by the Administrative Official in accordance with §
153.226.
      (2)   No antenna support structure with any single dimension exceeding 15
feet shall be installed, erected, moved, replaced, added to or structurally
altered without a permit therefor issued by the Administrative Official in
accordance with §
153.226.
      (3)   All permit applications for the installation, erection or
maintenance of an antenna or antenna support structure shall be on forms
provided by the village and shall be submitted to the Administrative Official
accompanied by the following:
         (a)   Three sets of plans showing:
            1.   The proposed location of the antenna and antenna support
structure on the subject lot;
            2.   The configuration of the subject lot, including elevations of
the subject lot and the structures and any existing antenna and antenna support
structure on the subject lot;
            3.   All structures on lots contiguous to, and across any street
from, the subject lot;
            4.   All existing and proposed landscaping, fencing or other
screening;
            5.   Plans and specifications for the installation, including
antenna and antenna support structure and base configuration, mounts and
foundation; and
            6.   Details of the structure on which any building-mounted antenna
or antenna support structure is to be mounted.
         (b)   Manufacturer’s specifications for the proposed installation;
         (c)   Wind loading and effective surface area calculations;
         (d)   Dimensions and configuration of the proposed antenna and antenna
support structure and the components or elements thereof, including its height
from the base and its maximum width and all other dimensions and details
required to calculate effective surface area;
         (e)   Weight of the proposed antenna and antenna support structure;
         (f)   A letter from a registered structural engineer, or other
evidence satisfactory to the Administrative Official, to the effect that the
roof or other structure or foundation upon which the antenna or antenna support
structure will be mounted will withstand torque loading at 80 mph winds;
         (g)   A plat of survey for the subject lot showing the location of all
improvements thereon; and
         (h)   An application fee in the amount as shall be required for an
application for a variance under the zoning regulations.
      (4)   The granting of any permit may be made subject to reasonable
aesthetic considerations and safety conditions as the Administrative Official
shall deem appropriate.
   (D)   Variations.
      (1)   In considering whether to grant variances for antennas and antenna
support structures that fail to comply with the requirements of this section,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall first find the following, among other
requirements as shall be required under §
153.244 or as the Zoning Board of Appeals shall deem pertinent:
         (a)   A satisfactory signal cannot be obtained with the antenna and
antenna support structure in full compliance with this section;
         (b)   The inability to comply with this section is not due to the
presence on the subject lot of any other antenna or antenna support structure;
         (c)   The antenna and antenna support structure shall be inconspicuous
from the view of a ground observer from any viewing direction, during all
seasons of the year, because of existing topographical features or landscaping
of the lot or structural or architectural features on the structures thereon,
or modifications that will be made thereto; and
         (d)   The antenna and antenna support structure are designed and
mounted so as to withstand wind and other stresses to which it may be subjected
without any threat to public safety.
      (2)   The granting of any variations may be made subject to reasonable
aesthetic considerations and safety conditions as the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall deem appropriate.
   (E)   Technical assistance. In connection with any application for a
variance from the requirements of this section, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be authorized, at the expense of the applicant for the variance, to
retain or consult with independent experts if the Board shall deem it advisable
to do so in connection with the evaluation of technical or engineering data and
matters affecting public safety.
   (F)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to property
in districts designated M-2, P or S.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.036 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this section, accessory
uses are permitted in any zoning district, and accessory structures are
permitted in any zoning district other than the B Business District, in
connection with any principal use lawfully existing within the district.
   (B)   Definition. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE. A structure or use that:
         (a)   Is subordinate in extent and purpose to, and serves, a principal
structure or use;
         (b)   Is customarily found as an incident to the principal structure
or use;
         (c)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of those
occupying, working at or being served by the principal structure or use;
         (d)   Except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of
this chapter, is located in its entirety on the same zoning lot as the
principal structure or use; and
         (e)   Is under the same ownership and control as the principal
structure or use.
   (C)   Certificate of zoning compliance. When required by §
153.226, certificates of compliance evidencing the compliance of the accessory
use or structure with the provisions of this chapter shall be obtained before
any accessory use or structure is established or constructed.
   (D)   Special regulations applicable to particular accessory structures and
uses. In addition to the requirements of subsection (E) below, the following
regulations shall apply to particular accessory structures and uses.
      (1)   Storage. Outdoor storage shall not be allowed as an accessory use,
except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter and except for the
outdoor storage of materials such as firewood, compost and mulch.
      (2)   No accessory parking in single-family residential districts. Except
when approved as part of a special use permit application, parking lots
required for or accessory to any business use shall not be permitted on any lot
in any single-family residential district.
   (E)   Use, bulk, space and yard regulations. Except as expressly provided
otherwise in this section, every accessory structure and use shall comply with
the use, bulk, space and yard requirements made applicable to them by the
regulations of the district in which they are located.
(Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 153.037 TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this section, temporary
uses as hereinafter specified are permitted in the zoning districts hereinafter
specified.
   (B)   Definition. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      TEMPORARY USE. A structure or use that:
         (a)   Is established for a fixed period of time with the intent to
discontinue the use upon the expiration of the time; and
         (b)   Does not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent
structure.
   (C)   Certificate of compliance required: special standards for issuance and
revocation.
      (1)   Certificate required. Except as provided in paragraph(D)(1) below,
no temporary use shall be established or maintained unless a certificate of
compliance evidencing the compliance of the use with the provisions of this
chapter shall have first been issued in accordance with §
153.226 of this code.
      (2)   Basis for certificate denial. A certificate of compliance may be
denied if the Administrative Official determines that the applicant has failed
to comply with the terms or conditions of any previously issued zoning
certificate for a temporary use or that the permanent use of the subject
property fails to comply in all respects with the provisions of all village
ordinances regulating the development, use and maintenance of the property. A
certificate shall be denied if the Administrative Official determines that the
public health, safety or welfare would be, or may reasonably be expected to be,
impaired by the issuance thereof.
      (3)   Conditions on certificate. A certificate of compliance may be
conditioned upon special requirements as the Administrative Official may
determine are necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter and to protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
      (4)   Revocation of certificate. A certificate of compliance shall be
revoked if any of the standards and conditions imposed pursuant to this
section, or the certificate, are violated.
   (D)   Permitted temporary uses. Subject to the specific regulations and time
limits that follow and to the other applicable regulations of the district in
which the use is permitted, the following temporary uses and no others are
permitted in the zoning districts herein specified.
      (1)   Indoor and outdoor art, craft, rummage, plant, and sidewalk sales,
shows and exhibits.
         (a)   In any business district; provided, however, that any use shall
require the specific prior approval of the Administrative Official on the basis
of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions and traffic access and
the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties; and
         (b)   No sale shall exceed a period of three days.
      (2)   Tents. In any district other than a residence district, in
connection with any permitted, accessory, or temporary use, no tent shall be
allowed to remain for a period of more than 14 days. In any residence district,
in connection with any permitted, accessory, or temporary use, no tent shall be
allowed to remain for a period of more than seven days. However, in connection
with any special use in a residential district, no tent shall be allowed to
remain for a period of more than 21 days. For the purposes of this subsection,
the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
            TENT. Includes awnings or canopies extending more than 72 inches
from the exterior wall of a building.
      (3)   Civic uses of public property. In any district, any civic use of
any public building or property when authorized by the governmental agency
owning or controlling the property; provided, however, that no certificate of
zoning compliance shall be issued for the use unless the Administrative
Official finds that the use shall impose no undue adverse effect on neighboring
streets or property.
      (4)   Open air markets.
         (a)   In the B Business District; provided, however, that any use
shall require the specific prior approval of the Administrative Official on the
basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking and sanitation provisions,
available utilities and traffic access, as well as the absence of undue adverse
impacts on other properties; provided further that no use shall be permitted
unless the Administrative Official also finds that the use will contribute
directly to the preservation and enhancement of an attractive and active
business district;
         (b)   The uses shall not be permitted at any location more than once
in any seven-day period or for more than eight consecutive hours; provided,
however, that a single certificate of compliance per calendar year may be
issued for a recurring open air market; and
         (c)   Unless waived in writing by the Administrative Official, open
air markets shall comply with the applicable district bulk, space and yard
requirements of this chapter.
      (5)   Outdoor storage of construction materials.
         (a)   In any district, when accessory to a construction project on the
lot for which a valid building permit exists; and
         (b)   The materials shall be kept in a neat, safe and secure condition
so as not to constitute a nuisance or offense.
      (6)   Outdoor cafés.
         (a)   In the B Business District; provided, however, that any use
shall require the specific prior approval of the Administrative Official on the
basis of adequacy of public access provisions, public health safeguards, litter
controls and the absence of undue adverse impact on other businesses in the
area;
         (b)   No outdoor café shall be permitted to operate for more than 60
days in any calendar year nor during more than one calendar year in every four
years as a temporary use;
         (c)   Outdoor cafés may be operated upon the village sidewalks if the
Administrative Official determines that there is adequate sidewalk space for
the operation of the café and that the use of the public way by pedestrians
will not be unduly impeded; provided, however, that appropriate approvals and
permits for use of public ways or other property of the village for this
purpose are also obtained pursuant to Chapter 97 of the village code.
      (7)   Pop-up store.
         (a)   In the B Business District; provided, however, that any use
shall require the specific prior approval of the Administrative Official on the
basis of adequacy of the parcel size, parking and public access provisions,
public health safeguards, litter controls and the absence of undue adverse
impacts on other properties in the area;
         (b)   No pop-up store shall be permitted to operate for more than 60
days in any calendar year.
   (E)   Bulk, space and yard regulations. Temporary uses are not required to
comply with the bulk, yard and space requirements applicable in the district in
which the temporary use is located.
   (F)   Use limitations.
      (1)   General limitations. Every temporary use shall comply with the
limitations made applicable to specified temporary uses by subsection (D)
above. No temporary use shall be permitted in any district if it would have a
significant negative impact, including aesthetic impact, on any adjacent
property or on the area, as a whole, in which it is located.
      (2)   Hours and days of operation. No temporary use shall be operated
during any hours or on any days of the week except such as are designated by
the Administrative Official in the certificate required by subsection (C)
above, on the basis of the nature of the temporary use and the character of the
surrounding area.
      (3)   Public safety. No temporary use shall be permitted that will result
in an undue on-site or off-site threat to public safety. No temporary use shall
be operated except in accordance with the restrictions and conditions as the
Administrative Official may require in connection with the certification.
      (4)   Traffic. No temporary use shall be permitted if additional
vehicular traffic reasonably expected to be generated by temporary use would
have undue detrimental effects on surrounding streets and uses.
      (5)   Conflicts with other temporary uses. No temporary use shall be
permitted if the use would conflict with another previously authorized
temporary use.
      (6)   Parking. Before approving any temporary use, the Administrative
Official shall make an assessment of the total number of off-street parking
spaces that will be reasonably required in connection with the proposed
temporary use, on the basis of the particular use, its intensity and the
availability of other parking facilities in the area, and shall approve the
temporary use only if off-street parking is provided. No temporary use shall be
authorized that would, in the opinion of the Administrative Official,
unreasonably reduce the amount of off-street parking spaces available for use
in connection with permanent uses located on the zoning lot in question.
      (7)   Additional conditions. Every temporary use shall, in addition,
comply with, and the Administrative Official may impose, other conditions as
may reasonably be necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter or to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 1048, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 1057, passed
2-22-2011; Ord. 1318, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 153.038 WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (WES).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
      (1)   Establish reasonable and uniform regulations for the location,
installation, operation, maintenance, and decommissioning of building- mounted
wind energy systems (BWES) and small wind energy systems (SWES);
      (2) Assure that any development and production of wind-generated
electricity in the village is safe and to minimize any potentially adverse
effects on adjoining properties and the broader community;
      (3)   Facilitate the development and production of wind-generated
electricity in the village in a manner consistent with the existing character
of the village;
      (4)   Promote the supply of sustainable and renewable energy resources,
in support of national, state and local goals; and
      (5)   Facilitate energy cost savings and economic opportunities for
village residents and businesses.
   (B)   General regulations. Except as specifically provided otherwise in
subsections (C) and (D), all WES shall comply with the general regulations set
forth in this subsection.
      (1)   Compliance with laws. All WES shall comply with all applicable
village, state and federal laws and regulations, including, without limitation,
the provisions of this section, this chapter, and all village building
ordinances and regulations.
      (2)   Compliance with permits. All WES shall comply with all applicable
WES permits issued pursuant to this subsection, including, without limitation,
all conditions imposed by the village as a condition of issuance of the
permits.
      (3)   Interference with utilities, roads and neighboring properties. No
WES shall be operated in a manner so as to interfere with any public right-of-
way or any utility system in the village, or so as to interfere with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of any other property in the village.
      (4)   General engineering regulations.
         (a)   All WES facilities shall be designed to withstand a minimum wind
velocity of 100 miles per hour, with an impact pressure of 40 pounds per square
foot.
         (b)   Each WES shall conform to all applicable industry standards,
including, without limitation, the standards developed by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI).
         (c)   All WES facilities shall be equipped with automatic and manual
braking systems.
         (d)   For turbines greater than 20 kilowatts (kw) of nameplate
capacity, the seal of a structural engineer shall be required.
      (5)   General installation regulations; quantity.
         (a)   Not more than one WES is permitted on each lot.
         (b)   WES facilities must be installed according to manufacturer
specifications.
         (c)   All necessary electrical connections must be made by a licensed
electrician.
      (6)   General sound level regulations.
         (a)   The average sound level produced by a WES shall not exceed a
maximum of 50 dB(A) during daytime hours, and 40 dB(A) during nighttime hours
on any nonparticipating property.
         (b)   No WES shall operate with an average sound level more than 5 dB
(A) above the non-operational ambient level, as measured on any
nonparticipating property.
         (c)   To limit the level of low-frequency sound, the average C-
weighted sound level during WES operation shall not exceed the A-weighted
ambient sound level by more than 20 dB.
         (d)   Sound level meters used for sound measurement must meet the
requirements of a Type 2 or better precision instrument according to ANSI S1.4
(American National Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters), and must
measure the average sound level using an integrating sound level meter that
meets the requirements of ANSI S1.43 (American National Standard Specifications
for Integrating Averaging Sound Level Meters). Measurement procedures must meet
the applicable portions of ANSI S1.29. Average sound-level shall be calculated
by time-averaging sound levels for a period of not less than one minute nor
more than two minutes. Measurements shall not be made when ground level winds
exceed ten miles per hour.
         (e)   For purposes of calculating sound levels, 5 dB(A) shall be added
to the measured average sound level from a WES as a penalty when its sound
emissions have an adverse character, as determined by the village’s Building
Commissioner in his or her sole discretion, that includes, without limitation,
prominent tones (such as, a humming sound) or an amplitude fluctuation in
synchronicity with the blade revolution (such as, a periodic swishing sound).
         (f)   The village may require the owner of a WES as the village may
determine necessary, and at the owner’s sole expense, to obtain field tests or
sound propagation modeling, conducted or supervised by an acoustics specialist
certified by the Institute of Noise Control Engineering, to determine whether a
violation of this subparagraph is occurring or has occurred. In the event that
a violation is occurring, the owner shall immediately discontinue operation of
the WES and promptly remedy the violation.
      (7)   General shadow flicker regulations.
         (a)   No shadow flicker caused by any WES shall fall on any
nonparticipating property:
            1.   At any time upon any building on a nonparticipating property
that exists as of the date of first operation of the WES; or
            2.   For more than 50 hours in a calendar year upon any portion of
the buildable area of the nonparticipating property.
         (b)   As a condition of any permit issued pursuant to this subsection,
the village may require the applicant to commit to a schedule for turning WES
turbines off, in order to ensure compliance with the applicable shadow flicker
regulations set forth in this subparagraph.
      (8)   Cessation of operation in emergency. The owner of the WES shall be
required to immediately cease operation of the WES for the duration of any
emergency, as determined by the Village Manager or his or her designee. For
purposes of this paragraph, an emergency shall mean a condition or situation
caused by the WES or a natural or manmade disaster that presents an imminent
physical threat of danger to life or significant threat to property.
      (9)   Electronic interference. WES facilities shall not be operated so as
to cause electromagnetic degradation in performance of microwave, television,
radio, internet or other wireless transmissions, including public emergency
communications systems, in a manner contrary to FCC regulations or other
federal, state or local laws. For purposes of this paragraph, “degradation in
performance” shall be determined in accordance with the latest principles and
standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of
Radio Engineers, and the Electrical Industries Association.
      (10)   Maintenance.
         (a)   WES facilities shall be maintained in operable condition at all
times, except for reasonable maintenance and repair outages.
         (b)   Should a WES become inoperable, or should any part of the WES
become damaged, or should a WES violate a permit condition, the owner of the
WES shall cease operations immediately and remedy the condition within 90 days
after receipt of a notice from the village manager or his designee regarding
the condition; provided, however, that if the condition presents an immediate
threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, the owner of the WES shall
remedy the condition promptly.
      (11)   Decommissioning.
         (a)   A WES that is not in operable condition for a period exceeding
120 consecutive days shall be deemed abandoned. The owner of an abandoned WES
and the owner of the property on which the WES is located shall cause the
removal of all WES structures and facilities within 60 days after receipt of a
notice of abandonment from the village.
         (b)   Any abandoned WES that is not removed within 60 days after
receipt of a notice of abandonment shall be deemed a public nuisance, which
nuisance the village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to summarily
abate by removing such WES at the joint and several expense of the owners of
the WES and of the property on which the WES is located. In the case of such
removal, the village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to file a
lien for reimbursement of any and all expenses incurred by the village in
connection with the removal, including, without limitation, attorney fees and
accrued interest.
         (c)   Upon removal of the WES, the subject property shall be restored
to its original pre-WES-construction condition.
   (C)   Building-mounted wind energy systems (BWES).
      (1)   Permitted locations. Building-mounted wind energy systems are
allowed as a special use on a property located in any zoning district, and only
upon issuance of a special use permit in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The owner of the property on which the BWES is proposed to be
installed shall submit an application for a special use permit in accordance
with §
153.245 and
153.247(D)(10).
         (b)   Upon the approval of a special use permit for the BWES pursuant
to this section, the village shall record the maintenance covenant submitted
pursuant to §
153.247(D)(10)(a)6. with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
      (2)   Type. The BWES may be either a vertical axis wind turbine or a
horizontal axis wind turbine.
      (3)   Use and energy production restrictions. A BWES must be an accessory
use to the principal use on the lot on which it is located. The primary purpose
of the BWES shall be the production of energy for local distribution and
consumption on the lot on which the BWES is located. A BWES shall not be
constructed for the sole purpose of energy production for wholesale or retail
sale purposes; provided, however, that excess energy produced by an BWES may be
sold to a local electric utility company.
      (4)   Installation. BWES devices may be structurally attached either on
the roof or on the side of a principal building or detached garage, if in
accordance with the village’s building and construction regulations.
      (5)   Setbacks. All portions of all BWES (including, without limitation,
the blades of any turbines) shall comply with the generally applicable setback
restrictions for the zoning district in which the BWES is located.
      (6)   Height. No portion of any BWES shall extend more than ten feet
above the highest point of the building on which it is mounted, and in no
circumstance shall exceed 45 feet in height.
      (7)   Diameter. Unless authorized pursuant to a special use permit, the
maximum diameter of a BWES shall not exceed the lesser of ten feet, or 20% of
the width of the front elevation of the building on which the BWES is mounted.
      (8)   Color and sun glint. BWES facilities shall be finished in a neutral
color. The finish shall be flat or matte, so as to reduce incidence of sun
glint. The required coloration and finish shall be maintained throughout the
life of the BWES.
      (9)   Signage. No BWES shall have any advertising material, writing,
picture, or signage, other than warning information or manufacturer
identification.
      (10)   Environmental impact. In order to reduce potential bird perching
and nesting, all structures used for BWES facilities shall be designed as
enclosed tubular structures with pointed tops (monopoles), rather than lattice
structures, unless alternative mitigation strategies are otherwise approved by
the village.
      (11)   Sworn statement. Not less than once every 12 months, the owner of
each BWES shall submit to the village a sworn statement that the operation and
maintenance of the WES has been performed in compliance with all applicable
directions issued by the manufacturer thereof, along with supporting evidence
as may be requested by the village.
   (D)   Small wind energy systems (SWES).
      (1)   Permitted locations. A SWES is allowed as a special use on a
property located in any zoning district, and only upon issuance of a special
use permit in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The owner of the property on which the SWES is proposed to be
installed shall submit an application for a special use permit in accordance
with §§
153.245 and
153.247(D)(10).
         (b)   Upon the approval of a special use permit for the SWES pursuant
to this subsection, the village shall record the maintenance covenant submitted
pursuant to §
153.247(D)(10)(a)6. with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
      (2)   Type. The SWES may be either a vertical axis wind turbine or a
horizontal axis wind turbine.
      (3)   Use and energy production restrictions. A SWES must be an accessory
use to the principal use on the lot on which it is located and shall not be
permitted as a principal, “stand-alone” use. The primary purpose of the SWES
shall be the production of energy for local distribution and consumption on the
lot on which the SWES is located. A SWES shall not be constructed for the sole
purpose of energy production for wholesale or retail sale purposes; provided,
however, that excess energy produced by an SWES may be sold to a local electric
utility company.
      (4)   Height. No portion of any SWES shall exceed 45 feet in height. No
SWES may have a blade tip that, at its lowest position, is less than 15 feet
above ground level at the base of the SWES.
      (5)   Setbacks. All portions of all SWES (including, without limitation,
the blades of any turbines) shall comply with the generally applicable setback
restrictions for the zoning district in which the SWES is located and with the
following additional setback restrictions, to be measured from the base of the
SWES tower:
         (a)   A SWES may not be constructed within or over any utility, water,
sewer, or other type of recorded easement.
         (b)   A SWES may not be constructed within 10 feet from a top bluff
edge or on a bluff of Lake Michigan.
         (c)   A SWES shall be set back from all lot lines, third party
transmission lines, and communication towers a minimum distance equal to 110%
of the height of the SWES.
         (d)   Guy wires and anchoring systems for a SWES shall not be located
closer than 30 feet from any lot line or public right-of-way.
         (e)   No SWES may be located in the front yard or required side yard
of any property.
      (6)   Diameter. Unless authorized pursuant to a special use permit, the
diameter of a SWES shall not exceed ten feet.
      (7)   Color and sun glint. All SWES facilities shall be finished in
either off-white, light gray or another neutral color. The finish shall be flat
or matte, so as to reduce incidence of sun glint. The required coloration and
finish shall be maintained throughout the life of the SWES.
      (8)   Signage.
         (a)   No SWES shall have any advertising material, writing, picture,
or signage other than warning signage, turbine tower identification, or
manufacturer or ownership information.
         (b)   Except for meteorological and weather devices, or bird flight
diverters on guy wires, no flag, decorative sign, streamers, pennants, ribbons,
spinners or waiving, fluttering or revolving devices shall be attached to any
portion of the SWES.
         (c)   One or more warning signs, no less than 18 square inches and no
greater than two square feet in area, shall be posted at the base of an SWES
tower. The sign shall include a notice of no trespassing, a warning of high
voltage, and the emergency telephone number of the owner of the SWES.
         (d)   The sign area of any sign displaying the manufacturer’s
identification or ownership information shall be no larger than one square
foot.
      (9)   Climb prevention. The base of the tower shall not be climbable for
a vertical distance of 15 feet from the base, unless the tower is enclosed with
a locked barrier that is at least eight feet in height.
      (10)   Lighting.
         (a)   SWES facilities shall comply with all applicable FAA lighting
regulations and any other federal, state or village lighting regulations.
         (b)   SWES facilities shall not be artificially lighted except as
expressly required by the FAA or as necessary for the safety of personnel
performing maintenance of, or repairs to, the facilities. Any such artificial
lighting shall be shielded so that no glare extends beyond the property lines
of the property on which the SWES is located.
         (c)   Any security or emergency lighting shall be used only to the
minimum extent necessary.
         (d)   In order to reduce the impact on local wildlife, only red, dual
red-and-white strobe, strobe-like, or flashing lights shall be used for SWES
facilities.
      (11)   Environmental impact.
         (a)   SWES facilities, and the property on which such facilities are
located, shall be maintained in accordance with the environmental plan
submitted pursuant to §
153.247(D)(4).
         (b)   In order to reduce potential bird perching and nesting, all
towers used for SWES facilities shall be designed as enclosed tubular
structures with pointed tops (monopoles), rather than lattice structures,
unless alternative mitigation strategies are otherwise approved by the village.
      (12)   Burial of electrical wires. All electrical wires and lines
connecting to the SWES facilities shall be installed underground and their
location shall be reported to the village.
      (13)   Sworn statement. Not less than once every 12 months, the owner of
each SWES shall submit to the village a sworn statement that the operation and
maintenance of the WES has been performed in compliance with all applicable
directions issued by the manufacturer thereof, along with supporting evidence
as may be requested by the village.
   (E)   Indemnification. Each special use permit for a WES shall be subject to
at least the following: The owner of each WES, and the owner of the property on
which the WES is located, shall jointly and severally defend, indemnify and
hold harmless the village and its officials from and against any and all
claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs,
expenses and liabilities whatsoever including attorneys fees arising out of any
permit, approval, inspection, or other act or omission of the village, or any
acts or omissions of the owners concerning the operation of the WES project
without limitation, whether said liability is premised on contract or on tort.
   (F)   Subsequent development. No WES that is constructed and operated in
compliance with this subsection shall be deemed to be in violation of this
subsection solely as a result of any construction on any nonparticipating
property that occurs after the first date of operation of the WES.
(Ord. 1082, passed 5-21-2012)
§ 153.039 ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   Adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in all zoning
districts as either principal or accessory uses.
(Ord. 1270, passed 10-26-2020)
§§ 153.040 THROUGH 153.044 RESERVED.
PART B. KENILWORTH SIGN CODE
§ 153.045 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The following statement of purpose and intent is hereby adopted:
   (A)   The purpose of this part is to:
      (1)   Establish a comprehensive system of sign regulation which
accommodates and balances the need for a well-maintained, safe and attractive
community with the need for effective communication and business identification
within the village as an important means by which to preserve the village as a
desirable community in which to live and do business.
      (2)   Encourage high quality and excellence in the design of signs
throughout the village so as to promote and enhance the beauty and aesthetic
character of the residential neighborhoods and protect residential property
values.
      (3)   Encourage high quality and excellence in the design of signs in the
“B” Business District to promote and enhance the village’s ability to attract
new sources of economic development and protect property values in the “B”
Business District.
      (4)   Promote the public health, safety and general welfare through
reasonable, consistent and non-discriminatory sign regulations.
   (B)   This part is further and more specifically intended to:
      (1)   Protect, conserve and enhance the natural beauty of village
landscape, parks and beaches and the aesthetic quality of the village’s
tranquil and historic residential neighborhoods, so as to preserve the unique
character of the community and to protect property values within the village.
      (2)   Establish standards relating to the time, manner, placement and
physical characteristics of signs within the village to ensure that they are
adequate to meet essential communication needs within the village while
safeguarding the rights of the public and individual residents to a safe,
healthful and attractive environment free of visual clutter or litter.
      (3)   Encourage and allow signs that are appropriate to the zoning
district in which they are located and consistent with the category of use and
function to which they pertain.
      (4)   Protect community aesthetics and property values by ensuring that
signs are in harmony with nearby buildings, neighborhoods and conforming signs
and by precluding signs that create a nuisance to the nearby properties or
neighborhoods as a result of their size, height, illumination, brightness or
movement.
      (5)   Encourage the pedestrian-friendly nature of the village’s single,
small business district and enhance the aesthetics of the business district by
curtailing the size, height and number of signs and regulating the design,
quality and quantity of graphic sign elements to the minimum necessary to
identify business locations and the nature of the businesses.
      (6)   Restrict signs which distract or obstruct the vision of motorists,
bicyclists and pedestrians in the “B” Business District, so as to minimize
unsafe visual or auditory distractions that might otherwise arise from the
unnecessary or confusing proliferation or placement of signs or from the
excessive illumination, height, size, movement or noise of signs competing for
the attention of motorists, pedestrians and bicyclists.
      (7)   Ensure that all signs in the “B” Business District are proportioned
to the scale of, and are architecturally compatible with, existing land use,
buildings and nearby residential neighborhoods.
      (8)   Protect property values by precluding, to the maximum extent
possible, signs that create a nuisance to the occupancy or use of adjacent
properties as a result of their size, height, illumination, brightness or
movement.
      (9)   Preserve the historically subtle and understated lighting present
throughout the village by regulating sign illumination.
      (10)   Protect the right to express non-commercial opinions in all zoning
districts, subject to balanced and reasonable restrictions on the size, height,
location, timing and number of signs so as to safeguard the right of all
residents to a safe, healthful and attractive environment free of visual
clutter.
      (11)   Regulate the secondary effects of speech insofar as they adversely
affect community aesthetics and traffic, and bicycle and pedestrian safety,
rather than to censor speech or regulate viewpoints.
      (12)   Assure that all signs in the village are designed, constructed,
installed, and maintained in safe condition, and that portable, disposable
temporary signs do not become unsightly litter or pose a hazard to traffic or
pedestrians.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.046 TITLE AND SCOPE.
   This part shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Kenilworth Sign
Code”. The “Kenilworth Sign Code” governs and controls the location, erection,
use, display, design, size, materials, construction, installation, enlargement,
expansion, alteration, operation, maintenance, relocation and removal of all
signs and sign illumination within the village visible from any street,
sidewalk, or public or private common open space and is in addition to the
provisions of the building and construction regulations applicable to the
location, construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and electrical
wiring of signs and sign illumination and the provisions of, in any non-
residential district and for any special use in any residential district, the
appearance plan, and, in the Business District, the Kenilworth Design
Guidelines— Business District, applicable to signs.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 1098, passed 4-29-2013)
§ 153.047 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, use, display, construct, install,
enlarge, expand, alter, operate, maintain, relocate or remove any sign or sign
illumination in any zoning district except in conformance with the regulations
of this part.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.048 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A permanent sign which advertises, identifies or informs of
a business, service or use no longer being conducted on the lot on which the
sign is located, or on the premises to which the sign relates, and which has
been discontinued for a period of 30 days or longer.
   ADDRESS SIGN. A permanent sign using numerals to identify the location of a
business, residence, building or structure and such other location information
required by statute or government order, rule or regulation.
   ADVERTISING. Text and/or graphics on a sign promoting or offering for sale
products, goods or services.
   A-FRAME SIGN. A daily-display temporary portable sign, usually with two sign
faces in the shape of an “A”, “T”, or “I”, or a box on wheels, or a circular
form, intended for daily display or one-day display on the ground, not
permanently attached to any structure and easily movable.
   ALLOWED SIGN. Any sign allowed to be located, erected, used, displayed,
constructed, installed, enlarged, expanded, altered, operated, maintained,
relocated or removed within the village in conformance with the regulations of
this part.
   ARCHITECTURAL DETAIL SIGN. A permanent wall or monument sign which is carved
or etched into the façade of a building or independent structure or otherwise
incorporated into an architectural element of a building or structure, masonry
façade, archway, pillar or fountain and integrated into and subordinate to the
overall design of the architectural element.
   AWNING. A permanent structure consisting of a metal frame covered with
canvas, fabric, vinyl or other similar flexible material attached to a building
and extended over windows or doors or along a public sidewalk as a protection
from the elements.
   AWNING SIGN. A permanent sign painted, printed or otherwise permanently
affixed to an awning. An awning that is considered an architectural element of
a building and is not used for identifying the premises or the goods or
services sold on or off the premises is not considered a sign.
   BANNER SIGN. A short-term temporary portable sign printed or displayed on
fabric, canvas, vinyl or other flexible material with or without an enclosing
frame, or intended to be attached or suspended at two ends or continuously
across the top and bottom or the long side.
   BARBER POLE SIGN. A permanent wall or window sign in the shape of a
cylindrical pole in a traditional red, white and blue spiral striped design
that identifies the premises as a barber shop.
   BILLBOARD SIGN. An off-premises commercial message sign.
   BOOSTER SIGN. A temporary or short-term temporary portable sign celebrating
or acknowledging athletic, community, civic, philanthropic, religious or
educational programs, teams, seasons, events or the like.
   CANOPY. Any permanent structure consisting of a metal frame covered with
canvas, fabric, vinyl or other similar flexible material attached to a building
for the purpose of shielding an entrance to the residential portion of the
building from the elements.
   CANOPY SIGN. A permanent sign painted, printed or otherwise permanently
affixed to a canopy.
   CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN. A permanent sign intended to be frequently altered
mechanically or by hand using characters, letters or illustrations that can be
changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A
sign designed to allow plaques to be replaced occasionally is not a changeable
message sign.
   CIVIC EVENT SIGN. A short-term temporary portable sign announcing a
community, civic, philanthropic, religious, educational or similar event of
interest to the community.
   COMBINED SIGN AREA. The aggregate total square footage of permanent
commercial message signs allowed per occupant in the “B” Business District
including any combination of wall, window, projecting, awning and monument
signs. The square footage of any exempt signs is not included when calculating
combined sign area.
   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE SIGN. A sign that announces or offers for sale products,
goods or services, or that announces or directs attention to a business,
product, service, profession, commodity or other commercial activity or that
proposes a commercial transaction.
   CONSTRUCTION SITE SIGN. A temporary sign displayed on the site of ongoing
construction.
   DAILY-DISPLAY TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign not permanently installed, affixed or
mounted and not intended for a permanent use, which is intended for daily
display or one-day display by a business, entity, institution, organization or
event during customary operating hours.
   DEMOLITION SITE SIGN. A temporary sign in the B, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-
4 zoning districts providing notice of a Building Review Commission meeting to
review a demolition application for a building pursuant to the building and
construction regulations.
   DIGITAL SIGN or ELECTRONIC VARIABLE CHANGING SIGN (“EVCS”). Any
electronically programmed variable changing permanent sign depicting action,
motion, light or color changes through full motion video, electrical or
mechanical means, or which uses a digital or dynamic display device to present
the visual image, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display,
the sign structure itself, or any other component of the sign. A digital sign
or EVCS includes, without limitation, any sign which incorporates a flashing,
blinking or animated display, or an electronic display with rotating panels, or
LED lights manipulated through digital input, or “digital ink,” or any other
method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or
displays, or digital images of any kind projected onto a sidewalk, wall or
fence. A digital sign or EVCS also includes any sign that incorporates
television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED screens,
HD screens, 3-D technology, video boards and/or holographic displays or the
like to attract attention.
   DILAPIDATED SIGN. A permanent sign which is otherwise structurally sound,
but is in need of painting, maintenance or repair.
   DIRECTORY SIGN. A permanent sign, not advertising, which identifies the
location of occupants of a building or a group of buildings on the lot on which
it is displayed.
   ELECTION SIGN. A temporary portable sign announcing or supporting political
candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election.
   EXEMPT SIGN. An allowed sign for which no building permit and certificate of
appropriateness is required prior to its location, erection, use, display,
construction, installation, enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation,
maintenance, relocation or removal.
   EXTENSIONS, CUT-OUTS, or EMBELLISH- MENTS. Physical extensions to a
permanent sign or its structure that extend beyond the sign area or sign face
to draw attention to a sign message.
   EXTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN. A permanent sign, any part of which is
illuminated from an external artificial light source mounted either on the
sign, on another structure or on the ground.
   FAÇADE. The front of a building facing a public way.
   FLAG. Any fabric or bunting containing distinct colors, patterns or symbols,
used as an ornamental flag or as a symbol of government, political subdivision,
business, church, school, institution or other entity, and designed to be flown
or hung as a flag.
   FLASHING or BLINKING SIGN. A sign which produces intermittent illumination,
including, without limitation, revolving or rotating lighting; blinking or
flashing lighting; constant lighting whereby the brilliance, intensity or color
is varied by mechanical or other means; traveling or chasing lights or chaser
border; or rotating beacons or searchlights. A sign with reflective paint or
tape which is intended to be intermittently illuminated by independent light
sources (such as street lights, headlights or traffic lights) is a flashing or
blinking sign.
   FREE EXPRESSION MESSAGE. Any noncommercial viewpoint or free speech message
on a sign of a political, religious or ideological nature.
   FREE EXPRESSION SIGN. A sign containing only a free expression message.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign supported by one or more vertical pole(s), support
(s), pipe(s), wooden or metal beam(s) or post(s), standing on or inserted into
the ground independent of any other building or other structure.
   FRONT FAÇADE. The first floor wall area façade parallel or most nearly
parallel to the public street.
   GOVERNMENTAL SIGN. A sign erected, displayed and maintained pursuant to and
in discharge of any governmental function or required to be displayed and
maintained by any law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
   HAZARD or NO TRESPASSING SIGN. A sign either informing the public of a
danger or hazard existing on, or adjacent to, the lot on which it is located,
or issuing a warning to trespassers.
   HOLIDAY DECORATIONS. Temporary portable signs in the nature of decorations,
incidental to and customarily associated with, any national, state, local,
cultural or religious holiday.
   ILLEGAL SIGN. A sign located, erected, used, displayed, constructed,
installed, enlarged, expanded, altered, operated, maintained or relocated in
violation of the regulations set forth in this part.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN. A small sign, emblem or decal, not advertising, informing
the public of an incidental service or activity available or occurring on the
premises, including, without limitation, a credit card acceptance sign, a sign
indicating hours of business, a sign prohibiting solicitation, and a sign
indicating that an invisible pet fence is present. Security signs are not
incidental signs.
   INFORMATIONAL SIGN. A permanent sign, that is not a governmental sign and
does not contain advertising, the principal purpose of which is to inform the
public of the location of parking, or to provide directions to motorists or
pedestrians, including directions for entrances and exits, parking
restrictions, loading zones, and handicapped parking.
   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN. A permanent sign which functions to identify or support
the activities of an institution, government or non-profit organization such as
a park district, public utility, municipality, school district, church,
community center, or similar entity and does not advertise or offer for sale
any products, goods or services.
   INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY. A lot, or a portion of a lot, the occupant of which
is a government or non-profit organization, such as a park district, public
utility, municipality, school district, church, community center or similar
entity.
   INTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign located inside a building illuminated by a
light source and clearly visible from the exterior of the building through a
window or a door.
   INTERNALLY-ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign illuminated by a light source that is
enclosed by the sign face or located within the sign.
   LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign that was lawfully erected, but no longer
complies with provisions of federal, state or village laws, ordinances or
regulations as a result of changed conditions, including the enactment of this
part. A sign that was in violation of any village law, ordinance, or regulation
as of the date of the enactment of this part is not a legal nonconforming
signs.
   LIGHT POLE CIVIC BANNER SIGN. A temporary banner sign erected pursuant to a
village-approved civic event sign plan and intended for display on light poles
in the village for the purpose of announcing a community, civic, philanthropic,
educational or similar event of interest to the community.
   LOGO. The symbol or other graphic representation of a business, institution,
organization or public body.
   MASTER SIGN PLAN. A plan submitted to and approved by the Architectural
Review Commission, describing and depicting a coordinated signage plan for a
building or a development with multiple buildings.
   MEMORIAL PLAQUE SIGN. A permanent sign consisting of an inscribed plaque or
tablet memorializing or honoring a person, event, structure or the like.
   MOBILE BILLBOARD SIGN. A sign, including any digital sign or ECVS sign,
which is attached to, mounted on or carried by a motor vehicle, trailer,
bicycle or other vehicle on wheels, including a storage pod designed to be
moved on wheels, whether the pod is stationary or not and with or without
wheels attached, and including any vehicle whose principal function is to serve
as a stationary sign for an extended period of time and which is parked in a
location which is visible from the public right-of-way. A sign on a vehicle
which is used in the normal day-to-day operation of a business and regularly
moves from the parked location is not a mobile billboard sign.
   MONUMENT SIGN. A sign mounted on a permanent, freestanding structure
independent of any other building or structure, with a decorative base at
ground level or wood, brick, masonry, or the like which surrounds the posts or
beams, if any, supporting the sign.
   NEON ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign which incorporates lighted neon tubes or other
fluorescing gas.
   NOISE OR ATTENTION-GETTING SIGN. A sign which emits sound, vapor, smoke,
odor, particles or gaseous matter to attract attention.
   OCCUPANT. The owner, tenant, business or other user of all or a portion of a
building.
   OFF-PREMISES COMMERCIAL MESSAGE SIGN. A commercial message sign that
announces or offers for sale products, goods or services, or that announces or
directs attention to a business, product, service, profession, commodity, or
other commercial activity or that proposes a commercial transaction that occurs
on premises other than the lot upon which the sign is displayed, erected,
operated or located. Off-premises commercial message sign and billboard sign
shall have the same meaning in this part.
   ON-PREMISES COMMERCIAL MESSAGE SIGN. A commercial message sign that
announces or offers for sale products, goods or services, or that announces or
directs attention to a business, product, service, profession, commodity, or
other commercial activity or that proposes a commercial transaction that occurs
on the lot upon which the sign is displayed, erected, operated or located.
   OPEN HOUSE SIGN. A one day daily-display temporary portable sign directing
people to homes which are for sale and open to the public for physical viewing
without prior appointment.
   PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign which, when installed, affixed or mounted, is
intended for permanent use. For the purpose of this part, any sign intended to
be used and displayed for longer than 12 months from the date of erection or
installation shall be deemed a PERMANENT SIGN.
   PERSONAL EVENT SIGN. A short-term temporary sign located on private
residential property celebrating a notable occasion or a personal event, such
as a birth, birthday, graduation, or the like.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A temporary, short-term temporary, or daily-display temporary
portable sign, not intended to be permanently attached to a building, structure
or the ground, and either made of temporary material such as paper, cardboard,
foam board, vinyl, flexible fabric, canvas or the like, or specifically
designed to be easily moved or carried by a person, such as an A-frame or a
chalkboard on wheels, or designed to be worn by a person, or thrown by a
person. PORTABLE SIGNS include, without limitation, A-frame signs, signs on
wheels, sandwich boards, inflatable signs, advertising umbrellas, wind signs,
beacons and searchlights, mascots, signs worn by persons and human sign
spinners.
   PRIVATE SALE SIGN. A one day daily-display temporary portable sign
advertising a private sale of personal property from a residence, including a
garage sale, yard sale, moving sale, auction, estate sale or the like.
   PROHIBITED SIGN. Any sign not allowed to be located, erected, used,
displayed, constructed, installed, enlarged, expanded, altered, operated,
maintained or relocated within the village.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A permanent sign which is attached to and extends out from
a building facade or wall in such a manner that the sign face is perpendicular
or at an angle to the building facade or wall.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property in the village which is owned and/or operated
by any public body, including municipal property owned and operated by the
village (such as streets, sidewalks and parkways), property owned and/or
operated by the Kenilworth Park District, property owned and operated by
Kenilworth School District No. 38.
   PUBLIC UTILITY SIGN. A sign erected by a public utility or other provider of
public services, including any sign warning of danger or hazardous conditions
or delineating the presence of underground cables, gas lines or similar
facilities.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary portable sign placed on property to inform the
general public that the property is available for lease or sale.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign located on or attached to the roof of a building.
   ROTATING OR MOVING SIGN. A sign that contains any moving, revolving or
rotating parts; turns on an axis allowing different faces or images to be
viewed from a single location; revolves vertically; or has visible mechanical
movement of any kind designed to attract attention.
   SCOREBOARD. A permanent sign located on or adjacent to an athletic field
that displays information and/or statistics pertinent to games or activities
conducted on the premises.
   SECURITY SIGN. A sign which announces that a security system or alarm is
maintained on the property or premises.
   SHORT-TERM TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign not permanently installed, affixed or
mounted, and not intended for permanent use, which is intended for use and
display for up to, and not more than, 21 days.
   SHORT-TERM TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL MESSAGE WINDOW SIGN. A short-term temporary
commercial message sign affixed to the interior of a window of a commercial
establishment advertising a sale of merchandise, products, goods or services,
or a seasonal activity, grand opening or similar event.
   SHORT-TERM TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL MESSAGE WINDOW DISPLAY SIGN. A short- term
temporary commercial message sign that is suspended from the ceiling or set on
the floor or otherwise supported, and visible from any street or sidewalk, and
that is part of an interior display in a window of merchandise, products, goods
or services sold.
   SIGN. Any fixed, flexible, or moving device, fixture, structure, placard,
visual representation or visual entity, which uses writing, text, color, form,
graphics, symbols, illumination, architectural elements, or any electronic or
digital changeable movement, to inform, direct, warn, announce, identify,
advertise, attract attention, or to communicate information of any kind to the
public.
   SIGN AREA. The total area of the face of a sign in square feet.
   SNIPE SIGN. A temporary portable off- premises commercial or non-commercial
message sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise
attached to telephone poles, utility poles, fences, trees or rocks, or dug or
pounded into the ground on property not lawfully belonging to the person or
entity posting the sign and posted without the property owner’s consent.
   STREET FURNITURE SIGN. A sign consisting of advertising displays positioned
at close proximity to pedestrians for eye-level viewing, and displayed on
temporary or permanent fixtures such as transit shelters, newsstands, kiosks,
benches, umbrellas and the like.
   TEMPORARY PARKING AND TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN. A daily-display temporary
portable sign, not advertising, placed on private property, on public property,
or in the public right-of- way, to assist the general public with parking and
traffic flow including, without limitation, a sign placed in the street to
caution motorists to slow down for a school zone; a courtesy “No Parking” sign
to facilitate orderly child drop-off and pick-up at elementary and nursery
schools; and a courtesy “Valet Parking” sign for a public or private gathering.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, not permanently installed, affixed or mounted and
not intended for permanent use. For purposes of this part, any sign with an
intended use of less than 12 months shall be deemed a temporary sign.
   UNDER-AWNING SIGN. A sign attached to and/or mounted under an awning.
   UNDER-CANOPY SIGN. A sign attached to and/or mounted under a canopy.
   UNPROTECTED MESSAGE SIGN. A sign with any message, speech or image which is
not protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and/or
the corollary provisions of the Illinois Constitution, including, without
limitation, misleading or deceptive commercial messages, messages which promote
illegal products or services, and messages which meet the legal definition of
obscenity.
   UNSAFE SIGN. A sign that presents a threat of harm to person or property
because it is not properly secured, is structurally unsound, has defective
parts, is unlawfully erected or installed, is in danger of falling, presents
any fire, electrical safety or shock hazard, or is otherwise a danger or hazard
to the public.
   VANDALIZED SIGN. Any sign that has been painted, tagged, damaged or defaced
by acts of vandalism.
   WALL SIGN. A permanent sign attached to or erected against the wall of a
building or structure in a manner that the sign face is on a parallel plane to
the wall.
   WALL WRAP or WALL MURAL SIGN. A commercial message sign, whether painted
directly on the exterior surface of a building, wall, or fence, or, using the
medium of vinyl or similar materials, applied to or suspended from the exterior
surface of a building, wall or fence or wrapped around a building.
   WIND SIGN. A short-term temporary portable sign, not a flag, consisting of
objects or material that move upon being subjected to pressure by the wind,
including banners, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, captive balloons or
inflatable figures.
   WINDOW SIGN. A permanent sign applied, attached or in contact with the
interior of a window, the glass surface of a door, or located within five feet
of the interior side of a window or displayed so that it is visible from the
exterior of the window or door.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.049 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM REQUIREMENT TO OBTAIN BUILDING PERMIT AND
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   Exempt signs are allowed signs which are exempt from the requirement to
obtain a building permit and a certificate of appropriateness prior to
locating, erecting, using, displaying, enlarging or expanding such signs.
Exempt signs are subject to all additional regulations, standards, restrictions
and limitations set forth below, including, where applicable, the requirement
to obtain an administrative sign permit from the Administrative Official.
   (A)   Exempt permanent signs. The following permanent signs are exempt signs
allowed in all zoning districts, except as otherwise specified:
      (1)   Address sign. Address signs are allowed signs in all districts and
shall not exceed one square foot in area in the “B” Business District or two
square feet in area in all other zoning districts for each officially assigned
address, or such other size required by law, ordinance, rule or regulation. In
all zoning districts, a freestanding address sign shall not exceed three feet
in height measured from the ground. An address sign must be clear and readable
from the street with a minimum letter or numeral height of four inches.
      (2)   Directory sign. Directory signs are allowed signs only in the “B”
Business District, shall not exceed two square feet in area and five feet in
height measured from the ground, shall be limited to one such sign per
building, shall not be illuminated, and shall require an administrative sign
permit.
      (3)   Governmental sign. Governmental signs are allowed signs in all
zoning districts. The size and placement of governmental signs shall be in
accordance any applicable local, state or federal law, ordinance, rule or
regulation governing such signs and shall not be illuminated, unless otherwise
required by such law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
      (4)   Hazard or no trespassing sign. Hazard and no trespassing signs are
allowed signs in all zoning districts, shall not exceed one square foot in area
and five feet in height measured from the ground, shall be limited to the
number necessary to accomplish their intended purpose, shall be placed at such
locations on the lot to achieve their intended purpose, and shall not be
illuminated.
      (5)   Incidental sign. Incidental signs are allowed signs in all zoning
districts, shall not exceed a combined total area of two square feet, shall not
exceed five feet in height measured from the ground, and shall not be
illuminated.
      (6)   Informational sign. Informational signs are allowed signs in all
zoning districts, shall not exceed two square feet in area and five feet in
height measured from the ground, shall be limited to the number necessary to
accomplish the intended purpose, shall be placed at such locations on the
premises to achieve their intended purpose, shall not be illuminated, and shall
require an administrative sign permit.
      (7)   Memorial plaque sign. Memorial plaque signs are allowed signs in
all zoning districts and shall not exceed one square foot in area. All memorial
plaque signs shall be mounted flat against a building, on a monument stone, or
another permanent surface. A memorial plaque sign shall be constructed of
durable materials such as bronze, stone, or concrete, shall not be illuminated,
and shall require an administrative sign permit.
      (8)   Public utility sign. Public utility signs are allowed signs in all
zoning districts. The size and placement of public utility signs in all zoning
districts shall be as required by any applicable law, ordinance, rule or
regulation governing such signs and shall not be illuminated, unless otherwise
required by such law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
      (9)   Security sign. Security signs are allowed signs in all zoning
districts, shall not exceed one square foot in area and five feet in height
measured from the ground, and shall not be illuminated.
   (B)   Exempt temporary, short-term temporary, and daily-display temporary
signs.
      (1)   Exempt temporary signs. The following temporary signs are exempt
signs allowed to be displayed for not more than 12 months in all zoning
districts, except as otherwise specified.
         (a) Booster sign. Booster signs are allowed signs on private
residential property in the “B”, “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, and “R-4” zoning
districts, shall not exceed three square feet in area and three feet in height
measured from the ground, shall not be illuminated, and shall not be posted
without the consent of the lot owner.
         (b)   Construction site sign.
            1.   In the “B” Business District, a construction site sign is
allowed in connection with the construction or renovation of a building or
occupant’s space and is limited to no more than one sign per zoning lot
frontage. Such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area, shall not be more
than five feet in height measured from the ground, and shall not be
illuminated. A construction site sign shall not be displayed until all
necessary permits and approvals for construction have been granted by the
village and an administrative sign permit has been obtained from the
Administrative Official. A construction site sign in the “B” Business District
shall contain the information required by the building and construction
regulations and shall be removed in conformance with those regulations. Such a
sign may also contain the project name, architect, contractor and/or engineer
and their telephone numbers for the project under construction, and must be
removed within seven days after the earlier of completion of construction and
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, final inspection or expiration of a
building permit.
            2.   In all other zoning districts, the only allowed construction
site sign shall be the sign provided by the village, shall only contain the
information required by the building and construction regulations, and shall be
removed in conformance with those regulations.
         (c)   Demolition site sign. In the “B”, “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, and “R-4”
zoning districts, a demolition site sign is an allowed sign on property which
is the subject of a demolition application pursuant to the building and
construction regulations.
         (d)   Election sign. Election signs are allowed on private property
(other than institutional property) in the “B”, “R-1”, “R-2”, “R3”, and “R-4”
zoning districts, with the consent of the property owner, not to exceed six
square feet in area per candidate or position on a referendum question and five
feet in height measured from the ground, and shall not be illuminated.
         (e)   Flag. Two flags, each having a size less than 24 square feet in
area, may be displayed on each lot with the lot owner's consent. Each lot in
the village is limited to one flagpole not to exceed 14 feet in height. A flag
may also be displayed from a bracket attached to a building or structure. In
the “B” Business District, any commercial message flag shall be included in the
combined sign area and shall not be illuminated.
         (f)   Free expression sign. Free expression signs are allowed signs at
all times on private property in the “B”, “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3” and “R-4” zoning
districts, with the property owner’s consent, shall not exceed six square feet
in area and five feet in height measured from the ground, and shall not be
illuminated.
         (g)   Holiday decoration. Holiday decorations, including illuminated
decorations, are allowed in all zoning districts as temporary signs.
         (h)   Light pole civic banner sign. Light pole civic banner signs are
allowed in such zoning districts as are set forth in a village-approved civic
sign plan. Each such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area when
displayed on the village’s light poles.
         (i)   Real estate sign.
            1.   Residential District. One freestanding real estate sign is
allowed on private residential property offered for sale or lease in the “R-1",
“R-2", “R-3", and “R-4" zoning districts as a temporary sign, shall not exceed
six square feet in area and five feet in height measured from the ground, and
shall not be illuminated.
            2.   Business District. In the “B” Business District on the first
floor front façade or street level, one nonilluminated wall, window or
freestanding real estate sign is allowed as a temporary sign per occupant space
offered for sale or lease, and shall not exceed 12 square feet in area. A
freestanding sign shall not exceed five feet in height measured from the
ground. A wall sign may only be installed above the top of first floor glazing
and may not be installed higher than the second floor window sill of the
building or 14 feet measured from the ground or sidewalk next to the front
façade, whichever is lower. For private residential property above the first
floor in the “B” Business District, real estate signs may only be window signs,
shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall not be illuminated.
            3.   Removal and reduction. A real estate sign must be removed no
later than 14 days following the execution of a sales contract or rental lease
for the property or occupant’s space. However, in the case of multi-unit
developments or structures in the “B” Business District, within 21 days
following the date upon which such development or structure is 90% or more sold
or leased, any real estate sign must be removed or, for any remaining area not
sold or leased, replaced with a sign not to exceed six square feet in area.
            4.   General. The name, address, and telephone number of the person
responsible for removal of a real estate sign shall be clearly marked on the
sign.
      (2)   Exempt short-term temporary signs. The following short-term
temporary signs are exempt signs allowed to be displayed for up to 21 days in
all zoning districts, except as otherwise specified.
         (a)   Civic event sign. Civic event signs which are banner signs or
freestanding signs are allowed as short-term temporary signs with the property
owner’s consent on institutional property, shall not exceed 24 square feet in
area, shall not be secured to trees, shall not be illuminated, and shall be
removed within seven days following the event.
         (b)   Personal event sign. Personal event signs which are banner
signs, wind signs, freestanding signs, or other portable signs are allowed as
short-term temporary signs with the property owner’s consent, on private
residential property in the “B”, “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3", and “R-4” zoning
districts, shall not exceed 24 square feet in area, and shall not be
illuminated.
         (c)   Short-term temporary commercial message window sign. Short-term
temporary commercial message window signs are allowed in the “B” Business
District and shall not be illuminated. The total area of all allowed short-term
temporary, temporary and permanent window signs shall not exceed 30% of the
total aggregate window area on the first floor façade.
         (d)   Short-term temporary commercial message window display sign.
Short-term temporary commercial message window display signs are allowed in the
“B” Business District and shall not be illuminated. The total area of all
allowed short-term temporary, temporary and permanent window signs shall not
exceed 30% of the window area.
         (e)   Wind sign. In all zoning districts other than the “B” Business
District, wind signs are allowed with the property owner’s consent, shall not
exceed 24 square feet in area, and shall not be illuminated.
      (3)   Exempt daily-display temporary signs. The following daily-display
temporary signs are exempt signs and are allowed to be displayed in all zoning
districts on a daily basis or a one-day basis during customary operating hours,
except as otherwise specified.
         (a)   Open house sign. Open house signs are allowed for one-day daily
display in the “B”, “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3” and “R-4” zoning districts only, shall
not exceed three square feet in area or three feet in height measured from the
ground, shall not be illuminated, and must be removed at the close of the open
house event.
         (b)   Private sale sign. Private sale signs are allowed for one-day
daily display on private residential property in the “B”, “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”,
and “R-4” zoning districts with the property owner’s consent, shall not exceed
three square feet in area or three feet in height measured from the ground,
shall be not be illuminated, and must be removed at the close of the private
sale event.
         (c)   Temporary parking and traffic control sign. Temporary parking
and traffic control signs are allowed for one-day or daily display only, shall
not exceed three square feet in area or three feet in height measured from the
ground, shall not be illuminated, and must be removed each day at the close of
the customary operating hours of the business, institution, organization or
event.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.050 PROHIBITED SIGNS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   It is unlawful to locate, erect, use, display, enlarge, expand, alter,
operate, or maintain any of the following prohibited signs in any zoning
district, except as otherwise specifically provided below:
   (A)   Abandoned sign.
   (B)   Billboard sign.
   (C)   Changeable message sign.
   (D)   A-frame sign, prohibited only in the “B” Business District.
   (E)   Banner sign, prohibited only in the “B” Business District.
   (F)   Digital sign or electronic variable changing sign.
   (G)   Dilapidated sign.
   (H)   Extensions, cut-outs, embellishments.
   (I)   Flashing or blinking sign.
   (J)   Illegal sign.
   (K)   Interior illuminated sign.
   (L)   Internally illuminated sign.
   (M)   Mobile billboard.
   (N)   Neon illuminated sign.
   (O)   Noise or attention-getting sign.
   (P)   Roof sign.
   (Q)   Rotating or moving sign.
   (R)   Snipe sign.
   (S)   Street furniture sign.
   (T)   Under awning sign.
   (U)   Under canopy sign.
   (V)   Unprotected message sign.
   (W)   Unsafe sign.
   (X)   Vandalized sign.
   (Y)   Wall wrap or wall mural sign.
   (Z)   Wind sign, prohibited only in the “B” Business District.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.051 GENERAL REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR ALLOWED SIGNS IN ALL ZONING
DISTRICTS.
   The following general regulations and standards shall apply to all allowed
signs in all zoning districts:
   (A)   Responsibility for compliance. The responsibility for compliance with
this part rests jointly and severally upon the sign owner, all parties holding
the present right of possession and control of the lot on which a sign is
located, mounted, installed or displayed, and the owner of the lot.
   (B)   Owner’s consent. No sign may be placed on private property without the
consent of the owner of the lot, and such occupants that owner may have
provided with the right to consent by agreement or contract.
   (C)   Restrictions on signs on public property. No signs may be erected upon
public property, with the exception of governmental signs, public utility
signs, and such other signs specifically authorized by the village. Any sign
placed on public property without authorization is an illegal sign under this
part and may be summarily removed by the village without notice.
   (D)   Message substitution. Subject to the lot owner’s consent, a
noncommercial message of any type may be substituted, in whole or in part, for
any commercial message or any other noncommercial message on a currently
existing sign, including a legal nonconforming sign, without consideration of
message content, provided that the sign structure is legal. Such substitution
of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This
provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a
lot, nor does it alter or waive the requirement that a sign have a building
permit and a certificate of appropriateness.
   (E)   Logo size. A logo on a sign is limited to no more than 15% of the
total sign area.
   (F)   Building and construction requirements. All signs shall comply with
the building and construction regulations and shall be designed and constructed
adequately and safely to support their weight and to withstand wind and other
stresses to which they may be subjected. Supports and braces shall be an
integral part of the sign design. All signs attached to a building shall be
installed and maintained so that wall penetrations are watertight and the
structure does not exceed allowable stresses of supporting materials. All
fasteners used to attach signs to a structure or building shall be properly
sized for the design loads and material of the support, have a minimum cross-
section diameter of one-quarter inch, and be made of corrosion resistant
material.
   (G)   Obstruction of access ways. No sign shall be located, erected,
installed, relocated, maintained, enlarged, expanded or otherwise permitted to
obstruct or prevent free ingress and egress from any window, door, fire escape
or stairway of any building or structure, or to obstruct light or ventilation
required by the building and construction regulations. No sign shall be
attached to an external fire escape.
   (H)   Traffic safety. No sign shall be located, erected, used, displayed,
enlarged, expanded, constructed, maintained or illuminated in such a manner
that it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or otherwise cause a safety hazard,
nuisance or distraction to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, including the
requirements of §§
153.075 and
153.099 of this chapter.
   (I)   Sign measurement.
      (1)   Computation of sign area. Sign area is calculated as follows:
         (a)   For signs on a background, the entire area of the background
shall be included in the calculation of the sign area, including any material
or color forming the sign face or background used to differentiate the sign
from the structure against which it is placed. Sign area does not include any
supporting framework or bracing, unless such framework or bracing is part of
the message or sign face.
         (b)   For a sign consisting of freestanding letters, graphics, logos,
images or symbols, the sign area is calculated by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle or triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the
outer limits of the freestanding letters, graphics, logos, images or symbols.
Sign area does not include any supporting framework or bracing, unless such
framework or bracing is part of the message or sign face. Window signs printed
on a transparent film and affixed to a window pane shall be considered
freestanding letters, graphics, logos, images or symbols, provided that the
portion of the transparent film around the perimeter of the sign message
maintains the transparent character of the window and does not contain any
items in the sign message.
         (c)   Any sign wording, illustration or element that is less than two
feet from any other sign wording, illustration or element shall be considered
shall be considered a single sign for purposes of calculating sign area. No
sign shall be nearer than two feet to any other sign or structure which is on
the same plane, other than a structure to which it is lawfully attached.
         (d)   When a sign has more than one display face, all faces shall be
included in determining the sign area, provided that, if the sign faces of a
two-faced sign are parallel and the distance between them does not exceed 12
inches, the sign area shall be measured as the area of one face.
         (e)   The sign area of free-form or sculptural (non-planar) signs is
calculated as 50% of the sum of the area of the four vertical sides of the
smallest cube that will encompass the sign.
      (2)   Measurement of sign height. When measuring sign height, the height
of the sign structure is included.
         (a)   The sign height of freestanding and monument signs shall be
measured from the unaltered, unimproved natural ground level and/or sidewalk
adjacent to the sign to the top of the sign and/or sign structure.
         (b)   The sign height of projecting signs shall be measured from the
unaltered, unimproved natural ground level and/or sidewalk under the sign to
the top of the sign, exclusive of decorative braces.
      (3)   Measurement of front façade. For purposes of calculating the
combined sign area allowed in §
153.052, the area of the occupant’s front façade shall be measured as follows:
         (a)   Single story building. The area of the front façade of an
occupant’s space in a single story building shall be measured in square feet by
multiplying the horizontal width of occupant’s space by the vertical distance
of the occupant’s space measured from ground level to the lowest point of the
roof, but in no case shall such vertical distance exceed 14 feet in height.
         (b)   Multistory building. The area of the front façade of an
occupant’s space in a multistory building shall be measured in square feet by
multiplying the horizontal width of the occupant’s space by the vertical
distance of the occupant’s space measured from ground level to the bottom of
the sill of the second story window, but in no case shall such vertical
distance exceed 14 feet measured from ground level.
   (J)   Sign illumination. In all zoning districts, sign illumination is
limited to allowed exterior illuminated signs. All other illuminated signs are
prohibited signs.
      (1)   Location and design of light source. The lights for exterior
illuminated signs shall be located, shielded and directed in such a manner that
the light source is not directly visible from any surrounding public or private
property. The use of unshielded lights, including incandescent bulbs on poles
or strung on poles, wires or any other type of support to illuminate a sign is
not allowed. All receptacles or devices used to provide external illumination
for wall signs shall not protrude more than nine inches from the face of the
sign except for ground lighting.
      (2)   Hours of illumination. Illumination for an exterior illuminated
sign is allowed from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., except that an exterior
illuminated sign may remain illuminated during such time as the business is
open to the general public, so long as such sign is not a public or private
nuisance and in no case later than 11:00 p.m.
      (3)   Level of illumination. The lighting intensity of an exterior
illuminated sign shall not exceed, and shall be maintained at or less than ten
foot candles when measured with a standard light meter at four feet from the
center of the face of the sign.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.052 REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT ALLOWED SIGNS IN THE “B”
BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Certificate of appropriateness required for permanent commercial
message sign. It shall be unlawful to locate, use, erect, display, construct,
install, enlarge, expand, alter, operate or maintain a permanent commercial
message sign in the “B” Business District unless and until a building permit
for the sign has been issued by the Administrative Official in accordance with
the building and construction regulations and a certificate of appropriateness
has been issued pursuant to §§
153.240 through
153.249of this chapter by the Architectural Review Commission.
   (B)   Regulations for permanent commercial message signs.
      (1)   Sign orientation. In the “B” Business District, all permanent
commercial message signs shall be oriented to face Green Bay Road or Park Drive
only, except as otherwise allowed in this part.
      (2)   Allowed permanent commercial message signs. The following permanent
signs are allowed as commercial message signs on the front façade of a building
in the “B” Business District, and each occupant in the “B” Business District
shall have the option of choosing the mix of such signs that is appropriate for
the occupant’s business, subject to the restriction on combined sign area
allowed, the provisions of any master sign plan for the property, and all other
restrictions and limitations set forth in this part:
         (a)   Wall signs.
         (b)   Window signs.
         (c)   Projecting signs.
         (d)   Awning signs.
         (e)   Monument signs.
      (3)   Total combined sign area allowed. The total combined sign area
allowed for permanent commercial message signs in the “B” Business District
shall be calculated as follows:
         (a)   For a single occupant building, the total combined sign area
allowed shall not exceed the lesser of 7.5% of the total area of the front
façade, or 25 square feet.
         (b)   For each occupant in a multi- occupant building, the total
combined sign area allowed for each occupant shall not exceed the lesser of
7.5% of the total area of the front façade of the occupant’s space, or 25
square feet.
         (c)   For a single-occupant building with frontage on two public
streets, the combined sign area allowed shall not exceed the lesser of 7.5% of
the total area of the front façade or 25 square feet.
      (4)   Wall signs.
         (a)   One wall sign is allowed on the first floor front façade of a
single occupant building and shall be considered part of the combined sign area
for such occupant.
         (b)   In multi-occupant buildings, one wall sign is allowed on the
front façade of each occupant’s space, and shall not exceed the allowed
combined sign area for each such occupant.
         (c)   A wall sign may only be installed above the top of first floor
glazing and may not be installed higher than the second floor window sill of
the building or 14 feet measured from the ground or sidewalk next to the front
façade, whichever is lower.
         (d)   On single occupant corner building fronting on two public
streets, an additional wall sign may be allowed with the approval of the
Architectural Review Commission, so long as the nearest property is not in a
residential district, and the square footage of the additional wall sign does
not exceed the allowed combined sign area.
         (e)   The information contained on a wall sign shall be limited to the
regular name of the occupant’s business, organization or entity located on the
lot and a maximum of three words describing the occupant’s products or
services.
         (f)   An additional wall sign is permitted if the occupant’s space in
a building has a secondary rear or side entrance but such additional wall sign
shall be limited to no more than nine square feet and shall only indicate the
name of the occupant and the words “entrance,” “enter” or a similar term. The
square footage of such secondary sign shall not be included in the calculation
of the occupant's allowed combined sign area.
         (g)   No wall sign affixed to a building, including its sign support
structure, may project beyond the outer limits of the wall to which it is
affixed. A parapet wall may not be added to an existing building for the sole
purpose of increasing the allowable height of a wall sign. For new buildings,
when a sign is to be mounted on a parapet wall, that parapet wall must be
consistent with the architectural design of the building, including building
materials. Wall signs may not be attached to un-reinforced masonry parapets.
         (h)   A wall sign should be safely and securely attached to the
building wall, should be affixed flat against the building wall, and may not
project more than six inches from the building wall. A wall sign must be
mounted in such a way that it can be removed with minimal impact on the
building’s exterior wall.
         (i)   Wall signs may not cover windows, doors or architectural
elements.
      (5)   Window signs.
         (a)   Window signs are allowed on the front façade of a building in
the “B” Business District and shall be included in the calculation of the
occupant’s allowed combined sign area.
         (b)   On single occupant corner buildings fronting on two public
streets, an additional window sign on the first floor façade may be permitted
by the Architectural Review Commission, if the nearest property is not in a
residential district and the square footage of such additional window sign is
included in the calculation of the occupant’s allowed combined sign area.
         (c)   The information contained on a permanent window sign on the
first floor front façade shall be limited to the name of the occupant’s
business, organization or entity and a maximum of three words describing the
occupant’s products or services.
         (d)   For second floor occupants of a non-residential space, a window
sign consisting of painted or transfer letters is allowed on second floor
window(s) on the front façade. Such window sign may not exceed 10% of the area
of the window(s) on which it is located. Second floor window signs shall not be
included in the calculation of allowed combined sign area. On the second floor,
the content of permanent window signs is limited to the name of the occupant’s
business, organization or entity. In no case may temporary commercial message
window signs be displayed above the first floor of a building.
         (e)   Short-term temporary commercial message window signs and short-
term temporary commercial message window display signs shall be permitted in
the “B” Business District on the first floor front façade only and shall not be
illuminated. In a single occupant building, the total square footage of allowed
permanent and short-term temporary window signs shall not exceed 30% of the
total storefront window area.   In a multi-occupant building, the total square
footage of allowed permanent and temporary window signs for each occupant shall
not exceed 30% of the total storefront window area of the occupant’s space.
      (6)   Projecting signs.
         (a)   One projecting sign per occupant is allowed in the “B” Business
District and shall be included in the calculation of the allowed combined sign
area.
         (b)   The sign area of a projecting sign on a one-story building shall
not exceed four square feet per sign face. The sign area of a projecting sign
on a building with more than one story shall not exceed six square feet per
sign face.
         (c)   The pole of a projecting sign may project from the front façade
or wall no more than five feet over a public way or public sidewalk. The
maximum width of the projecting sign shall not exceed three feet. The inside
edge of the projecting sign shall be separated from the façade or wall by no
more than one foot.
         (d)   No projecting sign shall be placed higher than the second floor
window sill of the building or 14 feet measured from the ground or sidewalk
next to the front façade, whichever is lower. The lowest point of a projecting
sign shall not be less than seven feet six inches above the sidewalk located
below the sign.
         (e)   A projecting sign shall be located at or near the public
entrance to the building and shall not cover architectural elements.
         (f)   The information contained on a projecting sign shall be limited
to name of the occupant’s business, organization or entity and a maximum of
three words describing the occupant’s products or services.
         (g)   No projecting sign may be secured with external wire, chains,
cables, strips of wood or nails nor may any projecting sign be hung or secured
to any other sign. Any removable part of a projecting sign, such as the cover
of a service opening, must be securely fastened internally by chains or hinges.
      (7)   Awning and canopy signs.
         (a)   An awning sign is allowed in the “B” Business District and shall
be included in the calculation of the occupant’s allowed combined sign area.
         (b)   The letters on an awning shall be placed on the front descending
skirt only and shall not exceed six inches in height.
         (c)   Awnings with or without signs shall be constructed and erected
so that the lowest portion of the projecting frame and descending skirt shall
not be less than seven feet six inches above the level of the sidewalk or
ground located below the awning.
         (d)   Awning signs shall be limited to only the regular operating name
of the occupant’s business, organization or entity and the street address
numbers of the building to which the awning is attached.
         (e)   The edge of an awning may project out over the public way up to
four feet, but in no event may an awning be within two feet or less of the curb
line of a public street. The preferred minimum awning projection is 36 inches.
         (f)   A canopy sign shall be placed on the front face of the canopy,
parallel to the street, and is limited to the street address numerals only,
which shall not exceed six inches in height.
         (g)   Awnings, canopies, awning signs and canopy signs may not be
illuminated or back lit. Rigid awning or canopy coverings made of metal, hard
plastic or other materials that can be cracked or broken are not allowed.
      (8)   Monument signs. One monument sign is allowed for any building in
the “B” Business District that is set back ten feet or more from the lot line
abutting a public street and shall be included in the calculation of the
combined sign area. Monuments on which signs are attached shall not exceed 39
square feet in area or six and one-quarter feet in height.
      (9)   Commercial message flag signs. One commercial message flag sign is
allowed per occupant in the “B” Business District and shall be included in the
calculation of the occupant’s combined sign area. Commercial message flag signs
shall be compatible with the overall color scheme of the building’s facade,
shall not cover architectural elements of the building and shall not be
illuminated. The lowest part of a commercial flag sign should be not less than
seven feet six inches above the sidewalk located below the sign.
   (C)   Design criteria for permanent commercial message and institutional
signs.
      (1)   Intent of design criteria. Design criteria for permanent commercial
message signs in the “B” Business District are not intended to restrict
imagination, innovation and variety in sign design and display, but rather to
assist in focusing on design principles that can result in creative solutions
that will develop a high quality visual appearance within the village.
      (2)   Design criteria. Permanent commercial message signs in the “B”
Business District shall meet the following design criteria:
         (a)   The proposed sign is designed to be constructed, installed and
maintained in a safe condition with high quality design and materials.
         (b)   The proposed sign has good scale and proportion in its design,
and is proportioned to the scale of, and is architecturally and visually
compatible with, the building or property on which it is to be located and with
existing adjacent and nearby buildings or structures and residential
neighborhoods.
         (c)   The proposed sign is visually compatible with nearby buildings
and structures in terms of height, size, location, shape, proportion, scale,
materials, texture, lettering, illumination, colors and shape.
         (d)   The location of the proposed sign is appropriate in terms of
design, landscaping and orientation on the property.
         (e)   The colors, materials and lighting of the proposed sign are
restrained and harmonious, and not excessively bright.
         (f)   The proposed sign does not exceed the logo size requirements of
§
153.051(E).
         (g)   The amount of information and graphic elements that contain
images or symbols in the proposed sign or group of signs is appropriately
limited and results in a clear and readable design.
         (h)   Any proposed sign which is part of a master sign plan is
consistent with such plan.
         (i)   The proposed sign illumination does not exceed the level of
illumination requirements of §
153.051(J).
         (j)   The proposed sign illumination complies with the building and
construction requirements of §
153.051(F).
         (k)   The proposed sign does not cover architectural elements of the
building.
         (l)   If the proposed sign is an awning or canopy sign, the proposed
awning or canopy complies with the material construction requirements of
subparagraph (B)(7)(i) of this section.
   (D)   Permanent non-commercial message signs in the “B” Business District.
The following permanent signs are exempt signs allowed in the “B” Business
District, subject to the regulations and limitations set forth in §
153.049, including, where applicable, the requirement to obtain an
administrative sign permit, and shall not be included in the calculation of
combined sign area.
      (1)   Address sign.
      (2)   Directory sign.
      (3)   Governmental sign.
      (4)   Hazard or no trespassing sign.
      (5)   Incidental sign.
      (6)   Informational sign.
      (7)   Memorial plaque sign.
      (8)   Public utility sign.
      (9)   Security sign
   (E)   Requirement for master sign plan.
      (1)   Master sign plan for new building or development. For a new
building with multiple occupants or a new development with multiple buildings
in the “B” Business District, the applicant and/or property owner must submit a
master sign plan for review and approval by the Architectural Review
Commission. The purpose of a master sign plan is to coordinate signs on multi-
occupant buildings or in multi-building developments, to establish a building’s
or development's overall sign design, and to provide direction to future
occupants. A master sign plan must include, at a minimum, criteria and
specifications for general appearance, location, lighting, and approved
construction materials for signs.
      (2)   Master sign plan for existing building. For existing buildings, the
applicant must submit a master sign plan when:
         (a)   A change is proposed to any permanent sign for any occupant
which requires a building permit and certificate of appropriateness;
         (b)   A change in any occupant’s use of the property necessitates a
change in any permanent sign;
         (c)   One or more new signs are proposed by one or more occupants;
         (d)   Notice is received from the village that one or more permanent
signs on the building are not in compliance with this part by reason of being a
prohibited sign, abandoned sign, unsafe sign, or illegal sign or by reason of
any other failure of compliance under this part; or
         (e)   In the case of a legal nonconforming sign, the expiration of the
applicable amortization period.
      (3)   Content of master sign plan. A master sign plan for the entire
building or development shall be submitted to the Architectural Review
Commission for review and approval pursuant to the procedures set §§
153.240 through
153.249. This master sign plan for a development shall include any and all
signs for all buildings on the lot. A master sign plan for a building shall
include any and all signs for each occupant's space. All subsequently proposed
signs shall conform to the approved master sign plan so that as existing signs
are replaced for various reasons, including amortization under this chapter,
all new and replacement signs will be cohesive and in compliance with this
part.
   (F)   Temporary, short-term temporary and daily- display temporary signs in
the “B” Business District.
      (1)   Temporary signs on business and residential property.  The
following temporary signs are exempt signs allowed on business and residential
property in the “B” Business District, subject to the regulations and
limitations set forth in §
153.049, including, where applicable, the requirement to obtain an
administrative sign permit:
         (a)   Booster sign.
         (b)   Construction site sign.
         (c)   Demolition site sign.
         (d)   Election sign.
         (e)   Flag.
         (f)   Free expression sign.
         (g)   Holiday decorations.
         (h)   Real estate sign.
         (i)   Light pole civic banner sign.
      (2)   Short-term temporary signs and daily- display temporary signs on
business property. The following short-term temporary and daily-display
temporary signs are exempt signs allowed only on business property in the “B”
Business District, subject to the regulations and limitations set forth in §
153.049:
         (a)   Short-term temporary commercial message window sign.
         (b)   Short-term temporary commercial message window display sign.
         (c)   Temporary parking and traffic control sign.
      (3)   Short-term temporary signs and daily- display temporary signs on
residential property. The following short-term temporary and daily-display
temporary signs are exempt signs allowed in the “B” Business District on
private residential property only, subject to the regulations and limitations
set forth in §
153.049; and must removed within seven days following the event:
         (a)   Personal event sign.
         (b)   Open house sign.
         (c)   Private sale sign.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 1098, passed 4-29-2013)
§ 153.053 REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR ALLOWED SIGNS IN ALL DISTRICTS OTHER
THAN THE “B” BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permanent institutional signs.
      (1)   Residential districts. It shall be unlawful to locate, use, erect,
display, construct, install, enlarge, expand, alter, operate, or maintain a
permanent institutional sign in the “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, and “R-4” Districts
unless and until an application for a special use, or a modification or
amendment to an existing special use has been approved pursuant to §§
153.245 and
153.247, and unless and until a building permit and certificate of
appropriateness for such sign have been issued.
      (2)   Non-Residential Districts. It shall be unlawful to locate, use,
erect, display, construct, install, enlarge, expand, alter, operate, or
maintain a permanent institutional sign in the “P”, “S”, “M-1”, “M-2”, and “R”
Districts unless and until a building permit and a certificate of
appropriateness for such sign have been issued.
      (3)   Design criteria. All permanent institutional signs that must obtain
a certificate of appropriateness under this section are subject to the design
criteria in §
153.052(C).
   (B)    Commercial message signs prohibited. Commercial message signs are not
allowed in the “R-1”,“R-2”, “R-3”, “R-4”, “S”, “P”, “M-1”, “M-2”, and “R”
Districts.
   (C)   Permanent exempt signs. The following permanent signs are exempt signs
allowed in the “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, “R-4”, “S”, “P”, “M-1”, “M-2”, and “R”
Districts, subject to the regulations and limitations set forth in §
153.049, including, where applicable, the requirement to obtain an
administrative sign permit:
      (1)   Address sign.
      (2)   Governmental sign.
      (3)   Hazard or no trespassing sign.
      (4)   Incidental sign.
      (5)   Informational sign.
      (6)   Memorial plaque sign.
      (7)   Public utility sign.
      (8)   Security sign.
   (D)   Temporary, short-term temporary and daily-display temporary signs in
all zoning districts other than the “B” Business District.
      (1)   Temporary signs on residential private property. The following
temporary signs are exempt signs allowed on private residential property in the
“R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, and “R-4” zoning districts, subject to the regulations and
limitations set forth in §
153.049:
         (a)   Booster sign.
         (b)   Construction site placard sign.
         (c)   Demolition site sign.
         (d)   Election sign.
         (e)   Flag.
         (f)    Free expression sign.
         (g)   Holiday decorations.
         (h)   Real estate sign.
      (2)   Temporary signs on institutional property. The following temporary
signs are allowed on institutional properties in the “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, “R-
4”, “S”, “P”, “M-1”, “M-2”, and “R” zoning districts, subject to the
regulations and limitations set forth in §
153.049:
         (a)   Construction site placard sign.
         (b)   Flag.
         (c)   Holiday decorations.
      (3)   Short-term temporary and daily-display temporary signs on private
residential property. The following short-term temporary and daily-display
temporary signs are exempt signs allowed on private residential property in the
“R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, and “R-4” zoning districts, subject to the regulations and
limitations set forth in §
153.049:
         (a)   Personal event sign.
         (b)   Wind sign.
         (c)   Open house sign.
         (d)   Private sale sign.
      (4)   Short-term temporary and daily-display temporary signs on
institutional property. The following short-term temporary and daily-display
temporary signs are exempt signs allowed on institutional property with the
property owner’s consent in the “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, “R-4”, “S”, “P”, “M-1”,
“M-2”, and “R” zoning districts, subject to the regulations and limitations set
forth in §
153.049:
         (a)   Civic event sign.
         (b)   Temporary parking and traffic control sign.
         (c)   Wind sign.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.054 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   No allowed sign for which a building permit and certificate of
appropriateness is required shall be located, erected, used, displayed,
constructed, installed, enlarged, expanded, altered or relocated within the
village unless a certificate of appropriateness has been issued in accordance
with §§
153.240 through
153.249.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.055 ADMINISTRATIVE SIGN PERMITS.
   (A)   Exempt signs requiring an administrative sign permit. The following
allowed signs are exempt from the requirement to obtain a building permit and
certificate of appropriateness, but no such sign shall be located, erected,
used, displayed, constructed, installed, enlarged, expanded, altered or
relocated unless an administrative sign permit has been issued by the
Administrative Official.
      (1)   Directory sign.
      (2)   Informational sign.
      (3)   Memorial plaque sign.
      (4)   Construction site sign.
   (B)   Application for administrative sign permit. An application for an
administrative sign permit shall be on forms supplied by the village and shall
be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Administrative Official may
designate, accompanied by a nonrefundable application and filing fee in the
amount established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. Such application
shall provide the information listed in §
153.247 as well as the following additional information: a description and
graphic depiction of the proposed sign(s) including dimensions; a description
of the proposed location of the sign; the dimensions and locations of all other
signs on the property; a copy of the master sign plan for the property, if
applicable; and such other information as the Administrative Official shall
require.
   (C)   Review of administrative sign permit by Administrative Official.
      (1)   Standards for review. The application for an administrative sign
permit shall be reviewed by the Administrative Official who shall grant the
application upon showing that the following standards related to appearance,
appropriateness and safety of the proposed sign have been met:
         (a)   The proposed sign is consistent with any applicable master sign
plan;
         (b)   The proposed sign is visually compatible with surrounding
buildings, structures and other signs on the property in terms of height, size,
proportion, materials, colors, shape and orientation on the property;
         (c)   The information contained in the proposed sign is a clear and
readable design;
         (d)   The proposed sign is designed and intended to be constructed,
installed and maintained in a safe condition with high quality design and
materials; and
         (e)   the proposed sign does not create a public safety nuisance or
distraction to vehicular and pedestrian traffic and does not lead to an
excessive number of signs on the property.
      (2)   Issuance of administrative sign permit. Within ten days after the
submission of a complete application for an administrative sign permit, the
Administrative Official shall notify the applicant whether the application has
met the standards for review for an administrative sign permit.
   (D)   Denial by action of Administrative Official.
If the Administrative Official finds that the application fails to meet the
standards for review by the Administrative Official set forth in paragraph (C)
(1) above, the applicant shall have the right to submit the application to the
Architectural Review Commission as an application for a certificate of
appropriateness. The applicant must notify the Commission of its intent to
submit such an application within 60 days after the denial of the application
by the Administrative Official.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.056 REQUEST FOR VARIATION.
   A request for a variation from the requirements of this part shall be taken
to the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to §
153.244.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.057 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Authority to continue legal nonconforming signs. Except as provided in
subsection (H) of this section, any permanent sign lawfully in existence on the
effective date of this part, or any subsequent amendments to this part, that
becomes nonconforming as a result of the adoption or amendment of this part and
continues to be nonconforming, shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign
and may be continued, subject to the conditions and limitations of this
section. The burden of establishing a sign to be a legal nonconforming sign
shall rest on the person asserting the legal nonconforming status of such sign.
   (B)   Ordinary repair and maintenance of legal nonconforming signs.  Routine
maintenance of a sign, or changing of parts designed to be changed, shall not,
standing alone, be considered an alteration of the sign requiring the issuance
of a building permit and certificate of appropriateness for a sign or alter its
status as a legal nonconforming sign. Incidental repair or replacement of
nonloadbearing sign elements, electrical wiring and fixtures may be performed
on any legal nonconforming sign without altering its status as a legal
nonconforming sign, up to 35% of its replacement cost new. If the repair or
alteration of a legal nonconforming sign exceeds 35% of its replacement cost
new, the sign shall no longer be deemed to be a legal nonconforming sign and
shall be subject to the regulations of this part, including any applicable
requirement to obtain a building permit and a certificate of appropriateness.
   (C)   Repairs eliminating nonconformity. Any repair or replacement of a
legal nonconforming sign shall, whenever possible, eliminate or reduce any
nonconformity in the element being repaired or replaced.
   (D)   Alteration, enlargement or moving a legal nonconforming sign. A legal
nonconforming sign shall not be changed or altered in any manner that would
increase the degree of its nonconformity, be enlarged or expanded, be
structurally altered to prolong its useful life, or be moved in whole or in
part to any other location where it would remain nonconforming. A change in
sign message which does not otherwise violate the provisions of this part shall
not be deemed to be prohibited by this §
153.058.
   (E)   Restoring nonconformity prohibited. A legal nonconforming sign that
has been changed to eliminate its nonconformity or any element of its
nonconformity shall not thereafter be changed to restore such nonconformity or
nonconforming element.
   (F)   Damage or destruction of a legal nonconforming sign. A legal
nonconforming sign, or any nonconforming element of a legal nonconforming sign
capable of change or discontinuance separate from other elements of the sign,
damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 35% of its
replacement cost new shall not be restored but shall be removed or brought into
conformity with the provisions of this code.
   (G)   Abandonment of a legal nonconforming sign. Any legal nonconforming
sign that is an abandoned sign, regardless of any intent to resume the use of
the sign or intent not to abandon the use of such sign, shall not thereafter be
reestablished or resumed.
   (H)   Amortization of nonconforming signs. Legal nonconforming signs shall
be removed or made to conform within three years from the effective date of
this subsection.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.058 REVIEW OF PERMANENT SIGNS.
   Within 120 days after the effective date of this part, the Administrative
Official shall inspect all existing permanent signs throughout the “B” Business
District for the purpose of identifying those existing signs which are not in
compliance with this part, whether by reason of being prohibited signs, legal
nonconforming signs, abandoned signs, dilapidated signs, unsafe signs, illegal
signs, vandalized signs or signs which otherwise violate the provisions of this
code.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.059 SIGN MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Generally. The owner of a sign and the owner of the lot on which such
sign is located shall be jointly and severally responsible to maintain such
sign, including its illumination sources, in compliance with this part, this
chapter and all applicable laws, and any applicable certificate of
appropriateness, in a safe and secure condition, and in a neat and orderly
condition and good working order at all times, and to prevent the development
of any rust, corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in the physical
appearance or safety of such sign. The premises around monument and
freestanding signs shall be kept clean and free of all rubbish and weeds. It
shall be unlawful to have an abandoned sign, dilapidated sign, unsafe sign or
vandalized sign on any property in the village.
   (B)   Condition of permanent signs generally. Permanent signs shall be
periodically repainted or otherwise maintained to prevent corrosion or
deterioration caused by the weather, age or any other condition, and to keep
all such signs in neat and orderly condition and aesthetically pleasing
appearance. Obvious deterioration on a permanent sign, such as faded, peeling,
and broken lettering, or chips and dents or discoloration on a painted surface,
or tattered and torn material on an awning or canopy sign, are not allowed and
must be promptly repaired or remedied.
   (C)   Dilapidated signs. The Administrative Official shall send written
notice to the owner of any dilapidated sign, and to the owner of the building,
structure or lot on which the dilapidated sign is attached or erected, if
different, of the condition(s) of the sign which are deemed to make it a
dilapidated sign. A dilapidated sign must be brought into compliance with the
all applicable provisions within 30 days following notice of such violation.
   (D)   Unsafe signs. The Administrative Official shall send written notice to
the owner of any unsafe sign, and to the owner of the building, structure or
lot on which the unsafe sign is attached or erected, if different, of the
condition(s) of the sign which are deemed to make it an unsafe sign. If the
unsafe sign does not pose an immediate threat of harm to person or property,
the Administrative Official may require the owner of the sign, and the owner of
the building, structure or lot on which the unsafe sign is attached or erected,
if different, to repair or remove the sign within seven days following notice
of such violation. If the Administrative Official finds that any sign is so
unsafe or improperly secured or structurally unsound, or is in danger of
falling, or presents any kind of fire or electrical safety or shock hazard, or
is otherwise a menace to the public, or is otherwise in such hazardous
condition that immediate action is warranted, the village may notify, by
whatever means is practical, the parties entitled to notice under this
provision and direct the immediate removal of the sign or other action to abate
the hazard.
   (E)   Vandalized signs. The Administrative Official shall send written
notice to the owner of any vandalized sign, and to the owner of the building,
structure or lot on which the vandalized sign is attached or erected, if
different, of the condition(s) of the sign which are deemed to make it a
vandalized sign. A vandalized sign must be brought into compliance with the all
applicable provisions within 14 days following notice of such violation.
   (F)   Abandoned signs. The Administrative Official shall send written notice
to the owner of any abandoned sign, and to the owner of the building, structure
or lot on which the abandoned sign is attached or erected, if different, of the
condition(s) which are deemed to make it an abandoned sign. An abandoned sign
must be brought into compliance with the all applicable provisions within 30
days following notice of such violation.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.060 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Administration and enforcement. The Administrative Official designated
pursuant to §
153.225 shall administer and enforce this part as a component of his or her
overall administration and enforcement of this chapter. Accordingly, the
Administrative Official shall have all power and authority to administer and
enforce this part pursuant to any other provision of this chapter and
applicable law as well as the provisions of this part.
   (B)   Inspection of signs by village. The Administrative Official may
inspect, at such reasonable times as deemed appropriate, signs regulated by
this code to ascertain whether the sign structure is in conformance with the
all provisions of this part and this chapter and other applicable law.
   (C)   Notices.
      (1)   Illegal permanent sign. A permanent sign which has been located,
erected, used, displayed, constructed, installed, enlarged, expanded, altered,
operated, maintained, relocated or removed in violation of this part, this
chapter, or other applicable law is an illegal sign. Upon written notice by the
Administrative Official to the owner of the Illegal sign that such sign is in
violation of this part, the owner of such sign shall have seven days to bring
the sign into compliance with this Part or remove the illegal sign.
      (2)   Illegal temporary sign. If any temporary, short-term temporary or
daily-display temporary sign is being displayed or maintained in violation of
the provisions of this part, written notice shall be given to the occupant or
owner of the property on which the sign is located, who shall have 24 hours
following receipt of notice from the village to alter or remove the sign.
   (D)   Enforcement actions. The Administrative Official may take such
enforcement actions as are authorized by this part, this chapter and as
otherwise authorized by law. These may include, without limitation and in any
combination, the issuance of a stop work order, revocations of permits or other
approvals, prosecution for violations, the bringing of a civil action for any
penalty or fine, or the institution of the appropriate action at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require the removal
of the unlawful sign. Prior written notice of a violation shall not be required
for the initiation of enforcement actions under this section if the violation
creates an emergency or unsafe condition.
   (E)   Liability for damages, private remedies. Neither the provisions of
this code nor the issuance of any building permit or certificate of
appropriateness shall be construed as relieving any person erecting, owning or
maintaining any sign from liability arising by reason of, or personal injury or
property damage resulting from such sign, or work relating to such sign, or as
limiting the liability of any such person by reason of personal injury or
property damage so resulting. Nothing in this part shall be interpreted to
prevent any person entitled to relief in law or equity by reason of a violation
of the provisions of this chapter from bringing an appropriate action to secure
such relief.
   (F)   Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this part
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be
filed with the Administrative Official. He or she shall record properly and
promptly investigate such complaint, and shall take action thereon as provided
by this part, this chapter and other applicable law.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§§ 153.061 THROUGH 153.064 RESERVED.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 153.065 PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES.
   The following are the permitted and special uses in residential districts:
District Use
District    Use
            Single-family dwellings
            Home occupations as defined in §
R-1 and R-2 153.003
            Accessory uses as defined in §
            153.003 that are accessory uses to single-family dwellings
            Single-family dwellings
            Home occupations as defined in §
            153.003
            Accessory uses as defined in §
R-3 and R-4 153.003 that are accessory uses to single-family dwellings and
            single-family attached dwellings
            Single-family attached dwellings as a special use in the R-
            4 District, in conformance with §
            153.245(A)
 
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 976, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 153.066 LOT AREA AND LOT WIDTH.
 
                    Minimum Number of
                    Square Feet Per   Minimum Lot Width  Maximum Lot Width
District            Single-Family     (feet)             (feet)
                    Dwelling (square
                    feet)
R-1 (corner lots)   17,500            100                 Not greater than the
R-1 (interior lots) 15,750            90                  lot width of the
R-2                 12,000            75                  widest lot on the
R-3                 6,000             50                  frontage
R-4                 6,000             50
In determining the maximum lot width on a frontage, the existing lot with the
greatest lot width shall be excluded.
 
 
District Maximum Number of Square Feet for Lots Containing Single-Family
         Attached Dwellings
R-4      11,000
 
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 976, passed 4-9-2007; Ord. 987, passed 10-9-
2007)
§ 153.067 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
District Buildings Maximum Height
District                     Buildings                 Maximum Height
R-1                          Principal building        35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
R-2 (west of Green Bay Road) Principal building        31 feet or 2-1/2 stories
R-2 (east of Green Bay Road
and south and west of
Warwick Lane with frontage   Principal building        32 feet or 2-1/2 stories
on Oxford Road, Woodstock
Avenue, Cumnor Road and
Richmond Road)
R-2 (west of Sheridan Road
and north and east of
Warwick Lane, with frontage
on Oxford Road, Abingdon
Avenue, Robsart Road and     Principal building        34 feet or 2-1/2 stories
Tudor Place, and south and
west of Warwick Lane with
frontage on Abingdon Avenue
and Robsart Road)
R-3                          Principal building        30 feet or 2-1/2 stories
R-4 (east of Ridge Road and  Principal building        28 feet or 2-1/2 stories
south of Park Drive)
R-4 (east of Ridge Road,
north of Park Drive, and
west of the line created by
the east lot line of lots    Principal building        30 feet or 2-1/2 stories
with frontages on Brier
Street extended south to
Park Avenue)
R-4 (east of the line
created by the east lot line
of lots with frontages on
Brier Street extended south  Principal building        28 feet or 2-1/2 stories
to Park Avenue, north of
Park Drive, and west of
Green Bay Road)
R-4 (east of Green Bay Road) Principal building        30 feet or 2-1/2 stories
R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4        Garage detached from      20 feet or 1-1/2 stories
                             principal building
R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4        Other accessory buildings 14 feet
 
   (A)   The maximum building height for a principal building is subject to the
following exception.
   (B)   A principal building may exceed the building height provided by this
section where the lots adjacent and contiguous to the side lot lines of the lot
each contain a principal building that is a nonconforming structure under §
153.208, in which case the maximum building height on the lot shall be equal to
the building height of the building with the lowest height among the lots
adjacent and contiguous to the side lot lines, but in no event shall the
maximum building height exceed 35 feet.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 936, passed 6-13-2005)
§ 153.068 MAXIMUM SIZE; MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.
   (A)   Maximum building size. No building or any addition thereto shall be
constructed or structurally altered on a lot in any residence district if, as a
result thereof, the floor area of all buildings on the lot shall exceed the
maximum floor area computed as follows.
      (1)   For all buildings constructed, or for which a permit for the
initial construction or substantial alteration thereof was issued, on or before
October 22, 2005.
         (a)   Except as hereinafter provided, the maximum floor area
applicable to all lots shall be:
   1,200 + (.24 x lot area)
         (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum floor area applicable
to all lots shall in no event exceed:
   .45 x lot area
      (2)   For all buildings constructed or substantially altered pursuant to
a permit issued after October 22, 2005.
         (a)   Except as hereinafter provided, the maximum floor area
applicable to all lots shall be:
   1,200 + (0.21 x lot area)
         (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum floor area applicable
to all lots shall in no event exceed:
   0.42 x lot area
      (3)   Notwithstanding paragraphs (A)(1) and (A)(2) above, for single-
family attached dwellings authorized by special use, the maximum floor area
shall be:
   0.575 x lot area
   (B)   Maximum building coverage. No building or any addition thereto shall
be constructed or structurally altered on a lot in any residence district if,
as a result thereof, the aggregate coverage of the lot area by buildings shall
exceed the maximum building coverage computed as follows:
      (1)   If the lot area is less than or equal to 5,715 square feet, the
maximum building coverage shall be:
   .30 x lot area
      (2)   If the lot area is greater than 5,715 but less than 20,000 square
feet, the maximum building coverage shall be:
   800 + (.16 x lot area)
      (3)   If the lot area is greater than or equal to 20,000 square feet, the
maximum building coverage shall be:
   .20 x lot area
      (4)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum building coverage for a
lot, regardless of the lot area thereof, shall be reduced by the amount, if
any, by which the aggregate coverage of the lot area by impervious surfaces,
other than buildings, exceeds 25% of the lot area.
      (5)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, for
single-family attached dwellings approved by special use, the maximum building
coverage shall be:
   325 + (.30 x lot area)
   (C)   Other impervious surfaces. No sidewalk, driveway, pavement, patio,
open porch or deck, or similar structure, or other structure or impervious
surface, other than a building, shall be constructed or installed if, as a
result thereof, the aggregate coverage of the lot area by all impervious
surfaces shall exceed the lesser of the amount provided in paragraphs (C)(1) or
(C)(2) below for single-family dwellings, or paragraph(C)(3) below for single-
family attached dwellings:
      (1)   Twenty-five percent of the lot area, plus the amount, if any, by
which the maximum building coverage for the lot exceeds the actual coverage of
the lot area that is attributable to buildings;
      (2)   Twenty-five percent of the lot area, less the amount, if any, by
which the actual coverage of the lot area that is attributable to buildings
exceeds the maximum building coverage; or
      (3)   100 + (.35 x lot area).
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 946, passed 10-11-2005; Ord. 973, passed 2-
12-2007; Ord. 976, passed 4-9-2007; Ord. 987, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 153.069 MINIMUM SIZE OF PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
   The minimum size of a principal building shall be as follows:
 
District    Minimum Floor Area of Principal Building
R-1 and R-2 2,000 square feet
R-3 and R-4 1,500 square feet
 
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.070 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Minimum yard requirements.
District Yard Minimum Depth or Width, subject to Exceptions Set Forth in This
              Section
District    Yard        Minimum Depth or Width, subject to Exceptions Set Forth
                        in This Section
            Front       A minimum depth of 40 feet
                        A minimum width of 10 feet for each side yard, and
                        total side yard width of 30% of the width of the lot.
                        In the case of a side yard abutting a street, the
                        minimum width shall not be less than 40 feet, unless a
            Side in R-1 uniform setback line has been established or observed
                        on the same side of the street between two intersecting
                        streets at April 14, 1969, in which case the uniform
                        setback line shall be maintained, and the total side
R-1 and R-2             yard width shall be equal to the greater of 50 feet or
                        30% of the width of the lot
                        A minimum width of 8 feet for each side yard; provided,
                        however, that in the case of a side yard abutting a
                        street, the minimum width shall not be less than 40
            Side in R-2 feet, unless a uniform setback line has been
                        established or observed on the same side of the street
                        between two intersecting streets at April 14, 1969, in
                        which case the uniform setback line shall be maintained
            Rear        A minimum depth equal to the larger of 25 feet or 20%
                        of the depth of the lot
                        A minimum depth of 40 feet in the case of District R-
                        3 and 30 feet in the case of District R-4; provided,
            Front       however, that the minimum depth shall be seven feet for
                        single-family attached dwellings approved by special
                        use in District R-4
R-3 and R-4             A minimum width of 6 feet for each side yard; provided,
                        however, that a minimum width of three feet for each
            Side        side yard, and a total side yard of 10 feet for single-
                        family attached dwellings approved by special use in
                        District R-4
            Rear        A minimum depth equal to the larger of 25 feet or 20%
                        of the depth of the lot
 
   (B)   Exceptions. The minimum yard requirements set forth above in this
section are subject to the following exceptions, which shall not apply to
single-family attached dwellings in the R-4 District:
      (1)   Front yards; average setback line and average principal building
setback line. Where 30% or more of all property, according to front feet,
abutting upon one side of a street between two intersecting streets is built up
with buildings having an average setback line of more, or of less, than 40 feet
from the front lot line in the case of Districts R-1, R-2 and R-3 or 30 feet
from the front lot line in the case of District R-4, the average to exclude
corner lots:
         (a)   No building erected or structurally altered after April 14,
1969, except as permitted by §
153.208(A), shall project beyond the average setback line so established;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall require a setback line
of more than the following distance:
 
District                 Setback Line
                         50 feet in a block with street frontage (between
In Districts R-1 and R-2 intersecting streets) of not more than 400 feet; or
                         60 feet in a block with street frontage (between
                         intersecting streets) of more than 400 feet
In Districts R-3 and R-4 40 feet
 
         (b)   No portion of a building, other than covered but otherwise open,
unscreened and unenclosed porches with a height of more than one story, erected
or structurally altered, except as permitted in §
153.208(A), pursuant to a permit issued on or after October 22, 2005 shall
project beyond the average principal building setback line of all property
abutting upon one side of a street between two intersecting streets, which
average to exclude corner lots.
      (2)   Side yards. Nothing in this section shall reduce the buildable
width of a corner lot in any residence district legally existing at April 14,
1969 to less than 28 feet. If the principal building on a lot in District R-
1 or R-2 maintained a minimum side yard setback of six feet or more as of June
1, 1990, but less than the applicable minimum side yard setback set forth in
this section for District R-1 or R-2, whichever is applicable, the principal
building may be enlarged or structurally altered in the side yard, if and only
if the principal building, as so enlarged or structurally altered, shall not
project beyond the individual side yard setback line maintained as of June 1,
1990, and, in District R-1, also meets the minimum 30% total side yard width
requirement set forth in this section.
      (3)   Rear building lines on lots abutting Lake Michigan. Notwithstanding
any rear yard requirement in subsection (A) above, no principal building, or
structural alteration to an existing principal building, on a lot abutting Lake
Michigan may be located further from the front lot lie of the lot than the
average of the rear building lines for the lots located on either side of the
lot on which the new principal building or structural alteration is proposed;
provided, however, that the limitation in this subsection (B)(3) will not apply
to (i) any principal building, or structural alteration to an existing
principal building, on a lot abutting Lake Michigan constructed prior to
November 1, 2016; (ii) any principal building, or structural alteration to an
existing principal building, on a lot abutting Lake Michigan for which a
village permit or permit extension has been issued, or for which a complete
application has been filed with the village, prior to November 1, 2016; and
(iii) any principal building or structural alteration to an existing building,
constructed prior to November 1, 2016 or pursuant to subsection (B)(3)(ii) of
this section, that is reconstructed or remodeled on the exact foundation of
such principal building or structural alteration and does not extend above the
previous height of such principal building.
      (4)   Additional exceptions. The permitted obstructions described in §
153.033 may project into minimum yards required by this section to the extent
and subject to the limitations stated in §
153.033.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 936, passed 6-13-2005; Ord. 946, passed 10-
11-2005; Ord. 976, passed 4-9-2007; Ord. 1177, passed 10-17-2016)
§§ 153.071 THROUGH 153.074 RESERVED.
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 153.075 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Corners. On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in a manner as to impede materially
the vision between a height of two and one-half and ten feet above the
centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the lot
lines of the corner lot, and a line joining points along the lot lines 20 feet
from the point of their intersection.
   (B)   Driveways. On any lot in any residential district having a driveway
for vehicular access to a street, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or
allowed to grow in a manner as to impede materially the vision between a height
of two and one-half and ten feet above the centerline grades of any driveway
and the streets in the areas on each side of the driveway bounded by the lot
line of the lot abutting the street, the side lines of the driveway and a line
joining points along the lot line and side line on each side of the driveway
ten feet from the point of their intersection. Any materials lawfully existing
on the lot as of October 22, 2005 shall be considered a legal nonconforming
use.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 946, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 153.076 LOCATION OF ACCESSORY STRUCTURES ON LOT.
   (A)   Excepting fences subject to §
153.034 and other accessory structures that are paved surfaces installed at or
substantially below the adjoining grade such as driveways, sidewalks and
patios, and except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, in all
residential districts all accessory buildings and other accessory structures
which are not attached to the principal building on a lot shall be located:
      (1)   In the rear yard of the lot on which they are located;
      (2)   Not less than ten feet from the principal building on the lot and
not less than six feet from any other building on the same or any adjoining
lot;
      (3)   Not less than two feet from the side or rear lot line of the lot,
except that if an alley is located at the rear lot line, the accessory
structures may be built up to the alley line if no part of the structures,
doors and eaves included, project into the alley; and
      (4)   In the case of a corner lot, not more than six feet from the inside
side lot line of the lot.
   (B)   Accessory structures may have eaves, cornices, gutters and similar
appurtenances projecting not more than 12 inches closer to the lot line than
the limits above provided in this section.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.077 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The height limitations contained in §
153.067 do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, ventilators,
chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be placed over the roof
level and not intended for human occupancy.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.078 STRUCTURES TO HAVE ACCESS.
   Every structure hereafter erected on or moved to a lot in any residential
district shall be on a lot adjacent to a street or with access to an approved
private roadway, and all structures shall be so located on the lot as to
provide safe and convenient access for utilities, fire protection and required
off-street parking.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.079 LOCATION OF PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS.
   No private swimming pool shall be constructed or rebuilt within eight feet
of any side or rear property line of a lot in a residential district, nor shall
any pool or equipment appurtenant thereto be constructed or rebuilt between the
residence and the front street line or the residence and either side yard line
of the lot. In the case of the corner lot, no private swimming pool shall be
constructed closer to the side lot line abutting a street than the number of
feet equal to the minimum depth required for the side yard of the lot abutting
a street.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.080 PARKING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in each residential
district in accordance with both this section and the provisions of §§
153.185 through
153.192.
   (B)   Motor vehicles of any kind or type without current license plates
shall not be parked or stored on any residential district property other than
in an attached or detached garage.
   (C)   The maximum number of parking spaces permitted on a lot in a
residential district (including spaces in an attached or a detached garage)
shall be the larger of three or the largest whole number (disregarding
fractions) determined by dividing the total number of square feet of the lot by
3,500; provided, however, that single-family attached dwellings shall be
permitted to have a maximum of two parking spaces per dwelling unit regardless
of lot area. No parking space may be rented to or set aside for use by any
person not a resident on the premises, except that space for not more than one
vehicle in a private garage may be rented or set aside for use by any person
not a resident on the premises.
   (D)   Within the maximum number of spaces allowed, off-street parking spaces
on lots in residence districts may be located in rear yards or side yards
(except a side yard abutting a street in the case of a corner lot), but in no
case shall they be located in a front yard nor, in the case of a corner lot,
shall they be located in a rear yard closer to the side lot line abutting the
street than the number of feet equal to the minimum depth required by the
zoning regulations for the side yard of the lot abutting the street. Nothing in
this subsection shall prohibit temporary parking (without payment for the
privilege) in driveways in any yard.
   (E)   No garage shall be located in a manner that allows any part of the
garage to be closer to the front lot line of the lot on which it is located
than the principal building setback line.
   (F)   No garage shall have door openings facing the lot line abutting any
adjacent street where the sum of the garage door openings exceeds 20 feet.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 946, passed 10-11-2005; Ord. 976, passed 4-9-
2007)
§ 153.081 PARKING OR STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MAJOR COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT. Including trucks, vans and other motor
vehicles designed, used or maintained for the transportation of property and
used primarily in a trade or business, commercial enterprise or other gainful
activity, and trailers, mobile equipment and similar equipment used primarily
in furtherance of a trade or business, commercial enterprise or other gainful
activity
      MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Including boats and boat trailers, travel
trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on motor
vehicles), motorized dwellings and similar recreational vehicles, tent trailers
and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment,
whether occupied by the equipment or not.
   (B)   No major commercial equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot in
a residence district except in an enclosed building; provided, however, that
major commercial equipment may be temporarily parked or stored on the premises
in any residence district to the extent reasonably necessary in connection with
construction, repair or maintenance work on the premises.
   (C)   No major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot
in a residence district except in a car port or enclosed building, or in the
portion of the rear yard on which detached accessory buildings may be located
under the provisions of the zoning regulations; provided, however, that any
equipment parked or stored other than in an enclosed building shall be
effectively screened from view from the street and from adjoining properties,
and provided, further, that major recreational equipment may be temporarily
parked anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed 24
consecutive hours during loading or unloading.
   (D)   No major commercial equipment or major recreational equipment shall be
used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on any
lot in any residence district.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.082 AIR CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT AND APPURTENANCES.
   Air conditioning equipment and appurtenances serving a principal or
accessory structure located outside shall be installed as follows:
   (A)   Location: Air conditioning equipment shall be located in either any
side yard not abutting a street or the rear yard.
      (1)   In the side yard, air conditioning equipment shall not be closer to
either side lot line than 50% of the required side yard setback for a principal
structure.
      (2)   In the rear yard, air conditioning equipment shall not be closer
than two feet from the rear lot line.
   (B)   Installation: Air conditioning equipment may be installed in the
following manner:
      (1)   At grade, no closer to a side lot line than 50% of the required
side yard setback for a principal structure.
      (2)   Attached to the exterior wall facing any side lot line not abutting
a street or facing the rear lot line, per manufacturer’s specifications.
      (3)   For any non-residential use in a residential district, equipment
may be roof mounted.
      (4)   Existing air conditioning equipment may be replaced in its existing
location.
   (C)   Screening required: Air conditioning equipment and appurtenances shall
be screened to limit the visibility from grade level at adjacent residential
properties and street view.
      (1)   Such screening shall consist of one or more of the following:
         (a)   Existing structure;
         (b)   Fence;
         (c)   A natural screen comprised of dense evergreen plantings of
sufficient height and closely spaced to make the equipment inconspicuous to an
observer from neighboring properties and public ways during all seasons of the
year.
      (2)   All rooftop mounted air conditioning equipment and appurtenances
shall be colored to blend with its surroundings.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1201, passed 10-16-2017; Ord. 1388, passed 8-
18-2025)
§ 153.083 SOLAR PANELS.
   Solar panels shall be mounted only on the roof and shall not extend above
the highest point of the roof upon which they are to be mounted. If roof pitch
or other factors make the installation of solar panels impossible or render
them non-functional, the Administrative Official shall meet with the property
owner to determine an appropriate location on the roof for the solar panels. If
the property owner and the Administrative Official cannot agree upon a location
for the installation of the solar panels, the property owner may then seek a
determination of the location of these appendages from the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.084 AIR-SUPPORTED AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES.
   Air-supported and other similar structures may be erected for a period not
exceeding seven days for religious, educational, recreational or similar
purposes and shall otherwise be constructed as required by all applicable
building ordinances adopted by the village from time to time.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1048, passed 11-15-2010)
§ 153.085 ELECTRICAL AND TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Infrastructure below grade. All gas, electric and any other utilities
serving a principal or accessory structure shall be buried beneath the surface
of the soil. This includes all outdoor cables, wiring, switching cubicles,
meters and other outdoor equipment.
   (B)   Requirements for infrastructure to be placed above grade.
      (1)   Any equipment which by design is required to be placed above grade
shall be installed with the following requirements:
         (a)   In either a side yard (except a side yard abutting a street in
the case of a corner lot) or the rear yard, not less than two feet from the
side or rear lot line;
         (b)   In the front yard or side yard abutting a street in the case of
a corner lot, no closer than seven feet to any lot line abutting a street nor
closer than two feet to any other lot line; and
         (c)   An exception to the required two foot setback to any side yard
or rear yard requires the irrevocable written consent of the owner or owners of
the immediately adjacent property or properties, the form of which consent
shall be satisfactorily to the Building Commissioner.
      (2)   Screening required. All above-ground infrastructure equipment
serving a principal or accessory structure shall be screened by using one or a
combination of the following methods:
         (a)   Structures or fence which minimize the visibility at grade from
neighboring properties and public ways during all seasons of the year.
         (b)   A natural screen comprised of dense evergreen plantings of
sufficient height and closely spaced to make the equipment inconspicuous to an
observer at grade from neighboring properties and public ways during all
seasons of the year.
         (c)   In addition to screening, all above-ground infrastructure
equipment shall be colored to blend with its surroundings.
   (C)   Request for exception. A written request for an exception to division
(A) or (B) shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner and must provide a
detailed explanation of the request, alternatives considered, and the reason(s)
for the proposed approach.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1388, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 153.086 ELECTRICAL GENERATORS.
   (A)   All electric generators shall be sound attenuated and rated by the
manufacturer for sound emissions not exceeding 68 decibels at a distance of
seven meters. All electric generators placed outside of the principal building
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s
specifications (including specifications for sound attenuation) and shall be
located in either a side yard (other than a side yard abutting a street in the
case of a corner lot) or the rear yard and shall not be closer than 15 feet to
either side lot line or the rear lot line. Sound emissions from an electric
generator shall not exceed 68 decibels measured at any lot line at an elevation
of five feet above grade. An electric generator placed in an integrated
weather-resistant housing shall not be considered an accessory structure
subject to the requirements of §
153.076.
   (B)   Electric generators may only be installed at grade and may not be
attached to any exterior wall or rooftop of any principal or accessory
structure.
   (C)   Electric generator testing shall be subject to the following
requirements, to the extent reasonably possible.
      (1)   Electric generators should be operated for testing purposes not
more than one time for a period not to exceed 30 minutes in any seven-day
period.
      (2)   Testing of all electric generators shall take place between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1048, passed 11-15-2010)
§§ 153.087 THROUGH 153.094 RESERVED.
B BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 153.095 PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES IN B BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   The uses in the following table designated by a P are permitted as of right
in B Business District. Except as specifically limited by this chapter, the
remaining uses listed in the following table may be permitted in the Business
District as a special use, which is designated by an S, and subject to the
issuance of a special use permit as provided in §
153.245 and subject to the additional standards set forth in §§
153.095 through
153.099. Uses that are not identified in the following table are prohibited in
the Business District.
Description of Use Category
Description of Use                                                                Category
Residential                                                                        
   Multiple-family dwellings above ground floor only                           P
Retail Trade
   Antique store, including the sale of antiques and semi-antiques, but not    P
including pawnshops
   Appliance store                                                             P
   Art gallery and/or picture framing store                                    P
   Art supply and/or stationery store                                          P
   Artisan and maker space                                                     P
   Automobile, motorcycle, boat and marine sales and showroom, indoor display, S
and storage
   Book and/or music store                                                     P
   China and/or glassware store                                                P
   Clothing store                                                              P
   Floor covering, carpet and/or rug store                                     P
   Florist                                                                     P
   Furniture store                                                             P
   Gift store                                                                  P
   Grocery store                                                               S
   Hardware store, tile store, household goods, and plumbing supply, including P
locksmith and small repair services
   Jewelry store                                                               P
   Kitchen, bath and cabinet store                                             P
   Leather goods and/or luggage store                                          P
   Office supply store                                                         P
   Optical goods store                                                         P
   Pharmacy and/or drug store                                                  P
   Shoe store                                                                  P
   Sporting goods store, including sales, rental and repair of bicycles and othPr
sporting equipment
   Toy store and/or hobby shop                                                 P
   Wallpaper and paint store                                                   P
Food and Beverage
   Beer, wine and spirits shop                                                 P
   Brew pub                                                                    S
   Catering (as a principal use)                                               S
   Craft brewery/distillery/meadery/winery                                     S
   Outdoor dining accessory to restaurant, full service; restaurant, limited   S
service; or specialty food and beverage
   Restaurant, full service                                                    P
   Restaurant, limited service                                                 P
   Specialty food and beverage                                                 P
Services
   Bank                                                                        S
   Barber shop                                                                 P
   Business, professional, and financial services offices above ground floor   P
   Business, professional, and financial services offices, ground floor        S
   Dry cleaner and laundry receiving shop, but not processing or cleaning      P
   Hair salon and/or day spa                                                   P
   Interior decorating service                                                 P
   Medical/dental offices, immediate care, and specialty care, above ground floPr
   Medical/dental offices, immediate care, and specialty care, ground floor    S
   One-on-one educational services                                             P
   Performing arts theater                                                     S
   Photography studio                                                          P
   Physical fitness facilities, including one-on-one personal training         S
   Schools, training and educational services                                  S
   Shoe repair                                                                 S
   Tailor                                                                      P
   United States post office                                                   P
   Weight loss clinic                                                          S
Miscellaneous
   Additions to or modifications of buildings or structures resulting in a flooS
area of 10,000 square feet or more
   Boutique hotel                                                              S
   New buildings or structures with a floor area of 10,000 square feet or more S
   Planned unit developments                                                   S
   Principal buildings with height in excess of the maximum permitted, but not Sn
excess of 40 feet
   Substantial alterations to buildings or structures resulting in a floor areaS
of 10,000 square feet or more
   Building-mounted wind energy systems (BWES)                                 S
   Small wind energy systems (SWES)                                            S
 
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 1024, passed 8-
10-2009; Ord. 1082, passed 5-21-2012; Ord. 1318, passed 10- 24-2022; Ord. 1356,
passed 4-15-2024)
§ 153.096 MAXIMUM HEIGHT.
   Except as otherwise authorized by this chapter, the maximum height of
buildings and structures shall be as follows:
 
Type                               Maximum Height
Principal buildings and structures 35 feet or 3-1/2 stories
 
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 153.097 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Front yard. No front yard shall be required, except that no building
hereafter erected or structurally altered along the westerly side of Green Bay
Road between the north line of Kenilworth Avenue and the south line of Wayland
Avenue shall project in an easterly direction beyond a line 70 feet westerly of
and parallel to the easterly line of Green Bay Road.
   (B)   Side yard. No side yard shall be required, but if one is provided it
shall have a width of not less than five feet.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 153.098 RESTRICTIONS ON PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES.
   Uses permitted or authorized as special uses in the B Business District are
subject to the following restrictions.
   (A)   All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking
or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except as
otherwise authorized by this chapter.
   (B)   Establishments of the “drive-in” or “drive-through” type offering
goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are
not permitted.
   (C)   Dwelling units shall have a minimum 600 square feet per unit.
   (D)   Off-street parking facilities for motor vehicles shall be provided in
accordance with the regulations set forth in §§
153.185 through
153.192 hereof.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 1057, passed 2-
22-2011)
§ 153.099 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   On a corner lot in the B Business District, nothing shall be erected,
placed, planted or allowed to grow in a manner as to impede the vision between
a height of two and one-half and ten feet above the centerline grades of the
intersecting streets in the area bounded by the lot lines of the corner lot,
and a line joining points along the lot lines 20 feet from the point of their
intersection.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009)
§§ 153.100 THROUGH 153.109 RESERVED.
S SCHOOL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 153.110 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the S School District:
   (A)   Schools; and
   (B)   Accessory uses as defined in §
153.003.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.111 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   The maximum height of buildings and structures in the S School District
shall be 35 feet or two and one-half stories.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.112 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.
 
Yard  Minimum Depth or Width
Front A minimum depth of 25 feet
Rear  A minimum depth equal to the larger of 25 feet or 20% of the depth of the
      lot
Side  A minimum width of six feet on each side of a building
 
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§§ 153.113 THROUGH 153.124 RESERVED.
P PARK AND PLAYGROUND DISTRICT
§ 153.125 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the P Park and Playground District:
   (A)   Public park or playground;
   (B)   Village Hall;
   (C)   Village recreation center; and
   (D)   Accessory uses as defined in §
153.003.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§§ 153.126 THROUGH 153.139 RESERVED.
M-1 MAHONEY PARK DISTRICT
§ 153.140 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the M-1 Mahoney Park District:
   (A)   Public park in accordance with the conditions upon which the Mahoney
Park District premises are owned and possessed by the village; and
   (B)   Accessory uses as defined in §
153.003 to the extent permitted by those conditions.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§§ 153.141 THROUGH 153.154 RESERVED.
M-2 MUNICIPAL LANDS DISTRICT
§ 153.155 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the M-2 Municipal Lands District:
   (A)   Municipal and park district uses existing at the time of passage of
this chapter; and
   (B)   Accessory uses as defined in §
153.003.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.156 EXTENSIONS OF USES; NEW USES.
   Extensions of existing uses to new locations in this district and new uses
in this district will constitute special uses, and the authorization thereof
shall be subject to the provisions of §
153.245.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§§ 153.157 THROUGH 153.169 RESERVED.
R RAILWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY, PARKWAY AND AUTOMOBILE PARKING DISTRICT
§ 153.170 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the R Railway Right-of-Way, Parkway and
Automobile Parking District:
   (A)   Railroad station;
   (B)   Right-of-way for transportation by rail;
   (C)   Parkway;
   (D)   Parking of passenger automobiles;
   (E)   Accessory uses as defined in §
153.003.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§§ 153.171 THROUGH 153.184 RESERVED.
OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE PARKING REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.185 GENERAL STATEMENT OF REQUIREMENTS.
   In all districts, off-street automobile parking facilities, both those
permitted under the provisions of this chapter and those required herein, shall
conform to the requirements set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.186 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Restrictions as to use. Except as may otherwise be provided in the
zoning regulations, off-street parking spaces accessory to principal uses
permitted by the zoning regulations shall be solely for the parking of
automobiles of occupants, patrons, visitors or employees.
   (B)   Time for complying with parking requirements. In order to provide for
off-street automobile parking facilities in accordance with the conditions
specified herein, a private garage constructed on the lot or parcel of land
occupied by the principal building or use, or an off-street automobile parking
area, shall be provided at the time of the erection of any of the principal
buildings or structures on the lot or parcel of land, or, except in the case of
a church or public school on an existing site, at the time the principal
buildings or structures are enlarged, converted or increased in capacity by
adding dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or any other unit of
measurement specified in this subchapter or are increased in the intensity of
use or in occupancy content, regardless of structural change.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.187 PARKING AREAS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   Location. Parking spaces required for single-family dwellings, single-
family attached dwellings or multiple-family dwellings shall be located on the
same lot as the dwelling or dwellings served. Parking spaces required for all
other buildings may be located on the same lot or within 500 feet of the lot on
which the building is located. All parking spaces, parking areas and garages
shall be so located and designed as to provide vehicular access to adjacent
streets and alleys with the least interference with through traffic movements.
   (B)   Parking areas separate from principal building. Only parking areas
open to the sky may be used to satisfy the off-street facilities parking
requirements when the parking facilities are to be constructed on a separate
lot or parcel of land which is removed from the site of the principal building
which requires the parking facilities. This provision shall not apply in a
business district or other district where a public garage for the storage of
private automobiles and vehicles is a permitted use.
   (C)   Plot plan showing location of parking area. No application for a
building permit for a new, enlarged or altered structure or improvement or use
shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for the structure or
improvement or use a plot plan drawn to scale, showing the required off-street
automobile parking facilities in accordance with the conditions specified
herein; nor shall a permit be issued for the improvement of a parking area to
serve as an accessory use to an existing building or buildings until a plot
plan, drawn to scale, has been submitted in accordance with the provisions
contained herein.
   (D)   Location of off-street parking and driveways in yards. Within the
maximum number of spaces allowed, off-street parking spaces may be located in
rear yards and side yards, subject, in the case of lots in residence districts,
to the restrictions stated in §
153.080, but in no case shall they be located in any front yard; provided,
however, that driveways serving single-family dwellings and single-family
attached dwellings and driveways providing direct access from a garage or
parking area to a street or alley (and not serving as a circulation aisle in
connection with any parking space) may traverse any required yard. Permanent
off-street parking shall not be located in the portion of a driveway that
traverses the front yard.
   (E)   Private garages; driveways located below grade. Except in the B
Business District, no building or part of a building shall be constructed or
structurally altered to create any private garage or other place for the
storage or parking of automobiles if any part of an automobile stored or parked
in the space would be below the natural, unaltered adjoining grade of the lot
on which the building is situated. Except in the B Business District, no part
of any driveway or other impervious surface leading to a private garage shall
be constructed so the surface thereof is below the natural, unaltered adjoining
grade of the lot on which it is situated, except to the extent that the
Administrative Official shall have determined that the topography of the lot
requires all or any part of the driveway to be below the natural, unaltered
adjoining grade of the lot and the driveway would not present undue risks to
public safety or create excessive additional burdens upon village sewer systems
for drainage of stormwater.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 976, passed 4-9-2007; Ord. 1024, passed 8-10-
2009)
§ 153.188 COLLECTIVE PROVISIONS; CONTROL.
   (A)   Collective provisions. Parking spaces required for separate uses in
nonresidence districts may be provided collectively if the total number of
spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for
each use; and if all regulations governing the location of accessory parking
space in relation to the uses served are observed. But no parking space, or
portion thereof, shall serve as the required space for more than one use.
   (B)   Control of parking areas. Where required parking facilities are
provided off the site of the principal building or structure generating the
need for parking facilities in accordance with the provisions of this section,
the land upon which the parking facilities are located, or to be located, shall
be in the same possession, either by deed or long term lease, as the property
occupied by the use to which the parking facilities are auxiliary, in which
case the owner of the land shall be bound by covenants filed of record in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds or the Registrar of Titles of the county,
requiring the owner, his or her heirs or assigns to maintain the required
number of parking facilities throughout the existence of the principal use.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.189 SIZE; IMPROVEMENTS; SCREENING; SIGNS.
   (A)   A required parking space shall be at least eight and one-half feet in
width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps
and columns.
   (B)   All required parking spaces shall be surfaced with all weather hard
surface materials, as herein defined.
   (C)   All open automobile parking areas containing more than three parking
spaces shall be effectively screened on each side, adjoining or fronting on any
property located in a residence district, by a densely planted compact hedge.
   (D)   No signs of any kind shall be maintained on any parking areas except
as permitted by the Kenilworth Sign Code.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.190 REPAIR WORK.
   No motor vehicle repair work shall be permitted in required parking spaces
except of an emergency nature.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.191 REQUIREMENTS OF SIZE, ACCESS AND MARKING OF SPACES.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, an off-street parking space shall
consist of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening its
doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street
or alley and maneuvering room. Required off-street parking areas for three or
more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked, and shall be so
designated, maintained and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental
to parking shall be on any public street, walk or alley, and so that any
automobile may be parked and unparked without moving another. Tandem parking is
permitted in the B Business District for multiple-family dwellings.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1024, passed 8-10-2009)
§ 153.192 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum off-street parking facilities shall be provided. When
the determination of the number of required parking spaces results in the
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall require one additional
space.
 
Use                                   Number of Spaces
Church on a new site                  At least 1 parking space for each 10
                                      seating spaces in the main auditorium
                                      At least 1 parking space for each 1,000
Library or art gallery                square feet of floor area open to the
                                      public
Multiple-family dwelling              At least three parking spaces for each
                                      two dwelling units
Nonresidential uses in the B Business At least 1 parking space for each 600
District                              square feet of floor area above the
                                      ground floor
School on a new site                  At least 3 parking spaces for each 2
                                      rooms in which classes are conducted
Single-family dwelling and single-    At least one parking space
family attached dwelling
 
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 918, passed 5-10-2004; Ord. 976, passed 4-9-
2007; Ord. 1024, passed 8-10-2009)
§§ 153.193 THROUGH 153.204 RESERVED.
NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES
§ 153.205 INTENT.
   (A)   Within the districts established by this chapter or by future
amendment hereof, there may exist lots, structures and uses of land and
structures which are lawfully existing at the time of passage of this chapter
or an amendment, but which are or would be prohibited, regulated or restricted
by this chapter or the amendment. It is the intent of this subchapter to permit
these lawfully existing nonconformities (herein referred to as
“nonconformities”) to continue until they are removed or terminated, but not to
encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this subchapter that the
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, not be used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district. Any structure or use which is not lawfully existing at the time of
passage of this chapter or any future amendment hereto and which is in conflict
with the requirements of this chapter or an amendment shall remain unlawful
under this chapter or an amendment.
   (B)   Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a
structure, of land or of structure and land in combination shall not be
extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by the addition of other
uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
   (C)   Non-conforming signs shall be governed by this section and §§
153.030 through
153.060 of this chapter.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.206 NONCONFORMING LOT IN RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   In any residence district, notwithstanding regulations imposed by
other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling or an addition
thereto and customary accessory buildings, all of which comply with subsection
(B) below, may be constructed on a lot consisting entirely of a tract of land
that:
      (1)   Has less than the prescribed minimum lot size;
      (2)   Is shown by a recorded or registered plat or deed to have been
owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when
the creation of a lot of the size at the same location would not have been
prohibited by any zoning ordinance; and
      (3)   Has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining
tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the creation of the lot
has been prohibited by the applicable zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Construction permitted by subsection (A) above shall comply with all
regulations (except minimum lot area) that are generally applicable in the
district in which the lot is located, subject only to variances, if any, as
shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Appeals.
   (C)   If two or more lots of record or combinations of lots of record and
portions of lots of record, with continuous frontage, are in single ownership
at April 14, 1969 or at any time thereafter, and if all or part of the lots do
not meet the requirements established for lot area in the residence district in
which they are located, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
undivided parcel for purposes of this chapter, and no portion of the parcel
shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot area
requirements established for the district by this chapter, nor shall any
division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with an area below the
requirements stated in this chapter for the district.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.207 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter lawful use of land
exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter
or an amendment, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, provided:
   (A)   No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the date of passage or
amendment of this chapter;
   (B)   No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion
of the land other than that occupied by the use at the date of passage or
amendment of this chapter;
   (C)   If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of
more than 30 days, any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which the land is
located; and
   (D)   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.208 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES USED FOR A PERMITTED USE.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the time of passage or amendment of this
chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter or an amendment
by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on
the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, the structure may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.
   (A)   The structure may be enlarged, repaired or structurally altered,
provided that no enlargement, repair or alteration shall either create an
additional nonconformity or increase the extent of any existing nonconformity.
   (B)   If the nonconforming structure is located in any district other than
Districts R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 and is damaged or destroyed by any means to an
extent of more than 75% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the regulations for the
district in which it is located.
   (C)   If the nonconforming structure is located in Districts R-1, R-2, R-
3 or R-4 and is damaged or destroyed to an extent of more than 75% of its
replacement cost at the time of its destruction, by any means not within the
control of the owner thereof, such as fire, flood, earthquake, tornado or other
acts of God, it may be reconstructed to the same size and location as was
existing prior to the damage or destruction; provided, however, that the
structure was lawfully existing at the time of its construction and no repair,
restoration or reconstruction shall be made that would create an additional
nonconformity or increase the extent of any nonconformity existing at the time
of destruction.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 946, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 153.209 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND LAND IN
COMBINATION.
   If lawful use of structures or of structures and land in combination exists
at the date of passage or amendment of this chapter, that would not be allowed
in the district in which located under the terms of this chapter or an
amendment, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   No structure shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located.
   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for the use at the time of
passage or amendment of this chapter, but no use shall be extended to occupy
any land outside the building.
   (C)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter
be resumed.
   (D)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18
months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes
access to the premises), the structure or structure and land in combination,
shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   (E)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land. For this purpose, DESTRUCTION is defined as
damage to an extent of more than 75% of the replacement cost at time of
destruction.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.210 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that
the cubic content existing when the structure became nonconforming shall not be
increased.
   (B)   If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs
and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe
or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be
restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to
be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order
of the official.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.211 USES PERMITTED AS SPECIAL USES NOT NONCONFORMING USES.
   Any use which is permitted as a special use in any district under the terms
of this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in the district but
shall without further action be considered a conforming use.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§§ 153.212 THROUGH 153.224 RESERVED.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT: BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
§ 153.225 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   An Administrative Official designated by ordinance of the village
shall administer and enforce this chapter. He or she may be provided with the
assistance of other persons as may be directed by the ordinance.
   (B)   If the Administrative Official shall find that any of the provisions
of this chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the
person responsible for the violations, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or other structures; removal
of illegal buildings or other structures or of illegal additions, alterations
or structural changes; and discontinuance of any illegal work being done. He or
she shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance
with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 949, passed 2-13-2006)
§ 153.226 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No change in the use of land or of an existing building shall be made,
no building constructed, structurally altered or moved after the date of
passage of this chapter shall be occupied, and no land vacant on the date of
passage of this chapter shall be used for any purpose, until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Administrative Official stating that the
building and the proposed use thereof, or the proposed use of vacant land, as
the case may be, conforms to applicable building and health laws and ordinances
and to this chapter; provided, however, that a temporary certificate of
compliance may be issued by the Administrative Official for a period of not
more than six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building
pending completion, which temporary certificate may contain conditions and
safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
   (B)   Every application for a building permit shall be deemed to be an
application for a certificate of compliance. Every application for a
certificate of compliance for a new use of land where no building permit is
required shall be made directly to the Administrative Official. An application
for a certificate of compliance shall be issued or denied, as may be
appropriate, within 15 days after receipt by the Administrative Official of
written notice of completion of the construction, alteration or moving of the
building to which the application relates, or within ten days after his or her
receipt of the application if it relates to a new use of land where no building
permit is required.
   (C)   No nonconforming structure or use shall be renewed, changed or
extended until a certificate of compliance shall have been issued by the
Administrative Official; provided that within one year from the date of passage
of this chapter (or of any amendment hereto which causes a structure or use to
become nonconforming) owners or occupants of any premises with respect to which
any nonconforming structure or use exists may apply for a certificate of
compliance. The certificate of compliance shall state specifically that the
structure or use is nonconforming and the particulars in which the
nonconforming structure or use differs from the requirements of this chapter.
Failure to make the application within one year shall be presumptive evidence
that no nonconformity as to structure or use existed with respect to the
property at the time of passage of this chapter or an amendment and that any
noncompliance of the structure or use with the requirements of this chapter
occurred after the time of its passage.
   (D)   The Administrative Official shall maintain a record of all
certificates of compliance, and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any
person.
   (E)   Failure to obtain a certificate of compliance in connection with any
renewal, extension or change of a nonconforming structure or use shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided by §
153.999.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 949, passed 2-13-2006)
§ 153.227 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS,
PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.
   Certificates of compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications
approved by the Administrative Official authorize only the use, arrangement and
construction set forth in the approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and
punishable as provided by §
153.999.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 949, passed 2-13-2006)
§§ 153.228 THROUGH 153.239 RESERVED.
ZONING ADMINISTRATION, APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES
§ 153.240 BOARD OF APPEALS, JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Establishment and membership. A Zoning Board of Appeals (herein
sometimes referred to as the “Board”) is hereby established, which shall
consist of seven members who shall be residents of the village. The members of
the Board in office on the date of passage of this chapter shall continue in
office for the balance of their respective terms. The term of successors
appointed to the Board to succeed incumbents, as their terms expire by lapse of
time, shall be for five years. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant. Members of the
Board, whether appointed for a full term or to fill a vacancy, shall be
appointed by the President and Board of Trustees of the village voting jointly.
One of the members shall be appointed by the President and the Board of
Trustees as Chairperson of the Board, and shall hold the office until his or
her successor is appointed. Members of the Board may be removed from office by
the President and Board of Trustees voting jointly, for cause upon written
charges and after public hearing. All members of the Board shall serve without
compensation.
   (B)   Proceedings of the Board.
      (1)   The Board shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs
and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings shall be held at
the call of the Chairperson and at other times as the Board may determine. The
Chairperson, or in his or her absence the acting Chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the
public.
      (2)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating
that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the
office of the Board.
   (C)   Jurisdiction and powers.
      (1)   The Board shall have the following jurisdiction and powers:
         (a)   Appeals from action of Administrative Official.  To hear and
decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination
(hereinafter collectively referred to as a “decision”) made by the
Administrative Official under this chapter;
         (b)   Variances. To hear and pass upon applications for variances from
the terms of this chapter in the manner and subject to the standards specified
in this chapter;
         (c)   Special uses. To consider, hold public hearings on, and make
findings and recommendations to the Board of Trustees with respect to
applications for special uses in all districts other than the B Business
District in the manner and subject to the standards specified in this chapter;
and
         (d)   Other matters. To hear and decide all other matters which it is
required to pass upon under this chapter.
      (2)   The Plan Commission shall have the jurisdiction and power to
consider, hold public hearings on, and make findings and recommendations to the
Board of Trustees with respect to applications for special uses in the B
Business District in the manner and subject to the standards specified in this
chapter.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 1057, passed 2-
22-2011)
§ 153.241 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMISSION.
   (A)   Statement of purpose and intent. The purpose of establishing the
Architectural Review Commission is to:
      (1)   Promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general
welfare of the citizens of the village;
      (2)   Enhance the values of the property throughout the village; and
      (3)   Encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness, cohesiveness
and compatibility of new buildings and of remodeled buildings and additions
thereto, so as to maintain and improve the established standards of property
values within the non-residential districts, as well as in special uses in the
residential districts, of the village.
   (B)   Establishment and membership. An Architectural Review Commission
(herein sometimes referred to as the “Commission”) is hereby established, which
shall consist of seven members. All members shall be appointed by the Village
President and Board of Trustees, voting jointly, based on their demonstrated
interest or expertise in design, architecture, architectural history, landscape
design, building construction and rehabilitation, local history and planning,
and other criteria deemed relevant by the Village President and Board of
Trustees. The seven members shall serve for staggered three-year terms. The
terms of the seven members shall continue until their successors have been
appointed and qualified. All members of the Architectural Review Commission
shall serve without compensation.
   (C)   Chairman. The President, with the approval of the Board of Trustees,
shall appoint one of the members of the Architectural Review Commission to
serve as Chairman. The Chairman shall have power to administer oaths.
   (D)   Meetings, quorum. Meetings of the Architectural Review Commission
shall be held at the call of the Chairman and shall be called whenever an
application for certificate of appropriateness is submitted for consideration.
Four members shall constitute a quorum. The Chairman shall be entitled to be
counted in determining a quorum and to vote as a member. The Architectural
Review Commission may adopt its own rules of procedure not inconsistent with
this chapter. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Commission shall
keep minutes of its proceedings and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Architectural Review Commission shall have the
following powers and duties:
      (1)   To consult with and cooperate with the Plan Commission, other
village departments, and any other municipal or governmental bodies, on matters
affecting the appearance of the village.
      (2)   To study exterior design drawings, building materials and landscape
and site plans for any building or structure in the non-residential districts
of the village or any residential district of the village that is also subject
to a special use, and to make recommendations to the Board of Trustees or the
Village Manager, as to the architectural or aesthetic aspects thereof.
      (3)   To review applications for permanent signs that are not exempt
signs under §§
153.045 through
153.060.
      (4)   Subject to the provisions of §
153.242, to hold meetings or hearings, when required, on the issuance of
certificates of appropriateness as provided in §
153.242, in connection with questions pertaining to applications for building
permits, and to issue or deny such certificate of appropriateness pursuant to
the provisions of §
153.242.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 153.242 CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   Certificate required for certain buildings, structures and signs. No
building or other permit otherwise required under any ordinance of the village
for any of the following shall be issued by the appropriate village official
except upon the granting of a certificate of appropriateness by the
Architectural Review Commission:
      (1)   The erection, construction, alteration or repair of any building or
structure in any non-residential district of the village or any residential
district of the village that is also subject to a special use; provided,
however, that no certificate of appropriateness will be required if the
Building Commissioner makes a determination that in any non-residential
district and for any special use in any residential district, the appearance
plan does not apply, and, in the Business District, the Kenilworth Design
Guidelines—Business District do not apply, to the work for which the building
or other permit is being sought; and
      (2)   The location, erection, use, display, construction, installation,
enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation or repair of any permanent sign
as defined in, and not exempt sign under §§
153.045 through
153.060.
   A certificate of appropriateness is deemed to authorize only the particular
building, structure or sign at the specific location for which it was issued
and shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such
building, structure or sign shall be removed or relocated.
   (B)   Special procedures in connection with other applications. Whenever any
application for a special use or planned unit development is filed pursuant to
this chapter as a companion to an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, and such companion application requires approval by the Board
of Trustees, the authority to hear and decide the application for certificate
of appropriateness otherwise delegated to the Architectural Review Commission
pursuant to this section shall be reserved to the Board of Trustees. For such
purposes, the Board of Trustees shall have all of the authority granted to, and
shall be subject to all of the limitations imposed on, the Architectural Review
Commission by this section; provided, however, that the provisions governing
public notice and hearing of, and action on, the application for special use or
planned unit development of this ordinance shall govern.
   (C)   Standards for certificates of appropriateness for buildings and
structures. The Architectural Review Commission shall grant a certificate of
appropriateness for the erection, construction, alteration or repair of any
building or structure in any non-residential district of the village that is in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of the standards set forth in the
ordinances, codes and regulations of the village and, in any non-residential
district and for any special use in any residential district, the appearance
plan, and, in the Business District, the Kenilworth Design Guidelines—Business
District, which are incorporated in and made a part of this chapter as
Appendices A and
C, respectively . In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the
Kenilworth Design Guidelines —Business District and the remaining provisions of
this chapter, the provision that is the most restrictive or imposes the higher
standard shall govern and control.
   (D)   Standards for certificates of appropriateness for signs. The
Architectural Review Commission shall grant a certificate of appropriateness
for the location, erection, use, display, construction, installation,
enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation or repair of any permanent sign
as defined in, and not exempt under, §§
153.045 through
153.060 that is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the standards
set forth in the ordinances, codes, and regulations of the village, and, in any
non- residential district and for any special use in any residential district,
the appearance plan, and, in the Business District, the Kenilworth Design
Guidelines —Business District, and the standards of §
153.052(C).
   (E)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. All applications for a
certificate of appropriateness shall be subject to the standards and procedures
established in §§
153.240 through
153.249.
   (F)   Pre-application conference. Prior to filing an application for a
certificate of appropriateness, the prospective applicant may request an
informal conference with the Administrative Official to discuss the proposed
application. The pre-application conference does not require either the payment
of an application fee or the filing of an application.
   (G)   Procedures for certificate of appropriateness approval.
      (1)   Application review. Upon receipt of a properly completed
application for approval of a certificate of appropriateness, the
Administrative Official shall review the application for compliance with all
applicable requirements. Completed applications will then be forwarded to the
Architectural Review Commission for a public hearing.
      (2)   Public hearing. The Architectural Review Commission shall hold a
public hearing on an application for a certificate of appropriateness no later
than 60 days after receiving a properly completed application from the
Administrative Official. The hearing shall be concluded not later than 120 days
following the receipt of a completed application unless the applicant shall
agree to an extension. Notice for the public hearing shall be issued in the
manner provided in §
153.249.
      (3)   Findings of fact; decision. After the close of the public hearing,
the Commission shall make findings of fact in support of its decision to grant
or deny a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the standards set
forth in this chapter. The Commission shall make its decision issuing, issuing
with conditions, or denying the certificate of appropriateness. The Commission
shall specify in its decision such conditions that it deems necessary to assure
the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, and the compatibility
with the surrounding neighborhood and community. The decision shall be issued
within 30 days after the close of the public hearing and be forwarded to the
Administrative Official.
      (4)   Required vote. The Commission shall not approve a certificate of
appropriateness except on the concurring vote of a majority of the members of
the Commission present at the meeting. The Commission shall not deny a
certificate of appropriateness except on the concurring vote of four members of
the Commission.
      (5)   Effect of decision. The decision of the Commission on an
application for a certificate of appropriateness will be the final decision of
the village. In the event of denial of a certificate of appropriateness, the
applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision in the Circuit Court of
Cook County in the manner provided by law.
   (H)   Amendments to certificates of appropriateness.
      (1)   Major changes.
         (a)   Procedure for major changes. An applicant seeking a major change
after a certificate of appropriateness has been approved shall seek an
amendment to the certificate by submitting a new application and following the
procedures for approval, as established in this section. Major changes to an
approved certificate of appropriateness may be granted only by the Commission
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section.
         (b)   Major changes defined. All changes other than minor changes.
      (2)   Minor changes.
         (a)   Procedure for minor changes. A proposed minor change after a
certificate of appropriateness has been approved may be presented directly to
the Administrative Official for consideration in the event of extenuating and/
or unforeseen circumstances. The Administrative Official may approve minor
changes memorialized in a written document which shall be forwarded to the
Commission.
         (b)   Minor changes defined. Minor changes shall include changes in
specified materials or structural components due to product discontinuance or
unavailability or the like, with no change in quality.
   (I)   Duration, expiration and removal.
      (1)   No certificate of appropriateness shall be effective for a period
longer than 12 months unless a building permit is obtained and the erection,
construction, alteration or repair of the building or structure, or the
location, erection, display, construction, installation, enlargement,
expansion, alteration, operation, or repair of the sign covered by the
certificate, has commenced within that period and is thereafter diligently
pursued to completion. The Administrative Official may, upon written request of
the applicant, extend this time limit for a period not to exceed an additional
six months if the Administrative Official deems such extension to be
appropriate and necessary to avoid undue hardship to the applicant. The
applicant must submit a written request for an extension to the Administrative
Official prior to the expiration of the certificate of appropriateness. Any
such extension shall be made only after payment of the appropriate fee.
      (2)   The right to extend said time limit shall not include the right to
request additional relief or amendment to or expansion of the scope of the
certificate of appropriateness. If a certificate of appropriateness expires,
the applicant must reapply for a new certificate of appropriateness and such
re-application shall be treated as a new application.
(Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 1098, passed 4-29-2013)
§ 153.243 APPEALS.
   (A)   Scope and commencement. An appeal may be taken from any decision of
the Administrative Official by any person aggrieved or by any official,
department or bureau of the village affected by the decision. The appeal shall
be taken within the time as shall be provided by the rules of the Board, by
filing with the Administrative Official and with the Board a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Administrative Official shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the
decision appealed from was taken.
   (B)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the decision appealed from unless the Administrative Official
certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal has been filed with him or
her that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case the
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the
Administrative Official and on due cause shown.
   (C)   Hearing, notice and decision. The Board shall fix a reasonable time
and place for the hearing for appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due
notice to the parties in interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable
time. Any party may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or attorney.
With the concurring vote of four members, the Board may, as long as its action
is in conformity with this chapter, reverse or affirm in whole or in part or
modify the decision from which the appeal was taken, and to that end the Board
shall have all the powers of the Administrative Official with respect to the
decision.
   (D)   Maintenance of records. The Administrative Official shall maintain
complete records of all actions of the Board relative to appeals, and shall
cause the Board of Trustees to be kept informed on a current basis of the
disposition of each appeal.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.244 VARIATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (A)(2) below, the Board shall
grant variances from the regulations of this chapter in harmony with their
general purpose and intent, only in the specific instances hereinafter set
forth, where the Board makes a finding of fact based upon the standards
hereinafter presented, that there are practical difficulties or particular
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations.
      (2)   A variation application for a property located in the B Business
Zoning District that is eligible for review by the Plan Commission pursuant to
§
33.017 shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of subsection (H)
below.
   (B)   Application for variation. An application for a variation shall be
filed with the Administrative Official in the manner prescribed in §
153.247 of this chapter.
   (C)   Hearing, notice and decision. The Board or, as applicable, the Plan
Commission, shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing of an
application for a variation, give public notice thereof as well as due notice
to parties in interest, and decide the application within a reasonable time.
Any party may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or attorney. The
concurring vote of four members of the Board or, as applicable, the Plan
Commission, shall be necessary to grant or, in the case of the Plan Commission,
recommend approval of, a variation. No order or ordinance granting a variation
shall be effective for a period longer than six months unless a building permit
is obtained and the construction, alteration or moving of the building covered
by the order or ordinance is started within that period.
   (D)   Authorized variations. Variations from the terms of this chapter may
be granted only in the following instances and in no other:
      (1)   To vary any of the requirements of this chapter with respect to
minimum sizes of lots, maximum height of buildings and other structures,
maximum and minimum size of buildings, maximum lot coverage by structures and
other impervious surfaces, and minimum depth and width of yards;
      (2)   To vary any of the regulations contained in §§
153.075 through
153.086;
      (3)   To vary any of the regulations contained in §§
153.185 through
153.192;
      (4)   To vary the following requirements of §§
153.045 through
153.060, with respect to signs otherwise authorized in that part:
         (a)   Sign size;
         (b)   Sign height;
         (c)   Combined sign area for on-premises commercial message signs;
         (d)   Logo size; and
         (e)   Location, placement or illumination of signs on a building, or
structure, or on the ground.
   (E)   Standards for variations.
      (1)   The Board shall not grant, and the Plan Commission, as applicable,
shall not recommend approval of, a variance from any of the regulations of this
chapter, as authorized by subsection (D) above, unless it shall make a finding
of fact, based upon the evidence presented to it in a particular case, that:
         (a)   In the case of property the principal use of which is for
business purposes, the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
applicable to the district in which it is located;
         (b)   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
         (c)   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
      (2)   For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Board or,
as applicable, the Plan Commission, in making its determination whether the
plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances and whether the variation,
if granted, may alter the essential character of the locality, shall take into
consideration the following factors to the extent they are established by the
evidence and deemed relevant by the Board or, as applicable, the Plan
Commission:
         (a)   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
condition of the property in question would result in a practical difficulty or
particular hardship upon the applicant for the variation, as distinguished from
a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulation were enforced;
         (b)   The conditions upon which the application for variation is based
would not be applicable generally to other property in the same district;
         (c)   The request for the variation is not based exclusively upon the
desire to make more money out of the property;
         (d)   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the property; and
         (e)   The variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and
air to adjacent properties or substantially increase the run-off of stormwater
onto adjacent properties or public streets, or substantially increase
congestion in the public streets or increase the danger of fire or otherwise
endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values
within the neighborhood.
      (3)   For the purpose of further supplementing the above standards and
factors in connection with requests for variations from the requirements of §
153.068, the Board, in making its determination, may also take into
consideration the following factors, among other factors deemed relevant by the
Board, to the extent they are established by the evidence and deemed relevant
by the Board:
         (a)   The effects of the proposed construction on the overall
appearance of the size and bulk of the existing structures on the property when
viewed from streets abutting the property and from adjacent properties;
         (b)   The proximity of the proposed construction to streets abutting
the property and to adjacent properties;
         (c)   The relative proximity of the proposed construction to streets
abutting the property and to adjacent properties in comparison with the
relative proximity of existing structures on other properties in the same
vicinity;
         (d)   The magnitude of the variation requested in absolute terms and
in proportion to the floor area and/or impervious surfaces allowed if the
strict letter of the regulation were enforced;
         (e)   The need for other variations in connection with the proposed
construction and the nature and extent of those other variations;
         (f)   The need for the variation to allow the owner or occupant of the
property to make reasonable use of a structure, the design of which otherwise
fails to conform to generally accepted or prevailing standards of the village
for the use and enjoyment of a structure as a residence for a family;
         (g)   The efficient and advantageous use of existing structures and
the degree to which the proposed construction makes efficient, economical and
advantageous use of existing and proposed floor area and impervious surfaces;
and
         (h)   The reasonableness of the variation requested in light of the
purposes served by the proposed construction and the design problems of the
existing structure intended to be alleviated by the proposed construction.
      (4)   For purposes of supplementing the above standards and factors in
connection with requests for variations from the requirements of §
153.067, the Board, in making its determination, may also take into
consideration the following factors, among other factors deemed relevant by the
Board, to the extent they are established by the evidence and deemed relevant
by the Board:
         (a)   The height and location of existing and proposed structures on
the property and adjacent properties;
         (b)   The need to maintain the height of the proposed structure in
relation to the height of an existing structure in order to enable the existing
and proposed structures to present a pleasing appearance reflecting
architectural integrity and harmony among separate structural elements; and
         (c)   The need to maintain a particular height of a proposed addition
to a structure in order to observe sound structural design and accommodate good
building practices in the construction of the proposed addition.
      (5)   For the purpose of supplementing the above standards with regard to
variations for signs, the Board or, as applicable, the Plan Commission, in
making its determination or recommendationshall take into consideration the
following factors to the extent they are established by the evidence and deemed
relevant by the Board or, as applicable, the Plan Commission:
         (a)   In the case of a commercial message sign, strict application of
the Kenilworth Sign Code would render the applicant unable to yield a
reasonable return from its property.
         (b)   The variation will not endanger the public safety or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood;
         (c)   The variation would not result in a sign or master sign plan as
required by the Kenilworth Sign Code that:
            1.   Would not be in harmony with the general and specific purposes
for which the Kenilworth Sign Code and the provisions from which a variation is
sought were enacted;
            2.   Would be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
materially injurious to the enjoyment, use, development, or value of adjacent
property or improvements;
            3.   Would substantially increase congestion in the public streets
due to parking or traffic;
            4.   Would create an unnecessary distraction to vehicle and
pedestrian traffic; and
            5.   Would result in a sign that is not aesthetically consistent
with the environment, or not proportional or architecturally compatible with
existing land uses and buildings and with any adjacent residential
neighborhood.
   (F)   Conditions. The Board may impose and, as applicable, the Plan
Commission may recommend imposing, conditions and restrictions upon the
premises benefitted by the variance as may be necessary to comply with the
standards set out in subsection (E) above to reduce the injurious effect of the
variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and better to carry out the
general intent of this chapter.
   (G)   Prohibited variations.
      (1)   No variation as to use. Under no circumstances shall the Board
grant or, as applicable, the Plan Commission recommend approval of, a variance
under this section to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this
chapter in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication
prohibited in the district by this chapter.
      (2)   No variation as to prohibited sign.  Under no circumstances shall
the Board or, as applicable, the Plan Commission recommend approval of, a
variation under this section to allow a sign prohibited under §
153.050.
   (H)   Certain variations in the B Business Zoning District.
      (1)   A variation application that is eligible for review pursuant to §
33.017 shall be heard by the Plan Commission in accordance with subsection (C)
above.
      (2)   The Plan Commission shall recommend approval of variances from the
regulations of this chapter in harmony with their general purpose and intent,
only in the specific instances set forth in this section, where the Plan
Commission makes a finding of fact based upon the standards set forth in this
section, that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations.
      (3)   Within 30 days following the date of completion of the public
hearing, the Plan Commission shall forward a coy of its written recommendation
to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees, upon receipt of the Plan
Commission’s recommendations and without further public hearing, by ordinance
may grant the application for the variation with conditions and restrictions,
as may be deemed necessary the Board of Trustees, or deny the application, or
refer it back to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 1057, passed 2-
22-2011; Ord. 1355, passed 4-15-2024)
§ 153.245 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Classes. The following types of uses which, because of their unique
character, can only be properly authorized in any particular district or
districts upon consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon
neighboring property and of the public need for the particular use at the
particular location, are declared to be special uses unless specifically
permitted under this chapter in the district in which proposed to be located:
      (1)   Places of religious worship;
      (2)   Schools including pre-schools and day care centers (except where
conducted as a home occupation);
      (3)   Libraries (where established as the principal use);
      (4)   Other uses private in character but operated not for profit and of
a nature that the operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to
their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities;
      (5)   Uses operated by a public agency or publicly-regulated utility, or
uses traditionally affected with a public interest;
      (6)   Uses identified in §
153.095 as special uses in the B Business District;
      (7)   Single-family attached dwellings where:
         (a)   The lot is located on Ridge Road between Greenwood Avenue and
Park Drive in the R-4 District;
         (b)   The single-family attached dwellings are located in a pre-
existing, multi-family building; and
         (c)   Through substantial alteration of the pre-existing building, the
number of dwelling units previously existing will be reduced by 50% or more;
and
      (8)   Building-mounted wind energy systems (BWES) and small wind energy
systems (SWES) as accessory uses in all districts.
   (B)   Changes in uses. If a use permitted in any district shall become a
special use by reason of the amendment of this section, all uses in existence
on October 13, 1998 shall remain permitted uses and be deemed authorized
special uses on the lots or parts of the lots on which the uses then exist. Any
changes in the use of a structure from a permitted use to a special use or any
accessory use (as defined in §
153.003) that is accessory to a special use shall require authorization as a
special use under this section.
   (C)   Buildings. Except as may be specifically authorized by action of the
Board of Trustees pursuant to subsection (J) below, the construction of a
building or the addition or alteration to the exterior of any building (other
than routine repairs and maintenance) used for or associated with a special use
or any accessory uses that are accessory uses to any special use shall be
deemed a special use requiring further authorization as a special use under
this section, whether the authorized special use or accessory use is authorized
by reason of having been a permitted use prior to the amendment of this section
or is authorized by action of the Board of Trustees pursuant to subsection (J)
below.
   (D)   Impervious surfaces. Except as may be specifically authorized pursuant
to this section, the construction or installation of or the addition to or
alteration (other than routine repairs and maintenance and replacements and
relocations) of impervious surfaces (other than buildings) used for or
associated with a special use or any accessory uses that are accessory uses to
a special use shall be deemed a special use requiring further authorization as
a special use under this section, except that an aggregate of impervious
surfaces (other than buildings) of up to 2% of the lot area may be constructed
or installed on a lot after October 13, 1998 without the prior authorization
otherwise required under this section if the aggregate of all impervious
surfaces (other than buildings) does not and will not exceed 18% of the lot
area, and if all other applicable provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable ordinances are complied with.
   (E)   Playground equipment. Except as may be specifically authorized
pursuant to this section, the construction or installation of or the addition
to or alteration (other than routine repairs and maintenance and replacements)
of playground equipment used for or associated with a special use or any
accessory uses that are accessory uses to a special use shall be deemed a
special use requiring further authorization as a special use under this
section, except that:
      (1)   Playground equipment in existence on October 13, 1998 shall remain
a permitted use on the lots or parts of lots on which the playground equipment
exists on October 13, 1998. Playground equipment for which a building permit or
other request for approval was on file with the village on or before October
13, 1998 shall be considered a permitted use on the lots or parts of lots on
which the playground equipment is proposed to be situated, but only to the
extent a permit therefor or other approval would have been issued (or was not
required) under ordinances in effect prior to October 13, 1998. A building
permit shall be obtained for any alteration (other than routine repairs and
maintenance), relocation, replacement (other than replacement with items
substantially equivalent in size and function) or expansion of the playground
equipment. No building permit shall be issued for any alteration, relocation,
replacement or expansion without authorization as a special use under this
section if the Administrative Official shall determine that the alteration,
relocation, replacement or expansion will or may materially and adversely
affect the public health, safety and welfare, injure the value of other
property in the neighborhood, or interfere with the use and enjoyment of
neighboring properties, compared with the effects of the playground equipment
on the factors before the proposed alteration, relocation, replacement or
expansion;
      (2)   Playground equipment authorized by action of the Board of Trustees
as a special use under this section may be altered, relocated, replaced or
expanded within any applicable limits of the approval. A building permit shall
be obtained for any alteration (other than routine repairs and maintenance),
relocation, replacement (other than replacement with items substantially
equivalent in size and function) or expansion of the playground equipment. No
building permit shall be issued for any alteration, relocation, replacement or
expansion without further authorization under this section if the
Administrative Official shall determine that the alteration, relocation,
replacement, or expansion will or may result in a material departure from the
site plan previously approved by the Board of Trustees or will or may
materially and adversely affect the considerations under which the playground
equipment was previously approved as a special use; and
      (3)   Playground equipment (whether fixed or movable) that, when put to
its intended use does not have or is not intended to have a fixed or single
location on the land, shall not require authorization as a special use or
accessory use that is accessory to a special use.
   (F)   Application. An application for special use shall be filed and
processed in the manner prescribed in §
153.247.
   (G)   Standards. No special use shall be recommended by the Board of Appeals
or the Plan Commission, as the case may be, or authorized by the Board of
Trustees unless the Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission, as the case may
be, and the Board of Trustees shall have taken into consideration the following
factors to the extent deemed relevant to the proposed special use and the
principal structure and each accessory structure used for or associated with
the proposed special use:
      (1)   The necessity for the public convenience at the particular proposed
location;
      (2)   The effects of the proposed design, location and operation on the
public health, safety and welfare;
      (3)   Injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in which
it is proposed to be located;
      (4)   Interference with the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties;
      (5)   Compatibility with permitted uses in the district in which it is
proposed to be located;
      (6)   Increased traffic congestion on public ways or increased parking
required on public ways;
      (7)   Damage to or destruction of natural scenic or historic features of
significance to the village or the immediate neighborhood; and
      (8)   In the case of playground equipment, in addition to the foregoing
applicable factors, its proximity to and effect on neighboring properties, its
expected intensity of use, and the consistency of the equipment and its
expected use with play equipment customarily associated with a residential use.
   (H)   Authorization; procedures.  
      (1)   Board of Appeals; Plan Commission. Special uses may be recommended
by the Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission, as the case may be, after a
public hearing called and held in the manner prescribed in this chapter and
required by law.
      (2)   Architectural Review Commission. Where the application for special
use also requires a certificate of appropriateness, the Architectural Review
Commission shall review and provide consulting recommendations on the
application for special use at a public meeting. In such instances, the
Architectural Review Commission shall provide comment and recommendations to
the Board of Trustees as to whether the building design and materials,
landscape plan and other proposed exterior aspects of the special use are in
conformity with, in any non-residential district and for any special use in any
residential district, the appearance plan, and, in the Business District, the
Kenilworth Design Guidelines—Business District. Within 30 days following the
date of the completion of the Architectural Review Commission meeting on the
application for special use, the Architectural Review Commission shall forward
a written copy of its recommendations to the Plan Commission or Board of
Appeals, as the case may be.
   (I)   Conditions. The Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission, as the case
may be, may recommend and the Board of Trustees may provide conditions and
restrictions upon the location and operation of a special use and associated
structures, including, but not limited to, provisions for off-street parking
and loading, as may be deemed necessary to promote the general objectives of
this chapter.
   (J)   Action by the Board of Trustees. The findings of the Board of Appeals
or the Plan Commission, as the case may be, on an application for a special
use, arrived at after public hearing, shall be submitted to the Board of
Trustees with a report and recommendations within a reasonable time. Where the
special use also requires a certificate of appropriateness, a written copy of
the Architectural Review Commission’s recommendations on the factors in
paragraph (H)(2) above shall accompany the finding, report and recommendations
of the Board of Appeals or Plan Commission. The Board of Trustees, upon receipt
of the report and recommendations and without further public hearing, by
ordinance may grant the application for the special use with conditions and
restrictions as may be deemed necessary by the Board of Trustees, or deny the
application, or refer it back to the Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission,
as the case may be, for further consideration.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 976, passed 4-9-2007; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-
2009; Ord. 1057, passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 1082, passed 5-21- 2012; Ord. 1098,
passed 4-29-2013)
§ 153.246 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Authority. The Board of Trustees may, in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth in this section, and by ordinance duly
adopted, grant special uses authorizing the development of planned unit
developments pursuant to the provisions of this section for the development or
redevelopment of any parcel of land, or group of contiguous parcels of land
that are located in the B Business District.
   (B)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to make available a special
use procedure that departs from the strict application of the specific zoning
requirements of the B Business District in an effort to promote excellence in
project design on the part of owners, builders, architects and applicants and
to produce developments which are in keeping with the overall land use, open
space and other objectives of the village comprehensive plan. This special
regulatory technique is included in the village code in recognition that
traditional bulk, use, yard and other regulations may impose less appropriate
regulations upon the development of lots or areas that lend themselves to an
individual, planned approach.
      (2)   Intent. This section is intended to assure that the following land
use and development objectives are accomplished, in addition to the general
land use and development objectives set forth in §§
153.240 through
153.249:
         (a)   To facilitate a development pattern that is consistent with the
objectives of the village comprehensive plan and with the purpose as defined in
this subchapter, which promotes compatible land uses with surrounding
neighborhood;
         (b)   To permit a creative approach to the development and
redevelopment of land in the B Business District;
         (c)   To achieve a more desirable physical environment by allowing
greater flexibility in building design, and site plan layout, and use than
would be possible through the strict application of the generally applicable
zoning and subdivision regulations;
         (d)   To allow more efficient use of the land resulting in more
economic networks of utilities, streets and other facilities;
         (e)   To encourage land uses that promote public health, safety and
welfare; and
         (f)   To allow the relaxation of certain otherwise applicable
substantive requirements based upon procedural protections that provide for the
detailed review of individual proposals for more significant developments in
the B Business District.
   (C)   Requirements and standards. All planned unit developments shall be
subject to the requirements and standards of this section. Subject to the
applicant complying with the provisions of this section, a planned unit
development may deviate from strict conformance with the required density,
dimension, area, bulk, use, and other regulations applicable to the property
upon which the planned unit development is located, but only to the extent
specified in the ordinance approving the final planned unit development, and
excluding the regulations found in §§
153.205 through
153.335.
      (1)   Special use standards. No special use for a planned development
shall be recommended or granted pursuant to this section unless the applicant
shall establish that, in addition to the standards set forth in this section
153.246(C), the proposed development will meet each of the standards made
applicable to special uses pursuant to §
153.245(G).
      (2)   Minimum area of development. The applicant shall have the burden of
establishing that the subject property is of sufficient size and shape to be
planned and developed as a unified whole capable of meeting the objectives of
planned unit developments pursuant to this section.
      (3)   Unified ownership required. The entire property proposed for
planned development treatment shall be in single ownership or under unified
control as to ensure that the entire property will be developed as a unified
whole. All the owners of the property shall be included as joint applicants on
all applications and all approvals shall bind all owners. The violation of any
owner as to any tract shall be deemed a violation as to all owner and all
tracts.
      (4)   Compliance with village code required. Construction and
improvements with any planned unit development shall comply with all applicable
village ordinances. Any proposed deviation from village standards or
requirements must be clearly listed on the preliminary plan application and
fully justified as being both necessary to the proper development of the
property and consistent with the objectives set forth in the applicable section
of the village code.
      (5)   Design requirements. The planned unit development as a whole, as
well as the individual buildings and site improvements constructed as part of
the planned unit development, shall be in general conformity with the
Kenilworth Design Guidelines—Business District.
      (6)   Compatibility of uses and design. The uses permitted in the planned
unit development shall be compatible with each other and with existing land
uses in the surrounding area. Uses shall be deemed compatible if all of the
following criteria are met.
         (a)   The individual uses in the planned unit development must be
permitted uses or permitted special uses in the B Business District, unless a
use deviation is approved by the Board of Trustees. Any individual use that is
allowed only as a special use in the B Business District must individually meet
the standards for the granting of special use permits, as established in §
153.245.
         (b)   The uses must be designed and located in conformity with the
surrounding development and adjacent properties.
      (7)   Covenants and restrictions to be enforceable by village. All
covenants, deed restrictions, easements and similar restrictions to be recorded
in connection with the planned unit development shall provide that they may not
be modified, removed or released without the express consent of the Board of
Trustees and that they may be enforced by the village as well as by future
landowners within the proposed development.
      (8)   Public open space and contributions. Whenever the village
comprehensive plan or official map indicates that development of a planned unit
development will create a need for land for public purposes of the village
within the proposed planned unit development, the Board of Trustees may require
that the area be designated and to the extent the need is specifically and
uniquely attributable to the proposed development, dedicated to the village for
the use. In addition, the Board of Trustees may require evidence that all
requirements of village ordinances pertaining to the dedication of land or the
contribution of cash in connection with subdivisions or developments of land
have been met as respects the proposed planned unit development.
      (9)   Common open space.
         (a)   Amount, location and use. When common open space is provided in
a planned unit development, the amount and location of the open space shall be
consistent with its intended function as set forth in the application and
planned unit development plans. No open space shall be used for the
construction of any structure or improvement except the structures and
improvements as may be approved in the final plan as appropriate to the
intended leisure and recreational uses for which the open space is intended.
         (b)   Preservation. Adequate safeguards, including recorded covenants
or dedication of development rights, shall be provided to prevent the
subsequent use of common open space for any use, structure, improvement or
development other than that shown on the approved final plan. The restrictions
must be permanent and not for a given period of years and must run with the
land.
         (c)   Ownership and maintenance. The final plan shall include
provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the open space and improvements
as are reasonably necessary to ensure their continuity, care, conservation,
maintenance and operation in accordance with predetermined standards and to
ensure that remedial measures will be available to the village if the open
space or improvements are permitted to deteriorate or are not maintained in a
condition consistent with the best interests of the planned unit development or
the village.
      (10)   Property owners’ association. When the requirements of paragraph
(C)(9) above are to be satisfied by the ownership or maintenance of the open
space or improvements by a property owners’ association, the association shall
meet each of the following standards.
         (a)   The bylaws and rules of the association and all declarations,
covenants and restrictions to be recorded must be approved as part of the final
plan prior to becoming effective. Each document shall provide that it shall not
be amended in any manner that would result in it being in violation of the
requirements of this subsection.
         (b)   The association must be established and all covenants and
restrictions recorded prior to the sale of any property within the area of the
planned unit development designated to have the exclusive use of the proposed
open space or improvements.
         (c)   The association must be responsible for casualty and liability
insurance, taxes and the maintenance of the open space and improvements to be
deeded to it.
         (d)   Membership in the association must be mandatory for each
property owner, and any successive owner, having a right to the use or
enjoyment of open space or improvements.
         (e)   Every property having a right to the use or enjoyment of the
open space or improvements must pay its pro rata share of the cost of the
association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association that
meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with
statutes of the state.
         (f)   The association must have the right to adjust the assessment to
meet changed needs. The membership vote required to authorize the adjustment
shall not be fixed at more than 51% of the members voting on the issue.
         (g)   The village must be given the right, but not the obligation, to
enforce the covenants.
         (h)   The village must be given the right, after ten days’ written
notice to the association, to perform any maintenance or repair work that the
association has neglected to perform, to assess the membership for the work and
to have a lien against the property of any member failing to pay the
assessment. For this purpose alone, the village shall have all the rights and
powers of the association and its governing body under the agreements and
declarations creating the association.
      (11)   Landscaping and perimeter treatment. Any area of a planned unit
development not used for structures or circulation elements shall be landscaped
or otherwise improved. The perimeter of the planned unit development shall be
treated so as to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses by means such as
provision of compatible uses and structures; setbacks; screening; or natural or
human-made buffers.
      (12)   Utilities. All utility lines shall be installed underground.
      (13)   Traffic plan. The final plan for the planned unit development
shall include a traffic plan that identifies points of ingress and egress,
streets, alleys and interior circulation routes. The traffic plan shall be
designed to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets adjoining the
planned unit development and to facilitate the free flow of both vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, within the planned unit development. The streets, alleys
and other traffic thoroughfares approved in planned unit development shall
comply with the minimum requirements of the village’s ordinances, rules and
regulations, unless a deviation is approved by the Board of Trustees.
      (14)   Range of uses. The planned unit development shall accommodate, as
appropriate, a mix of office/service, retail commercial, and residential land
uses.
      (15)   Enhancing community. The planned unit development shall promote a
strong community identity and opportunities to interact while building a
healthy commercial tax base.
      (16)   Public benefit. The planned unit development shall provide a
substantial benefit to the village and the public by maintaining the essential
quality, viability and attractiveness of village’s business district while
encouraging new economic development consistent with the character of the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental standards. The appropriateness and viability of a planned
unit development may also be evaluated by the Plan Commission and the Board of
Trustees based on the following supplemental criteria:
      (1)   Additional landscaping, buffering or screening within or around the
perimeter of the planned unit development;
      (2)   Location and screening of parking facilities;
      (3)   Community amenities (such as, but not limited to, public art and
gardens, public transportation shelters);
      (4)   Inclusion of sustainable design and green architecture;
      (5)   Preservation of environmental features; and
      (6)   Preservation of historic features.
   (E)   Procedural requirements.
      (1)   General requirements. All applications for planned unit
developments shall be subject to the standards and procedures established in
this subchapter.
      (2)   No precedent. No planned unit development approval shall be deemed
to establish any precedent requiring the approval of any subsequent
application.
   (F)   Pre-application conference. Prior to filing an application for a
planned unit development, the prospective applicant shall request an informal
conference with the Administrative Official to discuss the proposed planned
unit development. The pre-application conference does not require either the
payment of an application fee or the filing of an application.
   (G)   Neighborhood meeting.
      (1)   The prospective applicant shall schedule, provide notice of,
conduct and attend a meeting with the persons required to be notified under §
153.249. The purpose of the meeting shall be to broadly acquaint the
neighboring owners and residents with the applicant’s proposal and to provide
the applicant with any preliminary view or concerns that neighboring owners and
residents may have at a time when positions are still flexible and adjustment
is still possible and prior to the time when the applicant is required to
expend the funds necessary to prepare the complete documentation required for
formal application.
      (2)   A copy of the notice and the mailing list shall be filed with
application along with a written summary of any comments, suggestions or
recommendations regarding the preliminary application made at the meeting.
   (H)   Procedures for preliminary plan approval.
      (1)   Application review. Upon receipt of a properly completed
application for approval of a preliminary planned unit development plan, the
Administrative Official shall review the application for compliance with all
applicable requirements. Completed applications will be then be forwarded to
the Plan Commission and the Architectural Review Commission for their
respective reviews and recommendations.
      (2)   Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with this subchapter. Notices for the public hearings shall be
issued in the manner provided in §
153.249.
      (3)   Architectural Review Commission. The Architectural Review
Commission shall review and provide consulting recommendations on the
application for preliminary plan approval at a public meeting. The
Architectural Review Commission shall provide comment and recommendations to
the Plan Commission as to whether the building design, landscape plan and other
proposed exterior aspects of the planned unit development are in conformity
with the Kenilworth Design Guidelines—Business District.
      (4)   Findings and recommendations.
         (a)   Within 30 days following the date of the completion of the
Architectural Review Commission meeting on the application for preliminary plan
approval, the Architectural Review Commission shall forward a written copy of
its recommendations to the Plan Commission.
         (b)   Within 30 days after receiving the Architectural Review
Commission’s recommendations or the conclusion of the Plan Commission’s public
hearing, whichever is later, the Plan Commission shall forward to the Board of
Trustees:
            1.   A written copy of the Architectural Review Commission’s
recommendations on the factors in paragraph(H)(3) above; and
            2.   The Plan Commission’s recommendation to either approve the
preliminary plan, approve the preliminary plan with modifications or deny
approval of the preliminary plan.
         (c)   The Plan Commission shall enter written findings on the
standards for planned unit development approval as set forth in this
subchapter. The findings of the Plan Commission shall be based on the
particular facts and circumstances of the proposed development, as established
through the application materials, record made in the proceedings before that
body and matters of public record. The Plan Commission shall specify, in a
separate conclusion or statement, the stipulations, restrictions or conditions,
including, but not limited to, the operations of the planned unit development,
that it deems necessary to assume the protection of public health, safety,
comfort, morals or welfare.
         (d)   No planned unit development nor deviation shall be recommended
for approval unless the Plan Commission shall find that the preliminary plan is
in conformity with the standards set forth in this section.
      (5)   Board of Trustees.
         (a)   Within 75 days following the receipt of the recommendations of
the Plan Commission and the Architectural Review Commission by the Board of
Trustees at a public meeting, the Board of Trustees shall either deny the
application for approval of the preliminary plan; shall remand it back to the
Plan Commission for further consideration of specified matters; or shall, by
resolution duly adopted, approve the preliminary plan, with or without
modifications and conditions to be accepted by the applicant as a conditions of
the approval, and refer the matter to the Plan Commission for processing of the
final plan in accordance with this section. The failure of the Board of
Trustees to act within the timeframe set forth in this section, or such further
time to which the applicant may agree, will be deemed to be a decision denying
approval of the preliminary plan.
         (b)   The Board of Trustee’s decision to grant or deny an application
for preliminary plan approval shall be based on the particular facts and
circumstances of the proposed planned unit development, as established through
the application materials, the record made in all proceedings on the
application, matters of public record and those matters of public policy as the
Board deems relevant to its consideration of the application.
      (6)   Coordination with subdivision regulations. When a subdivision of
land subject to the village subdivision regulations in the village code is
proposed in connection with a planned unit development, review of the tentative
plat of the proposed subdivision shall be carried out simultaneously with
review of the preliminary plan.
      (7)   Simultaneous submittal of a final plan. The applicant may, at his
or her option, submit a final plan for a proposed planned unit development
pursuant to the requirements of paragraphs (I)(1) through (I)(7) simultaneously
with the submittal of a preliminary plan. In that case, the applicant must
comply with all provisions of this code applicable to the submittal of the
preliminary plan and the submittal of the final plan. The Plan Commission,
Architectural Review Commission, and Board of Trustees will consider such plans
simultaneously, applying the standards for both preliminary and final plans,
and shall approve is deny the final plan in accordance with the provisions of
this §
153.246.
   (I)   Procedures for final plan approval.
      (1)   Application review. Upon receipt of a properly completed
application for a final planned unit development plan, the Administrative
Official shall review the application for substantial compliance with approved
preliminary plan. If the Administrative Official determines the final plan
substantially conforms to the preliminary plan, the final plan will be reviewed
in accordance with paragraphs (I)(2) through (I)(6) below. If the
Administrative Official determines the final plan does not substantially
conform to the preliminary plan, the final plan will be reviewed in accordance
with paragraph (H) above.
      (2)   Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall hold a public meeting in
accordance with this subchapter.
      (3)   Architectural Review Commission. The Architectural Review
Commission shall consider the application for final plan approval at a public
meeting. The Architectural Review Commission shall provide comment and
recommendations to the Plan Commission regarding the factors identified in
paragraph (H)(3) above.
      (4)   Findings and recommendations.
         (a)   Within 30 days following the date of the completion of the
Architectural Review Commission meeting on the application for final plan
approval, the Architectural Review Commission shall forward a written copy of
its recommendations to the Plan Commission.
         (b)   Within 30 days after receiving the Architectural Review
Commission’s recommendations or the conclusion of the Plan Commission’s public
meeting, whichever is later, the Plan Commission shall forward to the Board of
Trustees:
            1.   A written copy of the Architectural Review Commission’s
recommendations on the factors in paragraph (H)(3) above; and
            2.   The Plan Commission’s recommendation to either approve the
final plan, approve the final plan with modifications or deny approval of the
final plan.
         (c)   The Plan Commission shall enter written findings affirming or,
based on a substantial change (as defined in subparagraph (I)(4)(d) below),
revoking the Plan Commission’s prior findings for planned unit development
approval as set forth in paragraph (H)(4)(c) above.
         (d)   No final plan for a planned unit development shall be
recommended for approval, nor deviations recommended for approval for a planned
unit development, unless the Plan Commission determines that the final plan for
the planned unit development substantially conforms to the approved preliminary
plan without a request to amend the preliminary plan. No final plan for a
planned unit development will be presented for final approval if it contains a
substantial change from the approved preliminary plan, unless the procedures
described in paragraph (H) above are first followed to consider the substantial
change. For the purposes of this section a substantial change is a change that
alters the concept or intent of the planned unit development; changes the
plan’s density, changes the height of any building, changes proposed open
space, makes material changes in architectural design, makes a material change
to the development schedule, or changes the governing agreements, provisions or
covenants for the development.
      (5)   Board of Trustees.
         (a)   Within 75 days following the receipt of the recommendations of
the Plan Commission and the Architectural Review Commission by the Board of
Trustees at a public meeting, the Board of Trustees shall either deny the
application for approval of the final plan; shall remand it back to the Plan
Commission for further consideration of specified matters; or shall, by
ordinance duly adopted, approve the final plan and any related deviations, with
or without modifications and conditions to be accepted by the applicant as a
conditions of the approval. The failure of the Board of Trustees to act within
the timeframe set forth in this section, or such further time to which the
applicant may agree, will be deemed to be a decision denying approval of the
final plan.
         (b)   The Village Board, in the exercise of its discretion, may
accept, reject or modify any conditions or restrictions that the Plan
Commission may recommend, or otherwise impose its own conditions. The
conditions shall be expressly set forth in the ordinance approving the final
plan. The ordinance shall also identify any deviations that have been approved
as part of the application.
         (c)   The Board of Trustees’ decision to grant or deny an application
shall be based on the particular facts and circumstances of the proposed
development, as established through the application materials, the record made
in all proceedings on the application, matters of public record and matters of
public policy as the Board deems relevant to its consideration of the
application.
         (d)   The Village Board of Trustees shall not grant approval of a
final plan unless it finds substantial conformity between the final plan and
the approved preliminary plan and further finds the final plan to be in all
other respects complete and in compliance with any and all conditions imposed
by approval of the preliminary plan and with the provisions of this subchapter
and all other applicable federal, state and village codes, ordinances and
regulations.
      (6)   Recording of the final plan. When a final plan is approved, the
Administrative Official shall cause the final plan and ordinance approving the
same to be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of the county.
      (7)   Engineering approval. The final plan for a planned unit development
will not be processed until detailed engineering plans have been reviewed and
approved by the Village Engineer.
   (J)   Amendments to planned unit developments.
      (1)   Major changes.
         (a)   Procedure for major changes. An applicant seeking a major change
after a final plan has been approved shall seek an amendment to the final plan
by submitting a new preliminary plan and supporting data and following the
procedures for preliminary approval, as established in this section. Major
changes to an approved final plan may be granted only by the Board of Trustees
pursuant to an ordinance approving the amended plan.
         (b)   Major changes defined. Changes that alter the concept or intent
of the planned unit development, including changes that increase the
development’s density by 10% or more, changes that increase the height of
buildings by 10% or more, changes in use, except as allowed by the ordinance
approving the final plan, changes that decrease open space by 10% or more,
changes to architectural design that are inconsistent with the Kenilworth
Design Guidelines—Business District, material changes in the development
schedule, and material changes in the final governing agreements, provisions or
covenants shall all be considered major changes to the approved plan.
      (2)   Minor changes.
         (a)   Procedure for minor changes. A proposed minor change after a
final plan has been approved may be presented directly to the Village Board of
Trustees for consideration. The Village Board of Trustees may approve minor
changes in the planned unit development plan by ordinance duly adopted without
further proceedings, provided it finds that the proposed change does not change
the concept or intent of the development.
         (b)   Minor changes defined. Minor changes are defined as any change
to an approved final plan that is not defined as a major change.
   (K)   Failure to complete project according to plans. Each ordinance
approving a final plan for a planned unit development shall contain additional
conditions regarding the revocation of the final plan approval as the Board of
Trustees may deem appropriate.
(Ord. 1024, passed 8-10-2009; Ord. 1098, passed 4-29-2013; Ord. 1340, passed
10-23-2023)
§ 153.247 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Place of filing. All applications for relief under this subchapter
shall be filed with the Administrative Official or with any other village
official or body as the Administrative Official may designate.
   (B)   Form, number, scale. All applications filed pursuant to this
subchapter shall be on forms supplied by the village and shall be filed in the
number of duplicate copies as the Administrative Official may designate,
including in electronic format, if requested. All plans filed as part of any
application shall be at a scale sufficient to permit a clear and precise
understanding of the contents of the plan and the proposal being made and shall
be folded to a convenient size for handling and filing in standard, legal size
file drawers.
   (C)   Filing deadlines.
      (1)   Applications requiring hearings. Applications requiring a public
hearing will not be scheduled for hearing unless and until filed in proper form
and number and containing all required information.
      (2)   Applications not requiring hearing. Applications that do not
require a public hearing shall be filed, in proper form and number and
containing all required information, at least 35 days prior to the time when
action on the application is requested. Applications so filed will be processed
on a first-filed, first-processed basis.
      (3)   Supplemental data. Whenever supplemental data in connection with a
previously filed application is required by the village or offered by the
applicant, it shall be submitted at least seven days prior to the date on which
it is to be considered at a hearing or a meeting or acted upon in connection
with the application. The filing of the data shall, in the discretion of the
Administrative Official and of the body hearing the application, be cause to
delay a requested or scheduled hearing date.
   (D)   Minimum data requirements.
      (1)   All applications. Every application submitted pursuant to this
subchapter shall contain at least the following information:
         (a)   The owner’s name and address and the owner’s signed consent to
the filing of the application;
         (b)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the owner,
and his or her interest in the subject property;
         (c)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all professional
consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application;
         (d)   The name and address and the nature and extent of the interest,
as defined in the village code provisions governing ethics, of any officer or
employee of the village in the owner, the applicant or the subject property;
         (e)   The address and legal description of the subject property;
         (f)   A description or graphic representation of the proposal for
which approval is being sought and of the existing zoning classification, use
and development of the subject property. The scope and detail of the
description shall be appropriate to the subject matter of the application, with
special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the
approval being sought in the application;
         (g)   In the case of any application being filed less than two years
after the denial of an application seeking essentially the same relief, the
statement required by §
153.248; and
         (h)   Proof of control or ownership, in the case of site-specific
applications.
The Administrative Official shall have the authority to waive any of the
minimum data requirements if the Administrative Official deems such waiver to
be appropriate in light of special circumstances making compliance with those
provisions either unnecessary or unduly burdensome; provided, however, that the
reviewing board or commission shall continue to have the right to request
additional information and to delay processing of an application until such
information is provided. The Administrative Official shall provide reasons for
such waiver to the reviewing board or commission.
      (2)   Applications for ordinance interpretations. Every application filed
pursuant to §
153.275 shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to
paragraph(D)(1) above, provide the following information:
         (a)   The specific provision or provisions of this chapter for which
an interpretation is sought;
         (b)   The facts of the specific situation giving rise to the request
for an interpretation;
         (c)   The precise interpretation claimed by the applicant to be
correct;
         (d)   Where a use interpretation is sought, the use permitted pursuant
to the present zoning classification of the subject property that is claimed by
the applicant to include, or to be most similar to, the proposed use; and
         (e)   Where a use interpretation is sought, documents, statements and
other evidence demonstrating that the proposed use will comply with all use
limitations established for the district in which it is proposed to be located.
      (3)   Applications for appeals. Every application filed pursuant to §
153.243 shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to
paragraph(D)(1) above, provide the following information:
         (a)   The specific decision from which an appeal is sought;
         (b)   The facts of the specific situation giving rise to the original
decision and to the appeal therefrom;
         (c)   The precise relief sought; and
         (d)   A statement of the applicant’s position as to alleged errors in
the decision being appealed and as to why the relief sought is justified and
proper.
      (4)   Applications for variations. Every application filed pursuant to §
153.244 shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to
paragraph division (D)(1) above, provide the following information:
         (a)   The specific feature or features of the proposed use,
construction or development that require a variation;
         (b)   The specific provision of this chapter from which a variation is
sought and the precise variation therefrom being sought;
         (c)   A statement of the characteristics of the subject property that
prevent compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
         (d)   A statement of the minimum variation of the provisions of this
chapter that would be necessary to permit the proposed use, construction or
development;
         (e)   A statement of how the variation sought would satisfy the
standards set forth in §
153.244(E);
         (f)   The names and addresses of all owners of property within 500
lineal feet, excluding street rights-of-way, in all directions from the subject
property as shown in the records of the office of the Assessor of the county;
         (g)   A survey, certified by a registered land surveyor, showing
existing lot lines and dimensions as well as lot area, all easements, all
public and private rights-of-way and all streets across and adjacent to the
subject property; and
         (h)   A statement concerning the conformity or lack of conformity of
the approval being requested to the village comprehensive plan and official
map. Where the approval being requested does not conform to the village
comprehensive plan or the official map, reasons justifying the approval despite
the lack of conformity shall be stated.
      (5)   Applications for zoning ordinance text amendments. Every
application filed pursuant to §
153.305 requesting an amendment to the text of this chapter shall, in addition
to the data and information required pursuant to paragraph(D)(1) above, provide
the following information:
         (a)   The exact wording of the proposed text amendment;
         (b)   A statement of the need and justification for the proposed text
amendment;
         (c)   The names and addresses of all owners of property within 500
lineal feet, excluding street rights-of-way, in all directions from the subject
property, as shown in the records of the office of the Assessor of the county;
         (d)   A survey, certified by a registered land surveyor, showing
existing lot lines and dimensions as well as lot area, all easements, all
public and private rights-of-way and all streets across and adjacent to the
subject property; and
         (e)   A statement concerning the conformity or lack of conformity of
the approval being requested to the official map. Where the approval being
requested does not conform to the official map, reasons justifying the approval
despite the lack of conformity shall be stated.
      (6)   Applications for special uses. Every application filed pursuant to
§
153.245 shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to
paragraph(D)(1) above, provide the following information:
         (a)   A written statement of the need for the special use;
         (b)   The names and addresses of all owners of property within 500
lineal feet, excluding street rights-of-way, in all directions from the subject
property, as shown in the records of the office of the Assessor of the county;
         (c)   A survey, certified by a registered land surveyor, showing
existing lot lines and dimensions as well as lot area, all easements, all
public and private rights-of-way and all streets across and adjacent to the
subject property; and
         (d)   A statement concerning the conformity or lack of conformity of
the approval being requested to the village comprehensive plan and official
map. Where the approval being requested does not conform to the village
comprehensive plan or the official map, reasons justifying the approval despite
the lack of conformity shall be stated.
      (7)   Applications for zoning map amendments. Every application filed
pursuant to §
153.305 requesting an amendment to the zoning map shall, in addition to the
data and information required pursuant to paragraph(D)(1) above, provide a
statement of the need and justification for the proposed zoning map amendment.
The statement shall address at least the following factors:
         (a)   The existing uses and zoning classifications of properties in
the vicinity of the subject property;
         (b)   The trend of development in the vicinity of the subject
property, including changes, if any, in the trend since the subject property
was placed in its present zoning classification;
         (c)   The extent to which the value of the subject property is
diminished by the existing zoning classification applicable to it;
         (d)   The extent to which the diminution in value is offset by an
increase in the public health, safety and welfare;
         (e)   The extent, if any, to which the use and enjoyment of adjacent
properties would be affected by the proposed amendment;
         (f)   The extent, if any, to which the value of adjacent properties
would be affected by the proposed amendment;
         (g)   The extent, if any, to which the future orderly development of
adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment;
         (h)   The suitability of the subject property for uses permitted or
permissible under its present zoning classification;
         (i)   The availability of adequate ingress to and egress from the
subject property and the extent to which traffic conditions in the immediate
vicinity of the subject property would be affected by the proposed amendment;
         (j)   The availability of adequate utilities and essential public
services to the subject property to accommodate the uses permitted or
permissible under its present zoning classification;
         (k)   The length of time, if any, that the subject property has been
vacant, considered in the context of the pace of development in the vicinity of
the subject property;
         (l)   The community need for the proposed map amendment and for the
uses and development it would allow; and
         (m)   The names and addresses of all owners of property within 500
lineal feet, excluding street rights-of-way, in all directions from the subject
property, as shown in the records of the office of the Assessor of the county.
      (8)   Applications for approval of a preliminary plan for a planned unit
development. Every application filed pursuant to §
153.246 shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to
paragraph (D)(1) above, provide the following information, unless waived by the
Administrative Official:
         (a)   Preliminary plan for a planned unit development plan. The
preliminary plan for a planned unit development shall contain the following:
            1.   Statement of objectives. The preliminary plan shall include a
statement of the planning objectives to be achieved by the particular design
approach proposed by the applicant, which shall include a description of the
character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions
and choices made by the applicant;
            2.   Statement of proposed use. The preliminary plan shall include
a statement of the applicant’s intention with regard to the future selling or
leasing of all or portions of the land or structures and the proposed use
thereof;
            3.   Detailed planned unit development plan. The preliminary plan
shall include a detailed drawing of the proposed planned unit development,
drawn to scale. The detailed planned unit development plan may consist of one
or more sheets and drawings and shall accurately depict:
               a.   Boundary lines, bearings and distances;
               b.   The location, width and purpose of all easements;
               c.   All streets on and adjacent to the subject property,
including street name, right-of-way width, sidewalks and the like;
               d.   Utilities on and adjacent to the site, including the
location, size and invert elevations of all sewers, the location and size of
water mains and hydrants, and the location of gas, electric, telephone and
cable lines;
               e.   The topography of the subject property;
               f.   Conditions on adjacent land, including adjacent grades, the
character and location of buildings, and the type and location of utilities;
               g.   The zoning classification of the subject property and all
adjacent properties;
               h.   All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use
or reserved for the use of all property owners, with the purpose indicated;
               i.   The location and purpose of each proposed building, and the
height of each building in feet and stories;
               j.   Landscaping and tree preservation plan;
               k.   At least two cross- sections through the entire site, to
illustrate the bulk and height of all proposed structures in relation to the
topography, vegetation and surrounding structures; and
               l.   The name of the development, the north point and scale, the
date of preparation and the acreage of the site.
            4.   Quantitative summary. A quantitative summary, which shall be
broken down into phase components if the development is to be implemented in
phases, and which shall include, but not be limited to the following:
               a.   Acreage and square footage of the subject property;
               b.   Residential density;
               c.   Total and footprint square footage of principal and
accessory buildings;
               d.   Number of parking spaces; and
               e.   Square footage of commonly owned and/or maintained open
space.
            5.   Engineering survey. The preliminary engineering survey showing
the adequacy of existing and proposed sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water
distribution systems.
         (b)   Plat of subdivision. If required, preliminary plat of
subdivision that meets the requirements of subdivision regulations of the
village code;
         (c)   Architectural drawings. Architectural drawings, including but
not limited to, floor plans, exterior building elevations, typical building
materials which clearly define all buildings proposed for the planned unit
development, including illustrations or depictions showing surrounding
properties in relation to the proposed planned unit development;
         (d)   Request for relief. A statement setting forth the specific
zoning modifications and exceptions being sought from the underlying zoning
requirements as part of the planned unit development;
         (e)   Open space statement. A statement describing why the area for
usable common open space was chosen, the unique advantages it offers, and how
it is envisioned that residents will utilize the space;
         (f)   Traffic and parking study. Traffic and parking study prepared by
a qualified expert setting forth and analyzing the effect of the proposed
planned unit development on traffic and parking in and around the subject
property. The traffic and parking study shall not be limited to the effect on
adjacent streets but shall extend to all surrounding areas affected by the
proposed planned unit development and shall indicate the anticipated points of
origin, direction, amount and density of traffic flow to and from the proposed
planned unit development;
         (g)   Statement of public benefit. A statement describing the specific
public benefits that are proposed to be contained in or associated with the
planned unit development;
         (h)   Development schedule. A development schedule setting forth the
approximate dates for beginning and completion of each stage of the
development;
         (i)   Traffic and parking mitigation study. A construction employee
traffic and parking mitigation plan that shall establish specific actions by
the owner to limit peak period vehicular traffic and parking generated by
construction of the planned unit development;
         (j)   Natural resource assessment application. A copy of an
application for the natural resource assessment to the North Cook County Soil
and Water Conservation District if the subject property is two acres or larger;
         (k)   Description of financial assurances.  A detailed description of
the financial assurances to be presented to guarantee completion of all public
improvements and private open space to be provided in connection with the
proposed planned unit development; and
         (l)   Financing plan. Evidence of the financing plan the applicant
proposes to use to complete the proposed planned unit development. The
applicant’s prior success in completing projects of similar scope may be
offered in support of this requirement.
      (9)   Applications for approval of a final plan for a planned unit
development.
         (a) Form of application.  Every application filed pursuant to §
153.246 shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to
paragraph (D)(1) above, provide the following information, unless waived by the
Administrative Official:
            1.   Development and construction schedule;
            2.   Copies of the plat of the planned unit development, and, as
applicable, any subdivision plat, plat of dedication and/or plat of vacation,
with original Mylar to be provided promptly following Board of Trustee
approval; and
            3.   A restrictive covenant in a form acceptable to the Village
Attorney limiting development of and construction upon the tract as a whole to
the development and construction as shall comply with the final development
plan granted by the Village Board of Trustees.
         (b)   Time of filing application for approval of final plan. Within 12
months following the approval of the Board of Trustees of the preliminary plan,
the applicant shall initiate the final approval process by filing an
application for final plan approval with the Plan Commission. The Board of
Trustees, in the exercise of its discretion, may extend the time for filing the
application for final plan approval.
      (10)   Applications for certificates of appropriateness. Every
application filed pursuant to §
153.242 shall contain at least the following information:
         (a)   A statement of intent identifying how the project meets the
criteria of, in any non-residential district and for any special use in any
residential district, the appearance plan, and, in the Business District, the
Kenilworth Design Guidelines —Business District, and explaining the design
rationale.
         (b)   Plans and elevations drawn to scale illustrating the existing
subject property, including calculations of all windows and doors with
dimensions, materials and glazing patterns, exterior details, as appropriate,
of millwork and including aggregate size of all awnings and signs.
         (c)   Scaled drawings and elevations showing all proposed windows and
doors with dimensions, materials and glazing patterns, exterior details,
millwork and any proposed special conditions including position and scale of
the proposed signs and awnings in relation to adjacent signs, buildings and
structures.
         (d)   Streetscape elevations, depicting rooflines and materials of
adjacent structures.
         (e)   Current color photographs of the existing facades of the subject
property and properties adjacent to the subject property and the date the
photographs were taken.
         (f)   Information, drawings, spec- ifications, samples, or other
materials regarding the design and size, color and placement on the building of
a proposed sign or sign structure for all proposed signs. Such materials should
also convey structural details including, but not limited to method of
construction and erection or attachment, as the case may be, to the building or
ground).
         (g)   Details regarding source, type and level of illumination of for
all signs. The level of illumination must be measured in foot candles.
         (h)   Parking lot layout (if applicable).
         (i)   Lighting plan of parking lot (if applicable).
         (j)   Landscape plan including the proposed species of vegetation and
size at the time of planting, tree removal plan, and existing or proposed
hardscapes (if applicable).
         (k)   Master sign plan if required by the Kenilworth Sign Code.
         (l)   Samples of exterior materials, including, without limitation,
manufacturer cut sheets and/or product samples of roof materials, wall
materials, window/door products, storefront glazing, light fixtures, and sign
materials. If applicable, local addresses of buildings using such materials.
      (11)   Applications for special uses for a wind energy system (WES). In
addition to such other data and information ordinarily required in connection
with an application for a special use permit pursuant to this section, an
application for a special use permit for a WES must submit to the village as
part of its application at least the following information:
         (a)   Generally applicable requirements.
            1.   Project proposal.
               (i)   A project summary, including, without limitation, and the
manufacturer information for the proposed turbines.
               (ii)   Current photographs of the proposed location of the WES.
               (iii)   A front elevation depiction of the subject property,
showing the location and proposed height of the top of the turbine from top of
the building.
            2.   Insurance. Proof of homeowner or business general liability
insurance, as appropriate, with a minimum coverage level of $1,000,000 per
occurrence.
            3.   Electric utility. Approval letter from the local electric
utility company, if the system is to be connected to the energy grid.
            4.   Manufacturer’s directions. A copy of the directions issued by
the manufacturer of the proposed WES for the proper installation, operation and
maintenance of the WES.
            5.   Certification of design compliance. A certification of design
compliance for the proposed WES with respect to the applicable noise,
structural and safety regulations set forth in this subsection, which
certification must have been obtained from Underwriters Laboratories (UL),
National Renewable Energy Laboratories (NREL), Det Norske Veritas (DNV),
Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energie (GL), or an equivalent third party.
            6.   Maintenance covenant. An executed maintenance covenant, on a
form provided by the village, providing that the owner and all subsequent
owners of the subject property will maintain the WES in accordance and
compliance with this subparagraph and with the maintenance directions issued by
the manufacturer of the WES.
            7.   Contact information. The name of a local contact with
authority to operate or repair the proposed WES as needed and at any time, and
the telephone number at which such contact may be reached on a 24-hour basis.
At all times during which the WES is in operable condition, the applicant shall
have the duty to notify the village of any changes to the information required
pursuant to this subparagraph.
         (b)   Additional BWES requirements.
            1.   Engineering plans. Engin- eering plans, which must include,
without limitation, the manufacturer's engineering specifications of the
turbine, nameplate wattage capacity, dimensions of the turbine unit, mounting
mechanisms, expected load and expected sound level production.
            2.   Site plan. A site plan, drawn to scale, signed and sealed by a
Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Illinois, and including, without
limitation, the following:
               (i)   The location of any overhead or underground power lines
and utility easements; and
               (ii)   The locations and the expected duration of shadow flicker
caused by the BWES facility.
         (c)   Additional SWES requirements.
            1.   Engineering plans. Engin- eering plans, which must include,
without limitation, the manufacturer’s engineering specifications of the tower,
turbine and foundation, detailed drawing of electrical components and
installation details, and expected sound level production. For turbines with a
nameplate wattage capacity exceeding 20 kilowatts, the plans must be sealed by
a Structural Engineer.
            2.   Site plan. A site plan, drawn to scale, signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Illinois, and including, without
limitation, the following:
               (i)   The existing and proposed contours, at a minimum of two
foot intervals;
               (ii)   The location, setbacks, exterior dimensions and square
footage of all structures on the subject property and all nonparticipating
properties located within 100 feet of the subject property.
               (iii)   The location and size of existing waterways, wetlands,
100-year floodplains, sanitary sewers, field drain tiles, storm sewer systems,
aquifers and water distribution systems;
               (iv)   The location of any overhead or underground power lines
and utility easements; and
               (v)   The locations and the expected duration of shadow flicker
caused by the SWES facility.
            3.   Soil studies. The applicant shall submit a soil analysis
measured at the proposed location for the base of the proposed tower and a
drawing stamped by a Structural Engineer, in order to demonstrate that the
soils are able to support the structural weight of the proposed SWES. For
purposes of this subparagraph, structural weight shall include the tower, wind
turbine generator, and any other components otherwise supported by the base
foundation of the proposed SWES.
            4.   Environmental impact studies and plans. Upon request of the
village, the applicant shall submit an environmental plan to mitigate or
eliminate any adverse impact of the proposed SWES on the local environment and
local wildlife, which plan shall be subject to the approval of the village in
consultation with the Illinois Department of Natural Resources and the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service.
   (E)   Special data requests. In addition to the data and information
required pursuant to subsection (D) above, every applicant shall submit any
other and additional data, information or documentation as the Administrative
Official or any Board or Commission before which its application is pending may
deem necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration and
disposition of the particular application.
   (F)   Concurrent applications. Where a proposed use or development requires
more than one approval pursuant to this chapter, applications for all approvals
may be filed concurrently notwithstanding the fact that approval of one
application may be a precondition to approval of other applications. The
applications may, in the discretion of the official, officials, body or bodies
charged with review of the applications be processed together; provided,
however, that no application shall be approved unless all applications that are
a precondition to its approval have first been approved.
   (G)   Withdrawal of application. An applicant may withdraw an application at
any time prior to a final decision having been rendered with respect thereto;
provided that the applicant shall have paid all applicable application fees
pursuant to §§
153.290 through
153.294. The withdrawal shall be without prejudice to the applicant’s right to
refile the application, but any refiling shall be treated as an entirely new
filing and shall be subject to the procedures and fees of this chapter in the
same manner as any other new application.
(Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 1024, passed 8-10-2009; Ord. 1057, passed 2-
22-2011; Ord. 1082, passed 5-21-2012; Ord. 1098, passed 4-29- 2013; Ord. 1340,
passed 10-23-2023)
§ 153.248 SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Second applications without new grounds barred. Whenever any
application filed pursuant to this chapter has been finally denied on its
merits, a second application, seeking essentially the same relief, whether or
not in the same form or on the same theory, shall not be brought unless, in the
opinion of the officer, Board or Commission before which it is brought,
substantial new evidence is available or a mistake of law or fact significantly
affected the prior denial.
   (B)   New grounds to be stated. Any second application shall include a
detailed statement of the grounds justifying consideration of the application.
   (C)   Exception. Whether or not new grounds are stated, any second
application filed more than two years after the final denial of a prior
application shall be heard on the merits as though no prior application had
been filed. The applicant shall, however, be required to place in the record
all evidence available concerning changes of conditions or new facts that have
developed since the denial of the first application. In the absence of evidence
it shall be presumed that no new facts exist to support the new petition that
did not exist at the time of the denial of the first application.
(Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 153.249 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Notice by mail.
      (1)   Notice of the public hearing at which any application for relief
under this chapter is to be considered shall be provided as required by this
section. The applicant for relief shall notify, in writing, by first class
mail, or hand delivery, all property owners within 250 feet of the boundaries
of the property that is the subject of the application, including streets and
rights-of-way, not less than 15 days or more than 30 days in advance of the
scheduled public hearing date.
      (2)   The mailing of notice, addressed to the name and address on the
most recent county real estate tax records, shall be deemed a satisfaction of
this notice requirement.
      (3)   The required mail notice for applications under this chapter shall
contain, at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   The street address, legal description or detailed location
description of the property, if any, that is the subject of the application;
         (b)   A statement describing the relief requested;
         (c)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (d)   The name and address of the legal owner, and beneficial owner if
any, of the property; and
         (e)   The meeting date, time and location.
      (4)   At the public hearing, the applicant shall present to the hearing
body an affidavit, certification or other evidence satisfactory to the hearing
body, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the hearing body, that the notice
requirement of this section has been satisfied.
   (B)   Notice by publication. The Administrative Official shall cause a
notice to be published in a newspaper published in, or of general circulation
within, the village at least once no less than 15 days, nor more than 30 days,
in advance of the hearing date, containing the information required in the
notice in subsection (A) above.
(Ord. 968, passed 11-13-2006; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 1126, passed 5-
19-2014; Ord. 1340, passed 10-23-2023)
§§ 153.250 THROUGH 153.259 RESERVED.
APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 153.260 WHO MAY APPEAL.
   Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau
of the village aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals may seek
review by a court of record of the decision, in the manner provided by the
statutes of the state.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§§ 153.261 THROUGH 153.274 RESERVED.
DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL, AND OF BOARD OF APPEALS AND BOARD OF
TRUSTEES ON MATTERS OF APPEAL
§ 153.275 PROCEDURES AS TO QUESTIONS OF INTERPRETATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Authority. The Administrative Official, subject to the procedures,
standards and limitations of this section, may render interpretations,
including use interpretations, of the provisions of this chapter and of any
rule or regulation issued pursuant to it.
   (B)   Purpose. The interpretation authority established by this section is
intended to recognize that the provisions of this chapter, though detailed and
lengthy, cannot possibly address every specific situation to which they may
have to be applied. Many situations, however, can be readily addressed by an
interpretation of the specific provisions of this chapter in light of the
general and specific purposes for which those provisions have been enacted.
Because the interpretation authority herein established is an administrative
rather than a legislative authority, it is not intended to add to or change the
essential content of this chapter but rather is intended only to allow
authoritative application of that content to specific cases.
   (C)   Parties entitled to seek interpretations. Applications for
interpretations may be filed by any person having an interest in the
circumstances giving rise to the need for an interpretation; provided, however,
that interpretations shall not be sought by any person based solely on
hypothetical facts or where the interpretation would have no effect other than
as an advisory opinion.
   (D)   Procedure.
      (1)   Application. Applications for interpretations of this chapter shall
be filed in accordance with the requirements of §
153.247.
      (2)   Action on application. Within 30 days following the receipt of a
properly completed application for interpretation, the Administrative Official
shall inform the applicant in writing of his or her interpretation, stating the
specific precedent, reasons and analysis upon which the determination is based.
The failure of the Administrative Official to act within 30 days, or a further
time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a contrary
interpretation rendered on the day following the 30-day period thereby allowing
the applicant to pursue an appeal pursuant to §
153.243.
      (3)   Appeal. Appeals from interpretations rendered by the Administrative
Official may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in §
153.243.
   (E)   Standards for use interpretations. The following standards shall
govern the Administrative Official and the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeals
from the Administrative Official, in issuing use interpretations.
      (1)   Any use defined in §
153.003 shall be interpreted as therein defined.
      (2)   No use interpretation shall permit a use listed as a permitted use
or a special use in a district to be established in any district in which the
use is not so listed.
      (3)   No use interpretation shall permit any use in any district unless
evidence shall be presented that demonstrates that it will comply with each use
limitation established for that particular district.
      (4)   No use interpretation shall permit any use in a particular district
unless the use is substantially similar to other uses permitted in the district
and is more similar to other uses than to uses permitted or specially permitted
in a less restrictive district.
      (5)   If the proposed use is most similar to a use permitted only as a
special use in the district in which it is proposed to be located, then any use
interpretation permitting the use shall be conditioned on the issuance of a
special use permit for the use pursuant to §
153.245.
   (F)   Effect of favorable use interpretation. No use interpretation finding
a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular
district shall authorize the establishment of the use nor the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or
structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of
applications for any permits and approvals that may be required by the codes
and ordinances of the village including, but not limited to, a special use
permit, a certificate of zoning compliance, a temporary use permit, a building
permit, a certificate of occupancy and subdivision approval.
   (G)   Limitations on favorable use interpretations. Subject to an extension
of time granted by the Administrative Official, no use interpretation finding a
particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district
shall be valid for a period longer than six months from the date of issue
unless a building permit is issued and construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a
certificate of occupancy is obtained and a use commenced within that period.
A use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or specially
permitted in a particular district shall be deemed to authorize only the
particular use for which it was issued, and the permit shall not be deemed to
authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate use interpretation has
not been issued. The permit shall automatically expire and cease to be of any
force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any
reason, be discontinued for a period of six consecutive months or more.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1018, passed 6-22-2009)
§ 153.276 DUTIES OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The duties of the Board of Trustees in connection with this chapter shall
not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement
that may arise. The procedure for deciding these questions shall be as stated
in this chapter. Under this chapter the Board of Trustees shall have only the
duties:
   (A)   Of considering and acting upon applications for special uses as
provided in §
153.245;
   (B)   Of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the
repeal of this chapter, as provided by law; and
   (C)   Of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in §§
153.290 through
153.294.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§§ 153.277 THROUGH 153.289 RESERVED.
SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES
§ 153.290 ESTABLISHMENT OF SCHEDULE OF FEES; PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Fee established. Every application filed pursuant to this chapter
shall be subject to a non-refundable application and filing fee in the amount
established by ordinance or resolution adopted from time to time by the Board
of Trustees. A schedule including the applicable fee shall be on file in the
office of the Administrative Official. In addition, the following applications
under this chapter shall be subject to recovery by the village of the actual
cost, as defined in this subchapter, incurred by the village in processing the
application:
      (1)   Applications to amend the regulations imposed by this chapter;
      (2)   Applications to change the official zoning map and districts
established by this chapter; and
      (3)   Applications for special uses pursuant to §
153.245 of this chapter.
   (B)   Payment; liens. The owner of the property which is the subject of the
application and, if different, the applicant, shall be jointly and severally
liable for the payment of the fees required by this subchapter. By signing the
application, the owner shall be deemed to have agreed to pay the fee and to
consent to the filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject property to
ensure collection of any fee, plus the cost of collection, which has not been
paid within 30 days following the mailing of a written demand for payment to
the owner at the address shown on the application. Any lien filed pursuant to
this section may be foreclosed in the manner provided by statute for mortgages
or mechanics liens.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 988, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 1018, passed 6-
22-2009)
§ 153.291 RECOVERABLE COSTS.
   For purposes of calculating the fee due pursuant to §
153.290, the actual costs incurred by the village in processing an application
that is subject to the recovery of actual costs in §
153.290 shall be deemed to consist of the following items of direct and
indirect expense:
   (A)   Legal publication (direct cost);
   (B)   Recording secretarial services (direct cost);
   (C)   Court reporter (direct cost);
   (D)   Administrative preparation and review (hourly salary times a
multiplier to be established from time to time by the Village Manager at a
level sufficient to recover 100% of the direct and indirect cost of the
service);
   (E)   Document preparation and review (hourly salary times a multiplier to
be established from time to time by the Village Manager at a level sufficient
to recover 100% of the direct and indirect cost of the service);
   (F)   Professional and technical consultant services (direct cost);
   (G)   Legal review, consultation and advice (direct cost);
   (H)   Copy reproduction (direct cost); and
   (I)   Document recordation (direct cost).
(Ord. 988, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 153.292 FEE PAYMENT AND ESCROW.
   (A)   Initial payment and escrow. Every application filed pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by the required fee plus, where required, an
additional amount for recoverable costs as provided in §
153.291, as fixed from time to time by the Administrative Official, to be
deposited in an application fee escrow. No interest shall be payable on any
escrow.
   (B)   Charges against escrow. From the date of filing of any application for
which the recovery of actual costs is required pursuant to this chapter, the
village shall maintain an accurate record of the actual costs, as defined in
this subchapter, of processing the application. The Administrative Official
shall, from time to time, draw funds from the escrow account established for
the application to pay the costs and shall transfer the funds to the
appropriate village accounts. The Administrative Official shall maintain an
accurate record of all drawings.
   (C)   Additional escrow deposits. Should the Administrative Official at any
time determine that the escrow account established in connection with any
application for which the recovery of actual costs is required is, or is likely
to become, insufficient to pay the actual costs of processing the application,
the Administrative Official shall inform the applicant of that fact and demand
an additional deposit in an amount deemed by him or her to be sufficient to
cover foreseeable additional costs. Unless and until the additional amount is
deposited by the applicant, the Administrative Official may direct that
processing of the application shall be suspended or terminated.
   (D)   Final settlement. As soon as reasonably feasible following final
action on an application for which the recovery of actual costs is required,
the Administrative Official shall cause a final accounting to be made of the
escrow deposits made in connection with the application and the actual cost of
processing the application and shall make a final charge of the costs against
the escrow deposits. A copy of the accounting shall be provided to the owner
and the applicant. If the amount in the escrow account is insufficient to pay
the total actual costs, a written demand for payment of the balance due shall
be mailed to the owner and the applicant. If unused balance remains in the
escrow account after paying the total actual costs, it shall be returned to the
applicant.
(Ord. 988, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 153.293 CONDITION OF ALL APPLICATIONS, APPROVALS AND PERMITS; TIME PERIODS.
   No application filed pursuant to this chapter shall be considered complete
unless and until all fees and deposits due pursuant to this subchapter have
been paid. Every approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to this
chapter shall, whether or not expressly so conditioned, be deemed to be
conditioned upon payment of fees as required by §§
153.290 through
153.294. Where this chapter provides that the passage of time without decision
or action shall be deemed an approval or a recommendation for approval, time
periods shall be tolled during any period of nonpayment, but shall otherwise
continue to run. The failure to fully pay any fee or deposit, when due, shall
be grounds for refusing to process an application and for denying or revoking
any permit or approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development
to which the unpaid fee or deposit relates.
(Ord. 988, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 153.294 SPECIFIED PUBLIC BODIES EXEMPT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to, and no fee shall be
required of, any public body or agency deriving the majority of its revenues
from taxes levied within the village.
(Ord. 988, passed 12-10-2007)
§§ 153.295 THROUGH 153.304 RESERVED.
AMENDMENTS
§ 153.305 AMENDMENTS OF CHAPTER.
   The regulations imposed and the districts created by this chapter may from
time to time be amended by ordinance in the manner provided by the statutes of
the state or this code, but no amendment shall be made without a public hearing
before some commission or committee designated by the President and Board of
Trustees of the village which shall report its findings and recommendations to
the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 1355, passed 4-15-2024)
§§ 153.306 THROUGH 153.319 RESERVED.
PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.320 PROVISIONS ARE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the
most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§§ 153.321 THROUGH 153.334 RESERVED.
COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS
§ 153.335 HANDLING OF COMPLAINTS OF VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER.
   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint. The complaint stating fully the causes
and basis thereof shall be filed with the Administrative Official. He or she
shall record properly and promptly investigate the complaint, and shall take
action thereon as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
APPENDIX A: APPEARANCE PLAN
Section I. CRITERIA FOR APPEARANCE.
   The purpose of these criteria is to establish a checklist of those items
which affect the physical aspect of the village environment. Pertinent to
appearance is the design of the site, building and structures, planting, signs
and miscellaneous other objects which are observed by the public.
   These criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or
variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles which can result
in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual appearance within
the village.
   A.   Relationship of buildings to site.
      1.   The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with
the streetscape, and to provide
for adequate planting, pedestrian movement and parking areas.
      2.   Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of zoning
restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship between
buildings.
      3.   Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building
wall extensions, plantings, berms or other innovative means so as to largely
screen parking areas from view from public ways.
      4.   The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its
site and adjoining buildings.
      5.   Newly installed utility services and service revisions necessitated
by exterior alterations, shall be underground.
      6.   In relating buildings to site, the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance in regard to bulk regulations, standards and off-street parking shall
be part of this criteria. This shall also apply to subsection B. which follows.
   B.   Relationship of building and site to adjoining area.
      1.   Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made
compatible by such means as screens, site breaks and materials.
      2.   Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be
provided.
      3.   Harmony in texture, lines and masses is required. Monotony shall be
avoided.
      4.   Buildings shall have similar scale to those in the surrounding area.
   C.   Building design.
      1.   Architectural style is not restricted -- evaluation of appearance of
a project shall be based on quality of its design and relationship to
surroundings.
      2.   Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious conformance
with permanent neighboring development.
      3.   Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be
selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.
   Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the
design in which they are used. Buildings shall have the same materials, or
those which are architecturally harmonious, used for all building walls and
other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from public ways.
   Inappropriate materials and methods, and those which will produce
inconsistency with the structure of the building, shall be avoided.
   Materials shall be of durable quality.
   In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the
structural materials shall meet the other criteria for materials.
   4.   Building components – such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets –
shall have good proportions and relationship to one another.
   5.   Colors shall be harmonious, with bright or brilliant colors used only
for accent.
   6.   Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground or
buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the
building, or they shall be located so as not to be visible from any public
ways.
   7.   Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures,
standards and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building design.
   8.   Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards and
exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways, using
materials as stated in criteria for equipment screening.
   9.   Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be
avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual
interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or individual
buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance.
   10.   Inappropriate, incompatible, bizarre and exotic designs shall be
avoided.
   11.   The provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in regard to bulk regulations
and standards, and those portions of the Kenilworth Building Code which
directly affect appearance, shall be part of the criteria of this subsection.
   D.   Signs.
      1.   Wall signs shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, color,
lettering, location and arrangement shall be harmonious with the building
design, and shall be compatible with signs on adjoining buildings. Signs shall
have good proportions.
      2.   Ground signs shall be designed to be compatible with the
architecture of the building. The same criteria applicable to wall signs shall
apply to ground signs.
      3.   Identification signs of a prototype design shall conform to the
criteria for building and ground signs.
      4.   Materials used in signs shall have good architectural character and
be harmonious with building design and surrounding landscape.
      5.   Every sign shall have good scale in its design and in its visual
relationship to buildings and surroundings.
      6.   Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Excessive
brightness and brilliant colors shall be avoided. Lighting shall be harmonious
with the design. If external spot or flood lighting is used, it shall be
arranged so that light source is shielded from view.
      7.   The provisions of the Kenilworth Village Code in regard to signs
shall be part of the criteria of this subsection.
   E.   Maintenance – planning and design factors.
      1.   Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of
maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of
finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance
and upkeep.
      2.   Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and
wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be
incorporated for protection against the elements, neglect, damage and abuse.
      3.   Provision for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures, and
control of dirt and refuse, shall be included in the design. Such
configurations that tend to catch and ac-cumulate debris, leaves, trash, dirt
and rubbish shall be avoided.
   F.   Factors for evaluation.
   The following factors and characteristics relating to a development, and
which affect appearance, will govern the Architectural Review Commission’s
evaluation of a design submissions
      Conformance to ordinances and the village plan
      Logic of design
      Exterior space utilization
      Architectural character
      Attractiveness
      Material selection
      Harmony and compatibility
      Circulation – vehicular and pedestrian
      Maintenance aspects
Section II. MAINTENANCE FOR GOOD APPEARANCE.
   A.   Site.
      1.   Landscape materials, other than plantings, which have deteriorated
or have been damaged or defaced, should be properly repaired or replaced.
      2.   Plant materials which have deteriorated or died shall be replaced
with healthy plantings, or the area should be redesigned with other treatment
to provide an attractive appearance.
      3.   Plantings should be kept watered, fed, cultivated and pruned as
required to give a healthy and well groomed appearance during all seasons.
      4.   Parking areas should be kept in good repair, properly marked and
clear of litter and debris.
      5.   Vacant property shall be kept free of refuse and debris, and shall
have the vegetation cut periodically during the growing season.
   B.   Buildings and appurtenances.
      1.   Buildings and appurtenances, including signs, should be cleaned,
painted or repaired as required to present a neat appearance.
      2.   Deteriorated, worn, or damaged portions should be rebuilt or
replaced.
      3.   Building and sign illuminating elements should be replaced as
required to maintain the effect for which designed.
   C.   Public property.
      1.   Parkway planting areas should be maintained by the adjacent property
owner or tenant in order to add to the aesthetic enhancement of the private
property and the overall attractiveness of the streetscape.
      2.   Sidewalks, curbs and gutters, roadside berms and other public
improvements in the public right-of-way shall be repaired and maintained as
necessary.
      3.   Refuse containers of an aesthetically satisfactory design and color
should be placed in locations which will encourage their use – to avoid
littering of waste materials.
      4.   Street hardware shall be erected and secured properly, and shall be
cleaned or painted regularly to present an orderly appearance. Signs shall be
treated similarly.
Section III. DEFINITIONS.
   APPEARANCE - The outward aspect visible to the public.
   APPURTENANCES - The visible, functional objects accessory to and part of
buildings.
   ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER - The composite or aggregate of the characteristics
of structure, form, materials and function of a building, group of buildings,
or other architectural composition.
   ARCHITECTURAL CONCEPT - The basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group of
buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development, which
produces the architectural character.
   ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE - A prominent or significant part or element of a
building, structure or site.
   ARCHITECTURAL STYLE - The characteristic form and detail, as of buildings of
a particular historic period.
   ATTRACTIVE - Having qualities that arouse interest and pleasure in the
observer.
   COHESIVENESS - Unity of composition between design elements of a building,
or a group of buildings, and the landscape development.
   COMPATIBILITY - Harmony in the appearance of two or more buildings,
structures, and landscape- developments in the same vicinity.
   CONSERVATION - The protection and care which prevent, destruction or
deterioration of historical or otherwise significant structures, buildings or
natural resources.
   DECORATIVE SCREEN - A wall or fence intended to partially or entirely cut
off visibility to the area behind it.
   EXTERIOR BUILDING COMPONENT - An essential and visible part of the exterior
of a building.
   EXTERNAL ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE - The architectural style and general
arrangement of such portion of a building or structure as is designated to be
open to view from a public street, place or way, including the kind, color, and
texture of the building material of such portion and the type of windows,
doors, lights, attached or ground signs, and other fixtures appurtenant to such
portion.
   HARMONY - A quality which produces an aesthetically pleasing whole as in an
arrangement of varied architectural and landscape elements.
   LANDSCAPE - Elements of nature, topography, buildings and other man-made
objects combined in relation to one another.
   LOGIC OF DESIGN - Accepted principles and criteria of validity in the
solution of the problem of design.
   MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT - Equipment, devices and accessories, the use of which
relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and
similar purposes.
   MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURES - Structures, other than buildings, visible from
public ways. Examples are: memorials, stagings, antennas, water tanks and
towers, sheds, shelters, fences and walls, kennels, transformers, drive-up
facilities.
   PROPORTION - Relationship of parts of a building, landscape, structures, or
buildings to each other and to the whole – balance.
   SCALE - Harmonious relationship of the size of parts to one another and to
the human figure.
   SITE BREAK - A structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas and
create visual interest in a site development.
   STREET HARDWARE - Objects other than buildings, structures and plantings
located in streets and public ways and outside of buildings. Examples are: lamp
posts, utility poles, traffic lights, traffic signs, benches, litter
containers, planting containers, letter boxes, fire hydrants.
   STREETSCAPE - The scene as may be observed along a public street or way
composed of natural and man-made components, including buildings, paving,
planting, street hardware and miscellaneous structures.
(Ord. 721, passed 1-13-1986)
APPENDIX B: ZONING MAPS
ZONING MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d0c3e9c0d70e134eef310cfee403f41c4e9bd594/
IMAGES/0-0-0-17.jpg]
 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT BY DISTRICT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d0c3e9c0d70e134eef310cfee403f41c4e9bd594/
IMAGES/0-0-0-19.jpg]
 
(Ord. 577, passed 4-14-1969)
APPENDIX C: KENILWORTH DESIGN GUIDELINES—BUSINESS DISTRICT
   The Kenilworth Design Guidelines—Business District, as adopted by Ordinance
No. 1098, passed April 29, 2013, are hereby adopted by reference and can be
found in their entirety at the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 1098, passed 4-29-2013)
CHAPTER 154: STEEP SLOPE REGULATIONS
Section
   
154.01   Findings
   
154.02   Statement of purpose; applicability
   
154.03   Definitions
   
154.04   Development in the Steep Slope Zone
   
154.05   Development standards
   
154.06   Required plans and permits
   
154.07   Stability of the steep slopes
   
154.08   Tree removal and replacement in the Steep Slope Zone
   
154.09   Appeals of code officials’ decisions
   
154.10   Zoning variations
   
154.11   Administration; fees; conflicting regulations
   154.12 through 15.98   Reserved.
   
154.99   Enforcement and penalties
§ 154.01 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The topography of the Village of Kenilworth includes bluffs and other
steep slope areas. These are valuable land resources that should be protected.
Bluffs and other steep slope areas play a central role in the management of
storm water throughout the village; they are also ecologically fragile and
inherently unstable. Their proper care and maintenance are important to avoid
degradation that could adversely affect the entire community.
   (B)   Steep slope areas may contain sediment, rock, and soils (i) that are
natural features subject to erosion, surface and subsurface movement of water,
and other destabilizing forces, and (ii) whose stability is affected by the
quality and root structure of natural ground cover. Regulating proposed
development according to the natural characteristics of steep slope terrain,
such as degree of sloping, significant vegetation, soil stability, and existing
drainage patterns will allow for development on top of steep slope areas,
including bluffs, while minimizing the physical impact of such development. The
public interest will be served by protecting people and property from the
potentially hazardous geological and hydrological conditions characteristic of
ravine and other steep slope areas.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 154.02 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate development along or
near steep slope areas to protect slope stability and overall drainage and
water management in the village. The purpose of this chapter is not to regulate
for aesthetic or habitat preservation purposes; rather, the purpose is to
prevent erosion of ravines and bluffs by regulating and managing steep slopes
for purposes of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. This chapter
protects people and property from the potentially hazardous geological and
hydrological conditions characteristic of ravine and bluff areas and further
recognizes that maintenance of stable ecological relationships minimizes
environmental degradation of the land and Lake Michigan. Due to improper and
unnecessary development within these sensitive areas, conditions are created
that jeopardize life, property, and the natural ecosystem. It is the intent of
this chapter to establish appropriate controls. All land use and development
on, within, and adjacent to the steep slope is controlled by this chapter.
      (2)   While this chapter provides for the reasonable use of steep slope
zones and related lands, it does so while protecting the public health, safety,
and welfare by:
         (a)   Discouraging development that threatens the stability of steeply
sloped terrain;
         (b)   Encouraging appropriate engineering technology to result in
stable slopes during and subsequent to development;
         (c)   Encouraging building techniques that increase slope stability;
         (d)   Reducing uncontrolled storm water runoff, soil erosion, and mud
slides by minimizing grading, encouraging the preservation of trees and other
vegetation, and, where necessary, requiring revegetation;
         (e)   Permitting development that is compatible with the natural
characteristics of steep slope terrain, such as degree of sloping, soil
suitability, and existing natural and man-made drainage patterns;
         (f)   Preserving the ravine and bluff environment through the
retention of dominant steep slopes and ridges in their natural state; and
         (g)   Reducing the physical impact on steep slopes and related areas
by encouraging innovative site and architectural design, minimizing grading,
and requiring restoration of graded areas.
   (B)   Applicability. This chapter only applies to properties that include or
are adjacent to a bluff along Lake Michigan or that portion of the Skokie Ditch
located east of Sheridan Road and north of Kenilworth Avenue.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.03 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. In the
case of any difference of meaning between the text of this chapter and any
caption or illustration, the text shall control.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A detached, one-story, covered structure designed to
provide enclosed storage or a screened or unscreened sitting area in the Steep
Slope Zone.
   BLUFF. An elevated segment of the Lake Michigan shoreline above the beach
which normally has a precipitous front inclining steeply on the lakeward side.
   CANTILEVER. Any portion of a principal structure that extends laterally
beyond the foundation that supports it.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The code official shall be the Building Commissioner.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change (other than minor common maintenance of
existing structures, paved areas, or utilities) to improved or unimproved real
estate, including without limitation the construction or installation of new,
or enlargement or demolition of existing, structures, paved areas, or
utilities; dredging, filling, drilling, mining, grading, paving, or excavation
operations; and open storage of equipment or materials.
   RAVINE. A deep gully or gorge worn by the flow of water to Lake Michigan. In
this chapter, all references to ravine shall refer that portion of the Skokie
Ditch located east of Sheridan Road and north of Kenilworth Avenue.
   STEEP SLOPE. Land comprising or adjacent to a lake bluff or ravine where the
slope in ascent or descent exceeds 10% from the horizontal.
   STEEP SLOPE LINE. A line representing the intersection of the tableland and
the steep slope. This line is commonly indicated on plats of survey or other
documents as the TOP OF BLUFF.
   STEEP SLOPE ZONE.
      (1)   In the case of a ravine, that portion of a lot that includes the
steep slope of the ravine and lies between the bottom of the ravine and a line
drawn ten feet behind the steep slope line at the top edge of the ravine and
away from the bottom of the ravine. For the purposes of this chapter, the
RAVINE means the Skokie Ditch east of Sheridan Road. The STEEP SLOPE ZONE shall
include all retaining walls located between the bottom of the ravine and the
steep slope line.
      (2)   In the case of a bluff, that portion of a lot that includes the
steep slope and lies between the water’s edge of Lake Michigan and a line drawn
35 feet behind the steep slope line at the top edge of the bluff and away from
the bottom of the bluff. The STEEP SLOPE ZONE shall include all retaining walls
located between Lake Michigan and the steep slope line.
   TABLELAND. Land at the top of a bluff or ravine where the cross slope in any
direction does not exceed 10%.
(Ord. 1163, passed 1214-2015)
Figure 154 - 1. Illustration of defined terms for Ravine
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d0c3e9c0d70e134eef310cfee403f41c4e9bd594/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1970.png]
Figure 154— 2 Illustration of defined terms for Bluff Steep Slope Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d0c3e9c0d70e134eef310cfee403f41c4e9bd594/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1972.png]
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 154.04 DEVELOPMENT IN THE STEEP SLOPE ZONE.
   Any development that is otherwise authorized under the codes, ordinances,
and regulations of the village may occur in the Steep Slope Zone, but only upon
the code official’s review and approval of an application therefor pursuant to
this chapter; provided, however, that only the following structures may be
constructed:
   (A)   In Steep Slope Zones that are bluffs or ravines.
      (1)   Retaining walls and other structures that are necessary or
beneficial for safe continued use of property and slope stabilization may be
constructed in the Steep Slope Zone in the manner approved by the code official
and in accordance with the following additional standards:
         (a)   Retaining walls shall not be used to increase table land.
         (b)   Retaining walls shall not be used to create a shelf or other
table area within the Steep Slope Zone.
         (c)   Backfilling of a retaining wall is allowed only as necessary for
slope stabilization.
      (2)   Structures on the exact foundation of a previously existing
structure may be rebuilt, provided that the rebuilt or remodeled structure (i)
does not extend beyond the previous foundation within the Steep Slope Zone,
(ii) does not extend above the previous height of the structure within the
Steep Slope Zone, and (iii) is undertaken pursuant to sealed plans of an
architect or structural engineer certifying that the existing foundation (with
appropriate engineering modifications, if any) will support the rebuilt or
remodeled structure without material adverse impact on the Steep Slope Zone.
      (3)   Cantilevering of structures over the steep slope line shall not be
permitted.
   (B)   In Steep Slope Zones that are bluffs.
      (1)   Mechanical or electrical lifts, bridges, decks, walkways, steps,
and/or fences which do not obstruct unnecessarily the flow of light and water,
and utility service lines, provided that:
         (a)   Such structures conform to the provisions of this chapter; and
         (b)   Stairs constructed in the Steep Slope Zone shall be no greater
than five feet in width. Stair landings constructed in the Steep Slope Zone
shall be no larger than 50 square feet. Stair landings for the purpose of this
chapter are defined as an intermediate platform on a flight of stairs, greater
than ten square feet, constructed for the purpose of allowing a change in stair
direction down the Steep Slope Zone and/or to break up ten or more stair steps.
      (2)   Decks can be no larger than 100 square feet unless applicant
provides exceptional engineering, including stormwater management and
vegetation, so that such deck will not jeopardize slope stability.
      (3)   Fences, provided that all fences must comply with all applicable
village codes, ordinances, and regulations, including without limitation
Chapter 153 of this code.
      (4)   One accessory building no larger than 150 square feet in area and
no more than 11 feet in height; provided, further, that the code official has
determined that (a) the accessory building as proposed will not adversely
impact the stability of the property or adjacent property and (b) the top of
roof is not visible from adjacent tableland.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 154.05 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Review of application. Any application for development in the Steep
Slope Zone shall be reviewed by the code official, who will consider such
application in light of the standards of this section relating to landscape
planning, soil mechanics engineering, hydrology, geology, environmental design,
and architecture. It is recognized, however, that each Steep Slope Zone has
unique characteristics and encounters different dynamics affecting its
stability and preservation. As a result, the code official may determine for
any application that certain of the following standards may not apply in whole
or in part to such application so long as the code official determines that the
application for development in its totality satisfies the purposes of this
chapter.
   (B)   Standards. The standards applicable to development in a Steep Slope
Zone are as follows:
      (1)   Filling, grading, and earth moving.
         (a)   Minimum alterations. Filling, grading, and earth moving shall be
limited to the minimum required for removal and replacement of foundations,
driveways, drainage control structures, and immediate yard areas. Substantial
filling, grading, and earth moving shall not be permitted and is prohibited.
         (b)   Erosion control. All filling, grading, and earth moving shall be
accomplished in a manner that will create the lowest possible potential for
airborne or waterborne transportation of soil. Temporary erosion control
matting shall be properly staked and trenched nightly where large areas of soil
are exposed.
         (c)   Soil fill in Steep Slope Zone. All fill in the Steep Slope Zone
is prohibited, other than back-fill which is determined by the code official to
be necessary for slope stabilization.
         (d)   Soil fill on table land. In conformance with generally accepted
engineering standards, all fill on table land shall be stabilized to at least
90% of maximum dry density as determined in ASTM procedure D-1557 or
equivalent.
         (e)   Prompt completion. Any earth moving shall be accomplished in the
shortest practical period of time, the schedule of which shall be approved by
the code official. All excavated material shall be removed from the Steep Slope
Zone and no temporary or permanent material storage shall be permitted within
the Steep Slope Zone. No existing natural vegetation shall be destroyed,
removed or disturbed prior to the initiation of development activities.
      (2)   Safety control of steep slopes.
         (a)   The development will not jeopardize slope stability on the
subject site or neighboring properties.
         (b)   Except as can be shown to be essential or beneficial for an
approved development, no filling, grading, and earth moving shall occur in a
Steep Slope Zone.
         (c)   Whenever there is construction upon any property that includes
or is adjacent to a Steep Slope Zone, a fence will be erected temporarily along
the top edge of the Steep Slope Zone, during any construction and/or demolition
activity upon such property.
      (3)   Construction techniques. All proposed structures shall have
foundations designed in a manner consistent with sound engineering and
geological principles. In addition, the following techniques shall be employed
to enhance stabilization of the ravine or bluff:
         (a)   Planning the development to recognize and fit the natural
topography, soils, geology, hydrology, and other existing conditions on the
proposed sites;
         (b)   Orienting development so that filling, grading, and earth
moving, landscaping and other site preparation is kept to an absolute minimum;
         (c)   Preserving the landscape through minimized disruption of natural
terrain and existing vegetation;
         (d)   Minimizing disruption or alteration of natural drainage ways;
         (e)   Minimizing the time during which areas are bare and exposed;
         (f)   Designing and properly locating structures so that structure’s
weight does not negatively impact slope stability; and
         (g)   Considering the effect of undercutting at the base of a Steep
Slope Zone caused by wave action, storm water flow, erosion, and/or channel
changes.
         (h)   Providing for management of silt runoff during the construction
period.
      (4)   Vegetation and revegetation.
         (a)   Natural vegetation. Unless being revegetated as part of the
development, every effort shall be made to maintain natural vegetation in the
Steep Slope Zone.
         (b)   Smallest area. At all times, the smallest practical area of raw
soil shall be exposed for as short a duration of time as practical. When
required by the code official pursuant to sound professional engineering
principles, temporary vegetation or other acceptable cover shall be used to
protect areas of raw soil exposed during development and to prevent airborne or
waterborne transportation of soil.
         (c)   Revegetation. A mixed planting of perennial and woody species is
recommended for use in the Steep Slope Zone disturbed by development.
         (d)   Erosion control mat. Temporary erosion control matting properly
staked and trenched shall be provided over raw soil areas until new vegetation
is established.
      (5)   Hydrological controls.
         (a)   Natural channels. Natural drainage ways shall be preserved to
the maximum extent possible.
         (b)   Controlled runoff. Concentrated runoff from impervious surfaces
shall be collected and transported in a pipe or other approved manner to a
municipal storm sewer system, if available. In no instance shall runoff be
transported to, directed toward, or be allowed to collect in any pipe or
conveyance that is part of the combined storm/sanitary sewer system of the
village.
         (c)   Water discharge into steep slope. Whenever stormwater is
transported across a property for discharge into a Sleep Slope Zone, the
conveyance pipes shall be of non-segmented (continuous sections of minimum 100
feet) pipe material, which shall be installed below ground by directional
boring where possible.
         (d)   Trenching. No pipe shall be installed within a Steep Slope Zone
by excavating a trench unless such trench is approved by the code official.
         (e)   Pipe materials. Flexible corrugated pipes shall not be used
within a Steep Slope Zone unless directional boring is found to be infeasible
in the sole determination of the code official.
         (f)   Interceptor ditches. When required by the code official pursuant
to sound professional engineering principles, interceptor ditches shall be
established above steep slopes in order that soil shall not become saturated
and the intercepted water shall be conveyed in a pipe or other approved manner
to a municipal storm sewer system, if available, or to the bottom of ravine or
bluff slopes in a manner designed to prevent erosion. In no instance shall
runoff be transported to, directed toward, or be allowed to collect in any pipe
or conveyance that is part of the combined storm/sanitary sewer system of the
village.
         (g)   Discharge point stabilization. Natural drainage ways shall be
stabilized by landscape integration and rip-rap or other means consistent with
sound professional engineering practice, to a distance below drainage and
culvert discharge points sufficient to convey the discharge without channel
erosion and in such a manner as to dissipate the energy of the discharge as
approved by the code official.
         (h)   Energy dissipater. All outflow from a stormwater conveyance pipe
must discharge into an energy dissipater designed to slow fast moving
stormwater and prevent soil erosion.
         (i)   Early completion. The overall drainage system shall be completed
and made operational at the earliest possible time during construction, the
schedule of which shall be approved by the code official.
         (j)   Impact on adjacent property. The natural or usual flow of
surface or subsurface water shall not be altered or obstructed in any way by
grade changes that may adversely affect the property of another by contributing
either to pooling or collection of waters or to the concentration or
intensification of surface water discharge.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 154.06 REQUIRED PLANS AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Required plans. Any development or other activity in the Steep Slope
Zone requiring a permit pursuant to this code and applicable regulations shall
be accompanied by the following plans and reports which must be submitted to
and approved by the code official prior to issuance of any permit or
commencement of the proposed development.
      (1)   Means and methods of construction. Because work to be performed in
the Steep Slope Zone may have adverse impacts on steep slopes, all permit
applications shall contain a written description of the proposed means and
methods of accomplishing such work (including without limitation the sequencing
and timing of work, the equipment to be used, interim protective measures, and
activities to monitor potential adverse impacts on the Steep Slope Zone), which
means and methods shall be designed to minimize slope damage. Upon approval of
the permit by the code official, such approved written description shall be the
enforceable means and method of the authorized development activities.
      (2)   Professional engineering. All development within Steep Slope Zone
shall be designed by a licensed structural engineer or geotechnical engineer
and must bear the engineers license seal on submitted drawings and
specifications satisfying good engineering practices and the standards of this
chapter, unless the code official otherwise waives in writing this requirement.
      (3)   Subsoil investigation. Every application for a development permit
in the Steep Slope Zone shall be accompanied by a report, prepared by a
licensed professional civil engineer or structural engineer trained and
experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering, which report shall
include the following:
         (a)   Soil types and subsurface materials. A description (the result
of a thorough subsurface investigation using techniques such as borings, test
pits, site tests, laboratory tests, or other procedures performed to a depth
sufficient to determine foundation conditions for the proposed construction) of
the soil and subsurface materials found on the subject site (with particular
emphasis on the area to be impacted by the proposed development) to a depth
extending below any proposed excavation as well as the engineering properties
of the subsurface soil materials.
         (b)   Observations. A description of existing observable slide areas,
scarps, tension cracks, eroded areas, leaning trees, and the like.
         (c)   History. As available, a historical review of bluff or ravine
stability considering owner photographs, previous reports and topographic
surveys; air photos, Corps of Engineers’ studies, Village of Kenilworth
information, and the like.
         (d)   Drainage. A description of surface patterns of water flow and
seeps as well as indication of the presence or absence of permeable zones in
underlying soils.
         (e)   Stability. A geotechnical stability analysis of the slope and
structure with factors of safety calculated for the existing and proposed
conditions by a method that satisfies both force and moment equilibrium for
long-term and short-term soil strength parameters.
         (f)   External influences. A description of any existing or
anticipated problems from undercutting at the base of a Steep Slope Zone caused
by wave action, ravine flows, erosion, or channel changes.
         (g)   Absence of special hazards. An opinion that the soil types, soil
stability, subsurface hydrology, and external influences affecting the site
will not cause any significant hazards for the proposed use; or if they may
cause such hazards, an opinion that such hazards can be overcome, together with
a reasonably detailed description of how it is proposed to overcome them.
      (4)   Grading plan. In addition to any other permit requirements, each
application for a permit involving development under this chapter shall be
accompanied by a grading plan, which plan shall include the following:
         (a)   A topographic survey, showing the Steep Slope Line (top of
bluff) as well as property contours at one foot intervals for tableland and
five foot intervals for steep slopes, including special notes and details of
the existing terrain;
         (b)   Proposed filling, grading, and earth moving details, including
the dimensions, elevations, and contours of any proposed filling, grading, and
earth moving;
         (c)   A schedule of when each stage of the project will be completed,
including the estimated starting and completion dates; and
         (d)   A provision requiring the placement of a temporary fence on the
table land at the top edge of Steep Slope Zone until construction is completed.
      (5)   Hydrological control plan. Applications for any development permits
shall include a plan for intercepting and containing drainage at the site and
from the structure.
      (6)   Vegetation plan. A vegetation plan, subject to the tree
preservation provisions of
Chapter 150 of this code, shall be submitted with each application for a
development permit, which plan shall include the following:
         (a)   A description of proposed revegetation of disturbed areas,
specifying the materials to be used;
         (b)   A written description detailing methods of slope stabilization
and revegetation, together with the rationale for selecting the plant materials
and planting techniques proposed to be used; and
         (c)   A timetable and sequencing program for implementing the
vegetative plan.
      (7)   Additional submittals; waivers. The code official may require
additional plans as needed for review. The code official may release an
applicant from any element of the aforementioned plan submittals to the extent
that the code official determines that such element(s) will not materially
assist in the evaluation of the proposed action’s impact on slope stability.
   (B)   Permit issuance; terms. Each permit application for development shall
be made in compliance with Chapter 150 of this code and other applicable codes,
ordinances, or regulations, including this chapter. The seal of an Illinois
licensed structural or geotechnical engineer shall appear on all plans and
specifications included as part of a permit application. Upon the code official
determining that an application satisfies the requirements of this chapter, the
code official shall cause a permit to be issued for development within the
Steep Slope Zone. The following provisions are to be imprinted upon each permit
issued for any development activities authorized by the administration of this
chapter and (whether so imprinted or not) shall be incorporated into and made a
part of any such permit:
      (1)   Limited obligation. Compliance with the procedures of this chapter
and the issuance of any related permits shall not be construed to impose any
legal or other obligation upon the village or its elected or appointed
officials, employees, agents, attorneys, or representatives. Any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter is for the benefit of the public and not for the
benefit of any individual.
      (2)   Civil claims. Compliance with the procedures of this chapter and
the issuance of related permits shall not relieve the permittee and the
property owner from civil liability claims.
      (3)   Endorsement. Compliance with the procedures of this chapter and the
issuance of related permits do not imply approval of the need for, or the
benefit or efficacy of, the proposed development; nor does it constitute any
assertion that the proposed development will not result in damage to the
property in question or to adjoining property.
      (4)   Closing report. A licensed professional structural engineer or
geotechnical engineer must inspect all work in the Steep Slope Zone while in
progress and, upon completion of the work, deliver to the code official a
written report bearing the engineer’s license seal, stating that all
development is in accordance with the approved plan and specifications for the
project. Such a report must be delivered prior to the village’s final
inspection, acceptance, and closing of the project.
   (C)   Special terms. In connection with the issuance of a permit pursuant to
this chapter, the code official may impose special conditions as deemed
necessary to ensure the effectiveness of plans for development on a property,
and to protect the long-term stability of a bluff or ravine, or otherwise to
notify future owners of the bluff or ravine conditions of such property.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 154.07 STABILITY OF THE STEEP SLOPES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   In order to provide for long-term slope stability and to prevent
failure of slope stability that may adversely impact neighboring properties,
all property owners whose property includes or is adjacent to a Steep Slope
Zone are required to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Any development within the Steep Slope Zone must meet all plan
submittal requirements in accordance with this chapter.
      (3)   Private storm drainage lines conveying storm water runoff either to
a public storm sewer or to the ravine channel or the toe of the bluff shall be
maintained by the owner thereof. Private drainage lines which leak water onto
the surface of a steep slope must be repaired within 30 days of notification by
the village.
      (4)   Intentional depositing of lawn waste or other natural or man-made
debris which may damage underlying vegetation or impede the free flow of water
through channels within a Steep Slope Zone shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Any tree removal within the Steep Slope Zone shall be in accordance
with the tree preservation standards of
Chapter 150 of this code and the provisions of this chapter.
      (6)   No swimming pool discharge (emptying) shall be directed toward or
directly discharged into a Steep Slope Zone.
   (B)   Maintenance and upkeep.
      (1)   Any authorized structure in the Steep Slope Zone may be repaired,
maintained, or altered but only in compliance with this code, including this
title.
      (2)   Landscape maintenance or routine arboreal activities may be
undertaken in the Steep Slope Zone.
   (C)   Restoration. All governmental entities, private property owners, and
all other private entities having authorized access to ravine or bluff steep
slopes and engaged in the maintenance, repair, or construction of utilities or
other structures within a Steep Slope Zone, or engaged in any modifications to
a steep slope, shall adhere to the applicable provisions of the this code,
including this chapter, utilizing best management practices.
   (D)   Emergency activities. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
village from permitting development activities on an emergency basis when
deemed necessary by the code official to remediate or restore an unstable or
insecure slope, or a slope that has sloughed, that presents an immediate threat
to health, safety, and welfare, or stability of an authorized building.
      (1)   Emergency development activity (including installation or
construction of structures) shall only be permitted provided that the remedial
action involves the least possible disruption of the natural features of the
site as possible and is in conformance with the standards and policies of this
chapter.
      (2)   Emergency development activity (including installation or
construction of structures) shall only be permitted to provide remedial action
that is the most reasonable action to address the emergency situation under the
circumstances.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 154.08 TREE REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT IN THE STEEP SLOPE ZONE.
   (A)   General. The village’s tree preservation requirements in
Chapter 150 of this code shall apply to all proposed tree removals and tree
replacements in the Steep Slope Zone.
   (B)   Additional standards. In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 150 of this code, there may be cases when removal of a tree or tree
stump may jeopardize slope stability and for all proposed tree removals in the
Steep Slope Zone, the following shall apply:
      (1)   The code official shall review each tree removal in the Steep Slope
Zone to determine whether the proposed removal of the tree will jeopardize
slope stability.
      (2)   Any applicant seeking to remove a tree in the Steep Slope Zone
shall provide the village with a report from a certified arborist as to whether
the proposed removal of the tree is consistent with good forestry practices and
certification from a geotechnical engineer as to the stability of the slope.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 154.09 APPEALS OF CODE OFFICIAL’S DECISIONS.
   (A)   Any determination of the code official under this chapter may be
appealed to the Board of Trustees by filing a request for review in writing
within 35 days after the code official issues his or her determination. The
Board of Trustees may designate a committee of the Board to hear the request
for review and make a written recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The
decision of the Board of Trustees will be final.
   (B)   In reviewing the determination of the code official, the Board of
Trustees will consider only whether the determination of the code official in
applying the regulations of this chapter imposes an unreasonable and undue
economic hardship that materially limits the property owner from making
reasonable use of such owner’s property or otherwise imposes requirements which
are unreasonably burdensome to the property owner given the benefits thereof to
the village. After receiving written submittals from the property owner and the
code official (and after a hearing if the Board of Trustees determines that
such a hearing will be instructive), a decision on such appeal must be issued
in writing no more than 60 days after the delivery of the final submittal by
the owner or code official or after the close of the hearing, whichever is
later.
   (C)   In considering an appeal under this section, the Board of Trustees may
reverse, affirm, or modify the determination of the code official, or remand
the determination back to the code official for further consideration, with or
without instructions.
   (D)   The Board of Trustees may issue further procedural rules governing
appeals under this section.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 154.10 ZONING VARIATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the ability of an owner to seek
a variation from the otherwise applicable zoning regulations affecting such
owner’s property. To the extent that the regulations of this chapter materially
restrict the ability of a property to be developed the Zoning Board of Appeals
may determine that the effects of this chapter can, in appropriate
circumstances, constitute a practical difficulty or unreasonable hardship.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 154.11 ADMINISTRATION; FEES; CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, the code official is hereby authorized
and directed to prepare any necessary or desirable forms, practices, and
procedures in order to implement the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   As part of any application, and as a condition of any permit, an
applicant shall be required to pay all fees and charges established in the
annual fee ordinance. To the extent that the village incurs third-party
expenses in connection with the administration of this chapter with respect to
a particular application, such third-party expenses shall be additional fees
chargeable to such application.
   (C)   To the extent that there are conflicting regulations in the village’s
building regulations or elsewhere in this code, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
§§ 154.12 THROUGH 15.98 RESERVED.
§ 154.99 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code, except where another specific penalty is provided.
   (B)   Joint responsibility. For any property affected by the provisions of
this chapter, the property owner, any developer, and their agents, employees,
contractors, subcontractors, licensees, and invitees are each jointly and
severally responsible for compliance with the terms of this chapter.
   (C)   Correction and restoration. In the event any violation of any
provision of this chapter occurs, the property owner shall be responsible for
the violation, its correction, and for otherwise bringing the property into
compliance with the terms of this chapter. Such compliance may require
restoration of the site as closely as possible to its original undisturbed
condition, topography, and/or vegetation in order to eliminate the violation.
   (D)   Stop work. The village shall have the right to issue a stop work order
for any work that is performed in the Steep Slope Zone either (i) without all
permits that are required to this chapter or (ii) in violation of the permits
so issued.
   (E)   Corrective measures. In addition to the monetary penalties provided
for herein, the village may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an
order against the parties responsible to re-establish or restore the grade,
slope, stability, vegetation, and/or drainage systems of a Steep Slope Zone in
order to eliminate and/or prevent an adverse impact upon any adjacent or
subservient property, and for such other and further relief as may be
appropriate in the circumstances.
(Ord. 1163, passed 12-14-2015)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 1959 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                  Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01                10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.02                10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.03                10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.04                10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.05                10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.07                10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.10                10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.11                10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.12                10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.15                10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.16                10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.17                10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.28                10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.29                10.02
5 ILCS 70/2                   10.04
5 ILCS 120                    33.071
5 ILCS 315/3                  34.01
5 ILCS 430                    34.04,
                              34.05
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.        34.01
10 ILCS 5/9-1 et seq.         34.02
10 ILCS 5/9-3                 34.01
20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.        96.01
25 ILCS 170/2                 34.01
30 ILCS 320/1 et seq.         31.26
35 ILCS 120                   35.20
35 ILCS 630                   35.20
35 ILCS 635                   35.20
35 ILCS 636                   35.20
50 ILCS 835/1 et seq.         56.02
50 ILCS 840/1 et seq.         56.02
65 ILCS 5                     10.02
                              30.09,
65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.       30.45,
                              31.22,
                              31.72
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2               10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(2)            10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1             10.99
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25           32.37
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1              35.03
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2              35.01,
                              35.02
65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 et seq.     Ch. 115
220 ILCS 5                    35.20
220 ILCS 5/16-104             35.02
220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)          56.02
220 ILCS 5/21-401             56.02
220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.         56.16
220 ILCS 65/4                 56.05
225 ILCS 312/1 et seq.        150.176
225 ILCS 320                  54.04
225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.        150.441,
                              151.02
225 ILCS 330/1 through 330-49 151.02
225 ILCS 460/1                112.35
225 ILCS 460/2                112.36
230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.      116.032
230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.         116.032
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.         132.20
235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.        116.001
235 ILCS 5/3-12(a)(11.1)      116.001
235 ILCS 5/6-3                116.032,
                              116.090
235 ILCS 5/6-27               116.001
235 ILCS 5/6-28.8             116.076
235 ILCS 5/6-28.8(a)          116.001
235 ILCS 5/6-31               116.016,
                              116.075
235 ILCS 5/7-9                116.093
410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.         113.06
410 ILCS 82/20(a)             113.06
410 ILCS 82/20(b)             113.06
410 ILCS 82/20(c)             113.06
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.        132.50
410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.        132.50
410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.      153.003
415 ILCS 5/14 et seq.         54.04
420 ILCS 46                   150.186
425 ILCS 60                   150.186
430 ILCS 135                  150.186
505 ILCS 89/1 et seq.         132.51
605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.      56.02
615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.          151.04,
                              151.07
625 ILCS 5                    Ch. 70,
                              70.15
625 ILCS 5/1-188              10.02
625 ILCS 5/15-316(c)          Ch. 74, Sch. VIII
720 ILCS 5/28-1 et seq.       116.032
765 ILCS 205                  151.10
805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.       116.030
                              
 
REFERENCES TO 1959 CODE
1959 Code Section 2013 Code Section
1959 Code Section 2013 Code Section
1-1               10.01
1-2               10.02,
                  10.04
1-3               10.03
1-4               10.10
1-5               10.99
1-9               11.02
1-10              10.05
1-11              10.16
1-12              11.03
1-13              11.01
1-15              10.17
2a-11             132.01
2a-12             132.02
2a-20             132.03
2a-21             132.04
2a-22             132.05
2a-24             132.06
2b-1              33.001
2b-2              33.002
2b-3              33.003
2b-4              33.004
2b-9              33.015
2b-10             33.016
2b-11             33.017
2b-12             33.018
2b-17             33.051
2b-18             33.052
2b-16             33.050
3-1               135.20
3-2               135.21
3-6               135.22
3-7               135.23
4-1               111.001
4-2               111.002
4-3               111.003
4-4               111.004
4-5               111.005
4-6               111.006
4-7               111.020
4-8               111.021
4-9               111.022
4-10              111.023
4-11              111.024
4-13              111.025
4-21              111.060
4-22              111.061
4-23              111.062
4-24              111.063
4-25              111.064
4-26              111.065
4-41              111.115
4-42              111.116
4-43              111.117
4-44              111.118
4-45              111.119
4-46              111.120
4-47              111.121
4-48              111.122
4-49              111.123
6-1               112.50
6-2               112.51
6-3               112.52
6-4               112.53
7-1               112.01
7-2               112.02
7-3               112.03
7-4               112.04
7-5               112.05
8-1               113.01
8-2               113.02
8-3               113.03
8-4               113.04
8-5               113.05
8-6               113.05
11a-1             133.01
11a-2             133.02
11a-5             133.20
11a-6             133.21
13-1              114.01
13-2              114.02
13-3              114.03
13-4              114.04
13-5              114.05
13-6              114.06
13-7              114.07
13-8              114.08
13-9              114.09
13-10             114.10
13-46             114.20
13-47             114.21
13-49             114.23
13-50             114.24
13-51             114.25
13-52             114.26
13-53             114.27
13-54             114.28
13-56             114.30
14-1              115.01
14-2              115.02
14-3              115.03
14-4              115.04
14-5              115.05
16-3              93.01
16-7              130.09
16-27             150.425
16-28             150.426
16-29             150.427
16-30             150.428
16-31             150.429
16-32             150.430
16-33             150.431
16-34             150.432
16-35             130.25
16-36             130.26
16-37             130.27
16-38             130.28
16-39             130.29
16-40             130.30
19-1              117.01
19-2              117.02
21-1              110.01
21-2              110.02
21-3              110.03
21-4              110.04
21-5              110.05
21-6              110.06
21-7              110.07
21-8              110.08
21-9              110.09
21-10             110.10
21-11             110.11
21-12             110.12
21-13             110.13
21-14             110.14
21-15             110.15
24-1              130.01
24-5              130.02
24-6              130.03
24-7              130.10
24-8              130.04
24-9              132.20
24-10             132.21
24-13             130.05
24-14             130.11
24-18             131.01
24-19             130.06
24-24             131.02
24-28             131.03
24-29             130.07
25-1              117.15
25-2              117.16
25-3              117.17
25-4              117.18
25-5              117.19
25-6              117.20
25-7              117.21
25-8              117.22
25-9              117.23
26-1              112.20
26-2              112.21
26-3              112.22
26-4              112.23
26-5              112.24
27-1              131.04
27-4              131.05
27-5              131.06
27-6              131.07
27-8              130.08
27-9              131.08
27-10             130.02
29-1              117.35
29-2              117.36
29-3              117.37
29-4              117.38
31-1              55.001
31-2              55.002
31-3              55.003
31-4              55.004
31-5              55.005
31-6              55.007
31-7              55.008
31-8              55.009
31-9              55.010
31-10             55.011
31-11             55.013
31-12             55.014
31-13             55.015
31-14             55.030
31-15             55.045
31-16             55.046
31-17             55.047
31-18             55.048
31-19             55.049
31-22             55.065
31-23             55.066
31-25             55.067
31-26             55.080
31-27             94.01
31-28             55.095
31-29             55.096
31-30             55.097
31-31             55.098
31-33             55.110
31-34             55.111
31-35             55.125
31-36             55.126
31-37             55.127
31-38             55.128
31-39             55.129
32-1              152.01
32-2              152.02
32-3              152.03
32-4              152.04
32-5              152.05
32-6              152.06
32-7              152.07
32-8              152.08
32-9              152.09
34-1              57.01
34-2              57.02
34-3              57.03
34-4              57.04
34-5              57.05
34-8              57.06
38-1              50.01
38-2              50.02
38-3              50.03
38-4              50.04
38-5              50.05
38-6              50.06
38-8              50.07
38-9              50.08
38-10             50.09
38-11             50.10
38-12             50.11
38-13             50.12
38-14             50.13
38-15             50.14
38-16             50.15
38-17             50.16
38-18             50.17
38-19             50.18
38-20             50.19
38-21             50.20
38-22             50.21
38-24             55.016
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
325      5-13-1935   33.003,
                     33.050
500      11-9-1959   55.080
526      7-1-1963    55.080
538      8-2-1965    92.01 -
                     92.08
539      8-2-1965    95.01 -
                     95.08
545      2-14-1966   50.06,
                     50.07
                     50.07,
554      11-14-1966  50.13,
                     50.17,
                     50.18
567      7-8-1968    50.06
571      8-12-1968   50.06
                     153.001 -
                     153.003,
                     153.015 -
                     153.017,
                     153.030 -
                     153.035,
                     153.065 -
                     153.070,
                     153.075 -
                     153.086,
                     153.095 -
                     153.099,
                     153.110 -
                     153.112,
                     153.125,
                     153.140,
                     153.155,
                     153.156,
577      4-14-1969   153.170,
                     153.185 -
                     153.192,
                     153.205 -
                     153.211,
                     153.225 -
                     153.227,
                     153.240,
                     153.243,
                     153.244,
                     153.245,
                     153.260,
                     153.275,
                     153.276,
                     153.290,
                     153.305,
                     153.320,
                     153.335,
                     Ch. 153, App. B
580      8-11-1969   152.04
589      7-13-1970   131.21
601      8-16-1971   50.06
607      4-24-1972   55.080
614      6-11-1973   134.01
625      1-27-1975   50.06
640      8-9-1976    131.20,
                     131.22
640      8-9-1976    131.23
646      10-10-1977  50.04
                     51.01,
647      12-12-1977  51.03,
                     51.99
649      2-13-1978   92.07
650      3-13-1978   55.006
651      6-12-1978   55.012
656      1-8-1979    132.50,
                     132.51
658      4-18-1979   50.06
662      7-9-1979    133.03
665      11-13-1979  92.07
677      11-9-1981   55.080
678      12-14-1981  50.06
680      12-14-1981  92.07
687      10-11-1982  135.20
688      11-8-1982   135.20,
                     135.21
689      1-10-1983   112.35 -
                     112.38
                     112.02,
690      1-10-1983   112.03,
                     131.21
697      7-11-1983   134.02
700      8-8-1983    55.080
                     52.001 -
                     52.004,
                     52.015,
                     52.030 -
                     52.074,
                     52.085 -
                     52.094,
703      10-10-1983  52.105,
                     52.120 -
                     52.122,
                     53.01 -
                     53.08,
                     53.20,
                     53.21,
                     53.99
                     53.08,
705      12-12-1983  53.20,
                     53.22
706      2-13-1984   92.07
719      9-9-1985    52.135
720      10-14-1985  50.03
721      1-13-1986   Ch. 153, App. A
                     150.175,
723      4-14-1986   150.176,
                     150.196
724      4-14-1986   150.195
725      4-14-1986   150.205,
                     150.206
726      4-14-1986   150.215 -
                     150.218
727      4-14-1986   150.230,
                     150.231
732      9-8-1986    134.01
734      1-12-1987   92.07
738      12-14-1987  92.07
741      3-14-1988   50.06
742      3-14-1988   53.01
747      8-8-1988    92.01 -
                     92.08
748      3-13-1989   33.052
755      12-11-1989; 50.08
763      6-12-1990   92.01 -
                     92.08
764      - -         33.100
                     92.09,
766      9-10-1990   135.01 -
                     135.05
768      12-10-1990  50.06
                     70.01,
                     70.15,
                     70.30 -
                     70.32,
                     71.01 -
                     71.05,
                     71.07,
                     72.01 -
780      7-8-1991    72.08,
                     72.20,
                     72.21,
                     73.01;
                     Ch. 74, Schs. I,
                     III,
                     IV,
                     V,
                     VI,
                     VII
782      12-9-1991   50.06
785      1-13-1992   54.01 -
                     54.09
786      3-9-1992    92.01 -
                     92.08
789      4-13-1992   73.01
790      5-11-1992   Ch. 74, Sch. III
795      11-9-1992   Ch. 74, Sch. VI
799      3-8-1993    50.06
801      4-12-1993   135.02,
                     135.04
805      10-12-1993  72.01
806      10-12-1993  95.03
808      3-14-1994   90.01 -
                     90.06
811      4-11-1994   72.20,
                     73.01
                     91.001 -
                     91.006,
                     91.020 -
                     91.024,
                     91.035,
812      5-9-1994    91.036,
                     91.050 -
                     91.055,
                     91.060 -
                     91.065,
                     91.080 -
                     91.084
813      5-9-1994    70.15
818      6-12-1995   92.07
819      6-12-1995   90.04
820      6-12-1995   50.08,
                     50.09
821      6-12-1995   53.01 -
                     53.03
817      6-12-1995   10.99
824      7-10-1995   132.50,
                     134.02
826      3-11-1996   70.15
828      8-12-1996   50.06
831      1-13-1997   72.09
834      9-9-1998    Ch. 74, Sch. VIII
837      10-13-1998  72.20,
                     73.01
844      2-8-1999    35.01 -
                     35.09
850      4-12-1999   35.01 -
                     35.09
857      6-14-1999   72.21;
                     Ch. 74, Sch. IV
858      6-14-1999   50.06,
                     50.08
859      6-14-1999   91.020
860      6-14-1999   92.07
861      6-14-1999   90.03
865      11-8-1999   72.07
872      6-12-2000   135.02
                     33.070 -
                     33.072,
                     150.021 -
                     150.029,
                     150.040,
885      11-13-2001  150.041,
                     150.043,
                     150.044,
                     150.055,
                     150.056,
                     150.070 -
                     150.076
888      2-11-2002   50.06
899      10-21-2002  112.01 -
                     112.07
903      4-14-2003   91.020
904      4-14-2003   72.20,
                     73.01
905      4-14-2003   92.07
910      7-14-2003   90.04
                     150.022,
                     150.023,
                     150.025 -
                     150.029,
                     150.040,
916      4-9-2004    150.041,
                     150.043,
                     150.055,
                     150.056,
                     150.073,
                     150.076,
                     33.072
917      4-12-2004   134.01
918      5-10-2004   153.192
921      5-10-2004   34.01 -
                     34.05
926      9-20-2004   33.016
                     33.072,
                     150.020,
929      12-14-2004  150.023,
                     150.027,
                     150.040,
                     150.043
930      12-14-2004  135.03
932      4-11-2005   72.20,
                     73.01
933      4-11-2005   92.07
936      6-13-2005   153.067,
                     153.069
                     150.105,
941      7-11-2005   150.120,
                     150.135 -
                     150.143
941      7-12-2005   135.02
942      9-12-2005   33.016
943      9-12-2005   35.20 -
                     35.24
                     150.155 -
945      10-11-2005  150.165,
                     150.167,
                     150.999
                     153.003,
                     153.033,
                     153.068,
946      10-11-2005  153.069,
                     153.075,
                     153.080,
                     153.208
948      2-13-2006   153.003,
                     153.034
949      2-13-2006   153.225 -
                     153.227
                     152.01,
951      4-10-2006   152.04,
                     152.09
952      4-10-2006   35.25
956      5-8-2006    152.01,
                     152.04
958      6-12-2006   55.065,
                     152.02
968      11-13-2006  153.249
969      12-11-2006  153.003
973      2-12-2007   153.068
                     153.003,
                     153.065,
                     153.066,
                     153.068,
976      4-9-2007    153.069,
                     153.080,
                     153.187,
                     153.192,
                     153.245
979      5-14-2007   73.01
                     72.07;
986      10-9-2007   Ch. 74, Schs. I,
                     II
                     153.003,
987      10-9-2007   153.065,
                     153.068
988      12-10-2007  153.290 -
                     153.294
                     55.002,
989      12-10-2007  55.125,
                     56.01 -
                     56.22
996      5-20-2008   Ch. 74, Sch. I
1000     8-5-2008    150.090
1002     8-8-2008    Ch. 74, Sch. I
1003     9-8-2008    113.05,
                     113.06
1004     9-8-2008    153.003,
                     153.034
                     150.021,
                     150.026 -
                     150.029,
1005     9-8-2008    150.040 -
                     150.044,
                     150.056,
                     150.070
1009     2-9-2009    55.008
                     150.001 -
                     150.007,
                     150.020 -
                     150.029,
                     150.040 -
                     150.044,
                     150.055,
                     150.056,
                     150.070 -
                     150.076,
                     150.175,
                     150.176,
1010     4-13-2009   150.185,
                     150.186,
                     150.195,
                     150.196,
                     150.205,
                     150.206,
                     150.215 -
                     150.218,
                     150.230,
                     150.231,
                     150.245,
                     150.290,
                     150.291
1013     5-11-2009   73.01
1014     5-11-2009   72.20
1015     5-11-2009   91.020
1016     5-11-2009   50.06
                     153.003,
                     153.015,
                     153.036,
                     153.037,
                     153.095 -
                     153.099,
1018     6-22-2009   153.240,
                     153.244,
                     153.245,
                     153.247 -
                     153.249,
                     153.275,
                     153.290
1020     6-22-2009   33.016
1022     7-13-2009   92.07
                     153.003,
                     153.095,
                     153.187,
1024     8-10-2009   153.191,
                     153.192,
                     153.246,
                     153.247
1026     9-14-2009   132.20,
                     132.21
1032     3-15-2010   70.15
1036     4-19-2010   73.01
1037     4-19-2010   50.06
1039     5-17-2010   150.305,
                     150.306
1044     8-23-2010   10.99
                     153.037,
1048     11-15-2010  153.084,
                     153.086
1049     11-15-2010  Ch. 74, Sch. VII
1051     11-15-2010  32.12
1056     1-18-2011   111.080 -
                     111.091
                     153.003,
                     153.037,
                     153.045 -
                     153.060,
                     153.098,
1057     2-22-2011   153.189,
                     153.205,
                     153.240 -
                     153.242,
                     153.244,
                     153.245,
                     153.247
1061     4-18-2011   50.06
1064     6-20-2011   50.04
1068     8-22-2011   Ch. 74, Sch. VI
1069     8-22-2011   Ch. 74, Sch. II
1076     3-19-2012   10.02
1078     4-16-2012   32.32
                     153.003,
                     153.038,
1082     5-21-2012   153.095,
                     153.245,
                     153.247
1086     11-19-2012  50.06
1097     4-29-2013   10.30 -
                     10.36
                     153.046,
                     153.052,
                     153.242,
1098     4-29-2013   153.245,
                     153.246,
                     153.247,
                     Ch. 153, App. C
                     150.027,
1099     4-29-2013   150.030,
                     150.043
1103     6-17-2013   Ch. 74, Sch. II
                     50.08,
1104     6-17-2013   50.09,
                     53.01 -
                     53.03
1106     6-17-2013   33.016
1108     7-15-2013   33.071
1119     12-16-2013  Ch. 74, Sch. I
1120     1-27-2014   Ch. 74, Sch. II
1126     5-19-2014   153.249
1130     8-18-2014   Ch. 74, Sch. II
1141     4-20-2015   31.26
1142     5-18-2015   150.450,
                     150.451
1149     7-20-2015   51.01
1150     8-17-2015   31.26,
                     31.45
1153     9-21-2015   150.195,
                     150.196
                     150.008,
1163     12-14-2015  154.01 -
                     154.11,
                     154.99
1169     3-28-2016   135.02
1172     7-18-2016   95.03
1174     10-17-2016  55.001
1175     10-17-2016  55.001
1177     10-17-2016  153.003,
                     153.070
1178     10-17-2016  150.440 -
                     150.446
1187     1-23-2017   33.100,
                     35.25
1188     1-23-2017   10.99
1189     2-13-2017   50.08,
                     53.01
1190     3-20-2017   72.22
                     116.001 -
                     116.003,
                     116.015 -
                     116.017,
                     116.030 -
1191     3-20-2017   116.036,
                     116.050,
                     116.051,
                     116.065 -
                     116.075,
                     116.090 -
                     116.095
1193     4-17-2017   Ch. 74, Sch. I
1197     7-24-2017   70.15
1201     10-16-2017  153.082
1211     1-22-2018   150.176,
                     150.186
                     56.01,
                     56.02,
1214     2-12-2018   56.13,
                     56.15 -
                     56.17
1215     2-12-2018   150.166
                     56.02,
                     56.04,
1224     8-20-2018   56.06,
                     56.15,
                     56.22,
                     56.23
1236     2-19-2019   Ch. 74, Sch. I
1237     2-19-2019   Ch. 74, Sch. II
                     118.01 -
1240     4-15-2019   118.03,
                     118.99
                     150.175,
                     150.551 
                     150.176,
                     150.185,
                     150.186,
                     150.195,
                     150.196,
                     150.205,
                     150.206,
                     150.215,
                     150.216,
1241     4-15-2019   150.230,
                     150.231,
                     150.245,
                     150.246,
                     150.290,
                     150.291,
                     150.305,
                     150.306,
                     150.460,
                     150.461,
                     150.550,
                     150.551
1255     12-16-2019  132.50,
                     132.51
                     96.01 -
1259     4-20-2020   96.05,
                     96.99
1262     6-15-2020   116.016
1264     8-17-2020   135.02
                     30.22,
                     30.50,
                     32.50,
                     33.016,
                     33.050,
1265     9-21-2020   33.051,
                     33.070,
                     33.071,
                     33.091,
                     150.028,
                     152.05,
                     152.08
1270     10-26-2020  153.003,
                     153.039
1282     6-21-2021   150.156,
                     150.164
                     151.01 -
1284     8-16-2021   151.14,
                     151.99
                     33.001,
                     114.04,
                     114.06,
                     114.09 -
1293     11-15-2021  114.11,
                     114.23,
                     114.26,
                     114.28 -
                     114.30
1294     11-15-2021  Ch. 74, Sch. I
                     Ch. 74, Schs.
1315     9-19-2022   I,
                     II
1316     9-19-2022   Ch. 74, Sch. VI
                     116.001,
1317     10-24-2022  116.016,
                     116.076
                     153.003,
1318     10-24-2022  153.037,
                     153.095
                     116.001,
                     116.015,
1321     11-21-2022  116.016,
                     116.068,
                     116.073
1336     7-17-2023   150.176,
                     150.186
                     153.003,
1340     10-23-2023  153.246,
                     153.247,
                     153.249
                     150.024,
                     150.026,
                     150.028,
1350     12-11-2023  150.040,
                     150.054 -
                     150.056,
                     150.075
1353     3-18-2024   135.02
                     33.016 -
                     33.018,
1355     4-15-2024   152.02,
                     152.03,
                     153.244,
                     153.305
1356     4-15-2024   153.003,
                     153.095
                     52.004,
                     52.038,
                     52.039,
                     52.045,
                     52.046,
                     52.049,
                     52.050,
                     52.055 -
                     52.057,
                     52.059,
                     52.060,
1365     11-18-2024  52.062,
                     52.065,
                     52.069,
                     52.070,
                     52.073,
                     52.085,
                     52.088,
                     52.135,
                     53.08,
                     53.20,
                     53.22,
                     150.444,
                     150.445
                     150.175,
                     150.176,
                     150.185,
                     150.186,
                     150.196,
                     150.205,
                     150.206,
                     150.215,
                     150.218,
                     150.230,
1374     12-9-2024   150.231,
                     150.245,
                     150.290,
                     150.291,
                     150.305,
                     150.306,
                     150.450,
                     150.451,
                     150.460,
                     150.461,
                     150.550,
                     150.551
1380     2-18-2025   32.32
1384     4-21-2025   55.008,
                     55.050
1385     5-19-2025   150.218
1388     8-18-2025   153.082,
                     153.085
1396     12-9-2025   90.03
                    
 
 
