KEWANEE, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-63 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 4266, passed 12-8-25; and
State legislation current through 2024 Illinois Legislative Service, Pamphlet
#5
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 3048
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF KEWANEE AND DECLARING THAT THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE EFFECTIVE
IMMEDIATELY.
WHEREAS, The American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the fifth supplement to the City Code of the City of Kewanee, which
supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior
supplement to the City Code; and
WHEREAS, The American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
recommended the revision or addition of certain sections of the City Code which
are based on or make references to sections of the State of Illinois Statutes;
and
WHEREAS, It is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections
per the changes of the law of the State of Illinois;
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED, BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF KEWANEE THAT:
Section 1.   The fifth supplement to the City Code of the City of Kewanee,
Illinois as submitted by the American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety. Changes to this fifth supplement are
contained in Section 2 of this ordinance. A summary of the changes made due to
the State of Illinois Statutes are:
City Code Article Description
§ 70.01          Definitions modified.
                  Handicapped changed to persons with disabilities.
                  School bus had language added.
                  Tow truck had language added.
§ 71.002         New language about road construction and maintenance added.
§ 71.03          Had an EPA section number change.
§ 71.080         Railroad crossing language added.
§ 72.10          Stopping, standing and parking in public parking areas.
§ 72.12          New handicapped language.
§ 74.03          Had new disabled street crossing language added.
§ 74.05          Had new disabled street crossing language added.
§ 74.12          Railroad crossing language added.
§ 134.01         Language about breast feeding in public added.
§ 136.01         Had an EPA section number change.
§ 137.04         Added "knowingly or intentionally" to section about defacing
                  firearms.
 
Section 2.   The following changes are made to the City Code as updated by the
fifth supplement to the City Code of the City of Kewanee, Illinois as submitted
by the American Legal Publishing Corporation.
a.   Article 70.99(A) is changed to read:
   § 70.99(A)   Traffic violations. Whoever violates any provision of this
traffic code for which another penalty is not already otherwise provided,
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 as specified
in § 10.99 "General Penalty" of this code."
b.   Article 72.12(C), penalty for unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved
for disabled persons, is changed to read:
   § 72.12(C) Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this
section shall be fined as set forth in § 72.99 $100.00, in addition to any
costs or charges connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle
authorized under this section."
c.   Article 72.99 PENALTY is repealed.
d.   The following paragraph is added to § 134.01 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   § 134.01(C) Any person who exposes their private parts in a public place
commits a public indecency. This includes urinating or defecating in public.
e.   Article 95.10 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS has
the following subparagraph added:
   § 95.10(E) The person is acting pursuant to a special cleanup day
established by the City."
Section 3   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately upon
its passage and approval as provided by law.
Adopted by the Council of the City of Kewanee, Illinois this 8th. day of April,
1996.
                                 James P. Burns /s/
                                 Mayor
ATTEST:
Sandra Murphy /s/
City Clerk
 
RECORD OF THE VOTE          Yes No Abstain Absent
Mayor James P. Burns        X
Councilman Wayne Becker     X
Councilman Willard Carroll  X
Councilwoman Cathy Maguire  X
Councilwoman Kellie Wallace X
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
   
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Acceptance of city code
   
10.03   Interpretation
   
10.04   Application to future ordinances
   
10.05   Captions
   
10.06   Definitions
   
10.07   Rules of interpretation
   
10.08   Severability
   
10.09   Reference to other sections
   
10.10   Reference to offices
   
10.11   Errors and omissions
   
10.12   Official time
   
10.13   Reasonable time
   
10.14   Effective time and date and ordinances repealed
   
10.15   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.16   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.17   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.19   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.20   Public utility ordinances
   
10.21   Court proceedings
   
10.22   Judgement; penalty; recovery
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the city of Kewanee shall be
designated as the Code of Kewanee and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 ACCEPTANCE OF CITY CODE.
   This city code, as hereby presented in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent
effect.
('71 Code, § 1-1-2)
§ 10.03 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.04 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.05 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.06 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Kewanee, Illinois.
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   COUNTY. Henry County, Illinois.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.07 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following
rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the City
Council or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
   (E)   In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code,
the following rules shall be observed:
      (1)   Intent to defraud. Whenever an intent to defraud is required in
order to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
      (2)   Liability of employers and agents. When the provisions of any
section of this city code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the
person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also
the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the
said person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty
set forth.
('71 Code, § 1-1-4)
§ 10.08 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.11 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.12 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.13 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Saturday, Sunday or a holiday it shall be excluded.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE TIME AND DATE AND ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after 00:01 a.m., November 1, 1993, shall contain
all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code. All
ordinances from number 2841 through any ordinances approved prior to the
effective date of this code shall be incorporated in this code as if passed
after this code's effective time and date.
(Ord. 2855, passed 10-12-93)
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.16 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the City Council requiring publication shall take
effect 10 days after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly
provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.17 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in anyway be effected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall by itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
   (D)   All general ordinances of the city that have been codified prior to
the adoption of this city code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred
to herein as being still in force or are by necessary implication herein
reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following
section), from which are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby
repealed: Tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances.
('71 Code, § 1-2-1)
§ 10.18 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.19 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If an Illinois Compiled Statutes cite is included in the
history, this indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the
same as the statute.
Example: (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3-2-2) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-85).
      (2)   If an Illinois Compiles Statutes cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.
Example:
   § 31.10 ELECTIONS.
      Election of city officers shall be conducted in accordance with general
election laws.
   (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)
   Statutory reference:
      For provisions concerning the election of municipal offices, see ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, § 3-2-2 et seq.
§ 10.20 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and
other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates or
public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code
or by virtue of §
10.17(D), excepting as this city code may contain provisions for such matters,
in which case this city code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or
ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
('71 Code, § 1-2-2)
§ 10.21 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable
If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
   (B)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this or the preceding section shall be construed
as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance
of the city herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or
altering any penalty accrued, or to accrued or as affecting the liability of
any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any
ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this
city code.
('71 Code, § 1-2-3)
§ 10.22 JUDGMENT; PENALTY; RECOVERY.
   In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable or shall be
created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the city, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but no more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
('71 Code, § 1-5-2)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person convicted of a violation of this code for which another
penalty has not been provided, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed the amount
set forth by the statutes of the State of Illinois as the maximum amount
authorized for a municipality for any one offense. The minimum fine for any
offense of this code shall be $25, such amount being in addition to any court
cost that is applied by the court.
('71 Code, § 1-4-1) (Am. Ord. 2577, passed 7-22-85; Am. Ord. 2754, passed 5-13-
91)
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   The penalty provided in this section shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which
is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such
duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
      (2)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is
created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of
a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar
any other penalty being enforced.
      (3)   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this section shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues.
('71 Code, § 1-4-4)
   (C)   Default; labor. Any person in default of payment of any fine or costs
imposed may be committed to the city or county jail until the fine, penalty and
costs are fully paid. Any person imprisoned under the provisions of this
section may be put to work for the benefit of the city for the term of his
imprisonment. The committed person shall be allowed, exclusive of board, a
credit of $5 for each day's work.
('71 Code, § 1-4-2)
   (D)   License. When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of
this code, any license previously issued to him by the city may be revoked by
the court or by the City Council.
('71 Code, § 1-4-3)
   (E)   Bail. Bail for violation of any section of this code (other than
traffic violation) shall be $100 in cash.
('71 Code, § 1-4-6)
   (F)   Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained herein, all
citations issued for a violation of this Code which constitute a first or
second offense may be adjudicated without court appearance. Any person who
wishes to plead guilty to either a first or second offense may do so by signing
a guilty plea at the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court, Kewanee
Division, and by paying the penalty for said offense. A first offense will
result in a fine being levied in the amount of $25. A second offense shall
result in a fine being levied in the amount of $50. It shall be the
responsibility of the office of the City Attorney or the Kewanee Police
Department to notify the Henry County Clerk of the Circuit Court as to any
person being charged with an offense for the third or more time. Any person
being charged with a violation of this Code for the third or more time must
appear before the Presiding Judge of the Clerk of the Circuit Court for entry
of a plea to any aforesaid charge.
(Am. Ord. 2142, passed 6-23-80; Am. Ord. 2999, passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 3179,
passed 9-14-98)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   City seal
   
11.02   Official city flag
   
11.03   City datum established
   
11.04   City slogan established
§ 11.01 CITY SEAL.
   (A)    A seal or disc in a circular form, with the words “City of Kewanee
Illinois • Founded 1854 Incorporated 1897 •” on the outer circle, and in the
interior or center of said circle, a depiction of a prairie chicken, known as a
“Kewanee,” shall be the seal of the city.
   (B)    The city seal shall be and remain in the custody of the City Clerk,
and be used by the Clerk and the Mayor, as provided by law.
('71 Code, § 1-25-1) (Am. Ord. 3017, passed 11-20-95)
§ 11.02 OFFICIAL CITY FLAG.
   The official city flag or insignia is hereby adopted by reference, as if
fully set forth herein.
('71 Code, § 1-25-2) (Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-50)
§ 11.03 CITY DATUM ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established minimizing, measuring and fixing elevations and
grades in the city, which base or datum plane shall be known under the stale
and name of “Kewanee City Datum.” The plane referred to is a horizontal plane
which is 99.37 feet vertically below the south side of the top of the manhole
frame at the center of the intersection of Second and Tremont Streets in the
city, the elevation of the said point being hereby established of 99.37 feet.
('71 Code, § 9-2-1)
§ 11.04 CITY SLOGAN ESTABLISHED.
   In recognition of being a proactive community, with many, many reasons to
live, work, shop, learn and play, as well as the work of the Chamber of
Commerce in promoting the community, the city hereby establishes the following
as its slogan:
   “Kewanee: A City of Choice.”
(Ord. 3307, passed 6-11-01)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
   
30.   CITY COUNCIL
   
31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
   
32.   DEPARTMENTS
   
33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
   
34.   [RESERVED.]
   
35.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
   
36.   TAXATION
   
37.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
   
38.   EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS
   
39.   [RESERVED.]
   
40.   CIVIL DEFENSE
   
41.   AGGREGATION OF ELECTRIC LOAD
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Membership
   
30.02   Powers and duties
Meetings; Rules of Procedure
   
30.15   Meetings
   
30.16   Order of business
   
30.17   Roberts' Rules of Order
   
30.18   Citizen participation
Ordinances and Resolutions
   
30.30   Record of ordinances; proof of publication
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 MEMBERSHIP.
   The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and four Commissioners, each
elected at large as provided by law.
('71 Code, § 1-6-1)
§ 30.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Council shall have and possess and shall exercise all executive and
legislative powers, functions and duties conferred upon the city or its
officers, together with the following:
   (A)   It shall make all orders for the doing of work or the making or
construction of any improvements or building.
   (B)   It shall levy all taxes, apportion and appropriate all funds, and
audit all bills, accounts, payrolls or claims, and order payment thereof.
   (C)   It shall make or authorize the making of all contracts, and no
contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the city unless made by ordinance or
resolution adopted by the Council, or reduced to writing by the Council, and
approved thereby or expressly authorized by ordinance or resolution adopted by
the Council; provided however, in all contracts involving the expenditure of a
less amount than $1,500, it shall not be necessary that the same be made, or
authorized by ordinance or resolution. All contracts and all ordinances and
resolutions making contracts or authorizing the making of contracts, shall be
drawn up by the City Attorney or examined by such officer before the same is
made or passed.
('71 Code, § 1-6-2)
MEETINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 30.15 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Council
Chamber in the City Hall on the second and fourth Monday of each month, at 7:00
p.m., except when said Monday shall be a public holiday, in which case the
Council shall meet at the same hour on the following day. Adjourned meetings
may be held for the purpose of completing the unfinished business of the
regular meetings at such time as may be determined by the Council.
('71 Code, § 1-6-5) (Ord. 1353, passed 10-17-55; Am. Ord. 2770, passed 12-23-
91; Am. Ord. 3158, passed 5-11-98; Am. Res. 4275, passed 11-25-02; Am. Res.
4337, passed 12-8-03)
   (B)   Special meetings of the Council may be called from time to time by the
Mayor or Council people, upon giving not less than 48 hours notice to all
members of the Council. However, that if all members of the Council are present
at such special meeting, said notice of such special meeting may be waived.
Notice to Council people shall be by personal service by delivery of said
notice to said Council person's principal residence and depositing a copy of
said notice in the Council person's mailbox at City Hall.
('71 Code, § 1-6-6) (Am. Ord. 3158, passed 5-11-98)
§ 30.16 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   At every meeting of the City Council at which a quorum is present, the order
of business shall be as follows:
   (A)   Call to order.
   (B)   Pledge of Allegiance.
   (C)   Approval of minutes.
   (D)   Presentation of payroll, bills and claims.
   (E)   Staff reports.
   (F)   Citizen participation. (In addition, the Chair shall permit citizen
participation on individual agenda items.)
   (G)   Business.
   (H)   Council communications.
   (I)   Announcements.
   (J)   Adjournment.
('71 Code, § 1-6-7) (Am. Ord. 3158, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 3532, passed 4-9-
07; Am. Ord. 3540, passed 6-11-07)
§ 30.17 ROBERTS' RULES OF ORDER.
   On all points of order not especially provided for by law or ordinance,
"Roberts' Rules of Order" is hereby adopted as the law to govern the
deliberations of the City Council.
('71 Code, § 1-6-8) (Am. Ord. 3158, passed 5-11-98)
§ 30.18 CITIZEN PARTICIPATION.
   In accordance with the requirements of Section 2.06(g) of the Illinois Open
Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/2.06(g)), any person attending a public meeting of any
City Council, city board, committee, subcommittee, or commission shall be
permitted to address the public officials during the public comment period,
which shall be reserved for each meeting. The public may also speak during the
discussion period for consideration of a new bill, as allowed by public
officials. These comments are subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   Public comment shall be limited to three minutes per speaker. The
three-minute time limit shall apply unless the public officials announce a
lower or higher time limit for public comment at a particular meeting or on a
particular subject which shall apply to all speakers addressing the specified
subject.
   (B)   Speakers may address the public officials when recognized by the Mayor
or presiding officer and shall state their name to the public body at the start
of his or her public comment.
   (C)   Each person may provide pre-prepared copies of his or her public
comments to the public body prior to, during or after his or her public comment
session.
   (D)   A group of three or more individuals speaking on the same topic are
asked to designate a single spokesperson to present the group's public
comments.
   (E)   Abusive, foul, or other inappropriate language or conduct and/or
personal attacks are not permitted when addressing the public officials and
shall be deemed out of order by the Mayor or the presiding officer and the
speaker's public comment session may be terminated.
   (F)   Public comment shall be allowed in a similar manner at all committee
meetings or meetings of subsidiary bodies of the city.
(Ord. 4179, passed 5-13-24)
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 30.30 RECORD OF ORDINANCES; PROOF OF PUBLICATION.
   All ordinances passed by the City Council shall be recorded by the City
Clerk in a proper book or books kept for that purpose, which said book or books
shall have complete indexes. The originals of all ordinances shall be kept on
file in the Clerk's office. In the case of ordinances requiring publication,
due proof of said publication shall be procured by the Clerk in the form of a
certificate of the printer or publisher, which said certificate shall be
attached to such ordinance or written and attested upon the face of the
original of such ordinance.
('71 Code, § 1-5-1)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Agents of Council
   
31.002   Oath of officers
   
31.003   Official bonds; conditions
   
31.004   Appointive officers; terms of office
   
31.005   Scope of departments, appointive officers and employees
   
31.006   [Reserved.]
   
31.007   Reports
   
31.008   Liability of officers
   
31.009   [Reserved.]
   
31.010   Car allowance
   
31.011   Ethics Act adopted
Mayor
   
31.020   Bond
   
31.021   Powers and duties
City Clerk
   
31.035   Office created; term
   
31.036   Oath; bond
   
31.037   Deputy City Clerk appointed
   
31.038   Duties
   
31.039   Books and records to be kept
   
31.040   Bookkeeping system; compromising claims prohibited
   
31.041   Monthly and annual reports
   
31.042   Additional duties
   
31.043   Records on papers not to be taken away from the control of the City
Clerk
   
31.044   Acceptance of assignment of money due from city prohibited
   
31.045   Office hours
   
31.046   Administrative fees
City Treasurer
   
31.060   Office created; term
   
31.061   Oath; bond
   
31.062   Books of account to be kept
   
31.063   Monthly and annual reports
City Attorney
   
31.075   Office created; term
   
31.076   Bond; oath
   
31.077   Powers and duties
City Manager
   
31.090   Position created; selection; residency
   
31.091   Term
   
31.092   Oath; bond; compensation
   
31.093   Manager Pro Tempore
   
31.094   Powers and duties
   
31.095   No interference
   
31.096   Audit
Health, Building and Zoning Officer
   
31.105   Position created; appointment
   
31.106   Oath; bond; compensation
   
31.107   Duties
   
31.108   Right of entry for inspections; notice of violations
Plumbing Inspector
   
31.120   Office created; term
   
31.121   Bond; oath
Superintendent of Waterworks
   
31.130   Office created
   
31.131   Bond; oath
   
31.132   Powers and authority
   
31.133   Compensation
Department Head for Parks and Cemeteries
   
31.146   Oath; bond; compensation
   
31.147   Duties
   
31.148   Employees
Cemetery Sexton
   
31.160   Position created; appointment
   
31.161   General duties; assignment
   
31.162   Bond; oath
   
31.163   Record of lots
   
31.164   Duties and authority
   
31.165   Collateral duty
   
31.166   Records; report
   
31.167   Maintain buildings; police powers
   
31.168   Monthly reports
Street Division Equipment Operator
   
31.170   Duties
   
31.171   Knowledge, skills, and abilities
   
31.172   Desired education, training, and experience
   
31.173   Essential functions and qualifications
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 AGENTS OF COUNCIL.
   All superintendents of departments and officers are the agents of the City
Council only, and all their acts shall be subject to review and to approval or
revocation by the Council. Every superintendent or officer shall, from time to
time, as required by law or ordinance, or whenever he shall deem necessary for
the good of the public service, report to the Council in writing respecting the
business of his department or office on matters connected therewith. The
Council may, by ordinance or resolution, assign to a superintendent, officer or
employee, duties in respect to the business of any other department, office or
employment, and such service shall be rendered without additional compensation.
('71 Code, § 1-6-3)
§ 31.002 OATH OF OFFICERS.
   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers,
elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the oath provided by the
Constitution, which oath, when subscribed, shall be filed with the City Clerk.
('71 Code, § 1-7-2)
§ 31.003 OFFICIAL BONDS; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The bonds of all officers shall be executed with two or more sureties,
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their respective
offices as prescribed by the laws of the state, the provisions of this code and
the rules and regulations pertaining to their respective offices.
('71 Code, § 1-6-3)
   (B)   The execution of all bonds shall be acknowledged by the officer or
person giving such bond and his sureties before some person authorized by law
to take the acknowledgment of deeds, and a certificate of such acknowledgment
made thereon. After the approval of the bond by the City Council or officer
authorized to approve said bond, the City Clerk shall endorse thereon the date
of its approval, and file said bond.
('71 Code, § 1-7-3)
§ 31.004 APPOINTIVE OFFICERS; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   All officers appointed by the Mayor or any of the Commissioners, whose
terms of office are not otherwise expressly provided by law or ordinance, shall
hold their respective offices for the term of one year from May 1 preceding
their appointment and until their successors are appointed and have qualified.
('71 Code, § 1-7-1)
   (B)   Appointments by Mayor. The Mayor, with the approval and consent of the
City Council, shall appoint the following: the City Clerk, the City Treasurer,
the City Attorney, the Plumbing Inspector, the Electrical Inspector, the City
Engineer, the Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department, the Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency Coordinator, the Cemetery Board of Managers, the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board
of Appeals and the Police Pension Board.
(‘71 Code, § 1-37-4) (Ord. 2599, passed 11-24-86; Am. Ord. 2607, passed 3-23-
87; Am. Ord. 2649, passed 11-23-87; Am. Ord. 4089, passed 1-24-22)
§ 31.005 SCOPE OF DEPARTMENTS, APPOINTIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The scope of the various departments of the city shall remain as now
constituted, the powers and duties of appointive officers and employees shall
remain the same, the composition of the Board of Local Improvements shall
remain as is, and the salaries of all appointive officers and employees shall
remain as now fixed, until such time as changes are made by the City Council.
('71 Code, § 1-37-5)
§ 31.006 [RESERVED].
Editors's note:
   §
31.006, titled "Salaries," has been superseded by the Administrative Code of
the City of Kewanee on file with the City Clerk.
§ 31.007 REPORTS.
   Each Commissioner, in addition to the regular reports required to be made by
him, shall report in writing to the Mayor or City Council when so required by
either the Mayor or City Council, respecting any matter on which said report
may be requested. All other officers of the city are required to make a monthly
and annual report of the acts and doings of their offices or departments.
('71 Code, § 1-7-5)
§ 31.008 LIABILITY OF OFFICERS.
   No provision of this code designating the duty of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
('71 Code, § 1-4-5)
§ 31.009 [RESERVED].
Editors's note:
   §
31.009, titled "Indemnification of city officials," has been superseded by the
Administrative Code of the City of Kewanee on file with the City Clerk.
§ 31.010 CAR ALLOWANCE.
   (A)   The City Council finds that the city officials hereinafter named use
their private cars in the performance of their duties for the city and that
they should have an expense allowance therefor.
   (B)   The sum of $200 per annum shall be paid for the use of their private
automobiles in performance of their duties as an extra expense incurred thereby
to the following officials and department heads:
      (1)   Mayor.
      (2)   Each Council member.
   (C)   The car allowance herein provided for shall be paid on November 1 of
each year.
('71 Code, § 1-7-6) (Ord. 2078, passed 9-24-79; Am. Ord. 2474, passed 10-22-84)
§ 31.011 ETHICS ACT ADOPTED.
   (A)   The regulations of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 5-15 and 10-10 through 10-
40 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430 §§ 1-
1 et seq. and herein referred to as the Act) are adopted by reference and made
applicable to the officers and employees of this governmental entity to the
extent required by ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5.
      (1)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited
or accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee are hereby
prohibited.
      (2)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to
an officer or employee is hereby prohibited.
      (3)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act,
by any officer or employee is hereby prohibited.
      (4)   For the purposes of this section the terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE
shall be defined as set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c).
      (5)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5 for similar violations
of the Act.
      (6)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any
existing agreement which regulates the conduct of officers and employees. To
the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive
than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall prevail in
accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a).
      (7)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited, political activities. However, any amendment that
makes its provisions optional for adoption shall not be incorporated into this
section by reference without formal action by this governmental entity.
      (8)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in
its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the
Illinois Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further
appeals or rehearing. This section shall be deemed repealed without further
action if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.
      (9)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by this governmental agency.
   (B)   A violation of any provision of this section shall be punished through
the bringing of a quasi-criminal judicial complaint by an attorney in the
manner provided by law for this governmental entity. That prosecutor shall
utilize prosecutorial discretion in enforcing this section and may seek such
penalties for a violation of this section as are allowed to be brought under
local or state law.
(Ord. 3431, passed 5-10-04)
MAYOR
§ 31.020 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Mayor shall execute a
bond in the form prescribed by law in the penal sum of $3,000 with sureties to
be approved by the Judge of the County Court. Said bond shall be filed in the
office of the City Clerk.
('71 Code, § 1-8-2)
§ 31.021 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall have and exercise all the powers and perform the
duties provided by law or ordinance of the city, not in conflict with the
provisions of this code. He shall grant and sign all ordinances, resolutions,
deeds, bonds, and warrants for the payment of money by the city, unless the
Mayor designates otherwise.
   (B)   The City Attorney and Assistant City Attorneys are hereby assigned to
the Mayor:
('71 Code, § 1-8-3)
CITY CLERK
§ 31.035 OFFICE CREATED; TERM.
   There is hereby created the office of City Clerk, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of Council. He shall receive such compensation as
may be provided for by the Council from time to time.
('71 Code, § 1-10-1)
§ 31.036 OATH; BOND.
   The City Clerk, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take
and subscribe the oath or affirmation prescribed by the Constitution of the
State, and shall execute a minimum bond with good and sufficient security to be
approved by the City Council, payable to the city, in the penal sum of $50,000
conditioned as provided by law.
('71 Code, § 1-10-2)
§ 31.037 DEPUTY CITY CLERK APPOINTED.
   The City Clerk, with the concurrence of the City Manager, may appoint a
Deputy City Clerk by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, who,
in absence of the City Clerk, in case of sickness or otherwise, shall be
empowered to perform all of the duties of said Clerk.
('71 Code, § 1-10-14) (Ord. 1705, passed 11-8-71)
§ 31.038 DUTIES.
   The City Clerk shall perform all the duties which may now or from time to
time hereafter be required of him by law and the provisions of this code. He
shall collect and receive all the moneys and revenues of every kind and from
every source due or payable to the city except only such as are by law required
to be paid directly to the City Treasurer. He shall once in each week collect
all officers or persons, all money received by such officer for and on behalf
of the city. Collections to be deposited to the credit of the City Treasurer in
the General Fund of the city; and a report of such deposits shall be made to
the City Treasurer on the last day of each month, showing the accounts on which
such money was collected. He shall give to each and every person paying money
to him a receipt showing the amount paid and on what account such payment was
made. He shall draw and attest all warrants on the City Treasurer in pursuance
of any ordinance, resolution or order of the Council.
('71 Code, § 1-10-4)
§ 31.039 BOOKS AND RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall keep proper and appropriate books and records
wherein the accounts, business transactions and affairs of his office shall be
by him transcribed for preservation and reference. He shall have charge of and
control over all the bookkeeping and clerical work necessary to be done in
behalf of the city, except such books and records as are by law required to be
kept by the City Treasurer or any other officer.
('71 Code, § 1-10-5)
   (B)   Specific records.
      (1)   License record. The City Clerk shall attest all city licenses and
keep a license record book showing to whom, for what purpose, at what time, for
what license fee and for what length of time licenses have been granted.
      (2)   Bond register. The Clerk shall keep in a separate book a registry
of all city and special assessments bonds issued, showing when issued, when
maturing, the amount, the rate of interest borne, on what account and for what
purpose issued, and when canceled and discharged.
      (3)   Warrant register. The Clerk shall keep a register of all warrants
issued by the city, stating the number of each warrant, the date and amount
thereof, on what account and to whom issued, and he shall issue no warrants
except in the manner provided by law.
('71 Code, § 1-10-7)
§ 31.040 BOOKKEEPING SYSTEM; COMPROMISING CLAIMS PROHIBITED.
   In keeping the books and records herein required to be kept by the City
Clerk, it shall be his duty to do the work in such a manner so that said books
and records will of all times contain and disclose in detail, the accounts,
transactions, business and affairs of his said office. He shall keep separate
the collections pertaining to the various funds, departments or offices of the
city, as they may exist from time to time. He shall have no power to compromise
claims or adjust differences alleged or claimed in the amount due or payable to
said city.
('71 Code, § 1-10-6)
§ 31.041 MONTHLY AND ANNUAL REPORTS.
   The City Clerk shall on the first regular meeting in each month make out and
report to the City Council his monthly statement for the preceding month, which
shall be given in detail the receipts and expenditures of said month; and he
shall at the first regular meeting in May of each year, report in writing to
the Council for the preceding fiscal year, wherein shall be given in detail the
receipts and expenditures of said year.
('71 Code, § 1-10-8)
§ 31.042 ADDITIONAL DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall prepare all commissions, licenses, permits and
other documents which he is required to issue under the laws and provisions of
this code, and shall attest the same with the corporate seal; and he shall in
like manner attest all deeds for the sale of real estate owned and conveyed by
the city.
('71 Code, § 1-10-9)
§ 31.043 RECORDS ON PAPERS NOT TO BE TAKEN AWAY FROM THE CONTROL OF THE CITY
CLERK.
   The City Clerk shall not allow any books, records or papers or other
instruments of writing to be taken out of the control of the Clerk, by any
person other than the Clerk and in the following cases, in which case the City
Clerk shall keep a record of the documents removed from the Clerk's control:
   (A)   Any city employees working under the direct supervision and control of
the City Clerk to include the City Manager when the employees or the City
Manager are authorized in writing by the City Clerk to remove designated
documents from the control of the City Clerk;
   (B)   The City Attorney;
   (C)   Upon the order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or
   (D)   Upon the direction of the City Council.
('71 Code, § 1-10-12) (Ord. 2255, passed 12-28-81; Am. Ord. 3025, passed 12-4-
95)
§ 31.044 ACCEPTANCE OF ASSIGNMENT OF MONEY DUE FROM CITY PROHIBITED.
   The City Clerk is prohibited from acknowledging or accepting any assignment
or order of money that may be due or to become due to any person from the city.
('71 Code, § 1-10-13)
§ 31.045 OFFICE HOURS.
   The City Clerk shall keep his office in the City Administration Building of
the city and his office hours shall be from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. of every
working day. The Clerk's office shall be closed on Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays.
('71 Code, § 1-10-3) (Ord. 1366, passed 2-11-57)
§ 31.046 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
   The City Clerk shall collect the following fees on an as occurring basis:
   (A)   A service fee of $30, which fee is hereby determined to be just and
payable, to be paid to the city, by any person, firm or corporation whose check
or other fiscal instrument is returned to the city by a financial institution
marked to indicate insufficient funds, an account that is closed, or for any
other reason can not be paid by the financial institution. The City Clerk may
place such charge, if unpaid after 30 days, upon any account open with the city
under the name of such person, firm, or corporation to be collected in the same
manner as allowed in §
52.22.
   (B)   A fee of $100 for a complete copy of the city code. Exempted from this
provision are officials of the city, who shall turn in their copies upon
leaving their office, Henry County States Attorney, Office of the Henry County
Circuit Court (Kewanee and Cambridge), Southern Illinois University, and the
Kewanee Public Library.
   (C)   A fee of $0.25 per page for photocopies.
(Ord. 2856, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 3252, passed 5-22-00)
CITY TREASURER
§ 31.060 OFFICE CREATED; TERM.
   There is hereby created the office of City Treasurer, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of Council. He shall receive such compensation
as may be provided for by the Council from time to time.
('71 Code, § 1-11-1)
§ 31.061 OATH; BOND.
   The City Treasurer, before entering upon his duties, shall take and
subscribe the oath or affirmation prescribed by the statutes of the state, and
shall execute a bond with good and sufficient securities to be approved by the
City Council, payable to the city, in the minimum penal sum of three times the
most recent federal population census of the city, conditioned as provided for
by law.
('71 Code, § 1-11-2)
§ 31.062 BOOKS OF ACCOUNT TO BE KEPT.
   The City Treasurer shall keep books of account in such manner as to show
with entire accuracy all money received by him and from whom and on what
account received; and all money paid out by him and on what account said. Such
books shall be so kept as to be readily understood and investigated and all
books, papers and files of his office shall at all times be open to
investigation by the City Council or any Commissioner.
('71 Code, § 1-11-3)
§ 31.063 MONTHLY AND ANNUAL REPORTS.
   (A)   Monthly reports. The City Treasurer shall present to the City Council
at its first regular meeting in such month, his report in writing, showing the
state of the City Treasury at the end of the previous month, and the balance in
the Treasury to the credit of each department of the city funds. Such report
shall contain an itemized statement of all money received into the Treasury and
on what account received, and also of all moneys paid out and on what account.
('71 Code, § 1-11-4)
   (B)   Annual report. The Treasurer shall annually at the first regular
meeting in the month of May of each year, report in writing to the Council, all
receipts of the city and from what source obtained, and all expenditures of the
city, according to the different department funds, during the preceding fiscal
year; and he shall in such report show the condition of the City Treasury at
the close of such fiscal year.
('71 Code, § 1-11-5)
CITY ATTORNEY
§ 31.075 OFFICE CREATED; TERM.
   There is hereby created the office of City Attorney, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council.
('71 Code, § 1-9-1)
§ 31.076 BOND; OATH.
   Before entering upon the duties of his office the City Attorney shall take
the oath prescribed by law for all city officers, and execute and deliver a
bond payable to the city in the minimum penal sum of $1,000, with sureties to
be approved by the City Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
his duties as said City Attorney. He shall receive such salary or compensation
as the Council may provide.
('71 Code, § 1-9-2)
§ 31.077 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be the legal adviser of the city, and when
required shall advise the City Council or any official in all matters of law in
which the interests of the city are involved, and shall draw such current
ordinances, bonds and contracts or examine and approve the same, as may be
required by the Mayor and/or Commissioners, or any other official; shall attend
all meetings of the Council and of the Board of Local Improvements when
requested so to do by the Mayor or Commissioners; shall prosecute or defend all
suits or actions for the violation of any city ordinance or other action in
which the city shall be a party or has any interest, in any court or before any
judicial tribunal, and use all necessary and proper means for the enforcement
or protection of the rights of the city, and when from any cause said City
Attorney is not able to attend to the duties of the office he may, with the
consent of the Mayor, appoint someone to act for the city; and whenever in the
opinion of the Council the interest of the city may require it, an assistant
counsel may be employed at the expense of the city.
   (B)   Appeals to the Appellate Court and Supreme Court shall only be taken
upon the approval of the Council. The City Attorney shall have power to adjust
all pending litigation and to settle same upon the authority of the Council;
shall report to the Council any defects which may be discovered in any
ordinance or in the authorized powers of any city officer, with a
recommendation for remedying the same; shall cause executions to be issued upon
all judgments recovered in favor of the city and see to their prompt
collections; shall examine all fee bills of officers of courts and certify to
the correctness of the same and the liability of the city therefor; shall
transcript appeals from the judgment of any Justice of the Peace to the city
court or the circuit court of the county in any case when it is believed public
interest requires it, but no appeal or writ of error shall be taken by said
City Attorney on behalf of the city to any higher court unless authorized or
directed to do so by the Council; shall be entitled to receive from any city
officer certified copies of any paper, contract or other document which may be
required in the prosecution or defending of any suit, or which may be needed
for any other purpose connected with the proper transaction of the duties of
the office.
   (C)   The City Attorney shall annually or more often if required by the
Council, report in writing to the Council a detailed statement of all actions
instituted and pending in courts of record wherein the city is plaintiff or
defendant, giving the names of the parties to the suit, the date of
commencement, the nature thereof and the several steps taken to bring the same
to final issue; shall give a list of all cases disposed of in any court of
record during the year with such remarks as may be deemed proper to the end
that the Council may be kept fully advised as to the legal affairs of the city.
   (D)   He shall not be required to prosecute any suit or action under the
provisions of this code, when upon investigation of the same he shall become
satisfied that the complaint was instituted maliciously or vexatiously and
without probable cause; or where there is not sufficient evidence in his
judgment to obtain a conviction; and he shall be authorized to discontinue any
such suit or proceeding upon such terms as may be deemed just and equitable and
shall have and possess the powers and rights usually possessed by attorneys-at-
law when acting for said city.
('71 Code, § 1-9-3)
CITY MANAGER
§ 31.090 POSITION CREATED; SELECTION; RESIDENCY.
   The position of city manager is created. The City Council will select an
individual to fill this position. The City Manager holds his office at the
pleasure of the Council, and is responsible for the efficient administration of
the business of the city. The City Manager shall be selected solely on the
basis of executive and administrative ability and without regard to his
political beliefs. The City Manager need not be a resident of the city when
appointed, but shall reside in the city within six months of his appointment.
He shall continue to reside within the city throughout his tenure of office.
(Ord. 2834, passed 6-14-93)
§ 31.091 TERM.
   The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term as provided by
law.
(Ord. 2834, passed 6-14-93)
§ 31.092 OATH; BOND; COMPENSATION.
   The City Manager shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed by statute.
Before entering into the duties of his office the City Manager shall execute a
bond in the minimum amount as specified for the treasurer per statute (ILCS Ch.
65, Art. 5, § 5-3-9), which shall be payable to the city. The city shall bear
the full cost of this bond or any other fidelity or bond required of the City
Manager under any law. The City Council shall set the City Manager's
compensation.
(Ord. 2834, passed 6-14-93)
§ 31.093 MANAGER PRO TEMPORE.
   In the case of a vacancy in the office of the City Manager, or in case of
the City Manager's temporary disability to act as manager, discharge by the
Council, or resignation, the Council shall appoint a Manager Pro Tempore who
shall possess the powers and duties of the Manager. The Manager Pro Tempore
shall be a qualified administrative officer of the municipality. In the case of
scheduled absences from the city, such as a vacation, the City Manager will
designate in writing a qualified administrative officer of the city who will
act in his stead.
(Ord. 2834, passed 6-14-93)
§ 31.094 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city
government and shall exercise general supervision over all city departments,
except as otherwise provide by law; he shall be responsible for the efficient
and economical conduct of all such departments. The City Manager shall have the
powers and duties specifically provide for in ILCS Ch. 65, Art. 5, § 5-3-7. He
shall:
   (A)   Enforce the laws and ordinances within the municipality.
   (B)   Appoint and remove all directors of departments; the Fire and Police
Chiefs shall not be appointed by Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. No
appointments shall be made upon any basis other than that of merit and fitness.
This appointive power includes the appointment of the Chief of the Police
Department and the Chief of the Fire Department.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 5-3-7(2) and ILCS Ch. 65, Art. 5, § 10-2.1-4).
   (C)   Exercise control of all departments and divisions of the city or that
may be created by the Council.
   (D)   Exercise all the duties granted by law to municipal clerks and
comptrollers with respect to the preparation of a report of estimated funds
necessary to defray the expenses of the city for the fiscal year for the
consideration of the Council prior to the preparation of the annual
appropriation ordinance.
   (E)   Prepare an annual budget proposal which shall be consistent with the
accounting system of the city; in no event shall the total proposed
expenditures for the general fund exceed the estimated revenues to be received
plus any unencumbered balance from the previous fiscal year or less any deficit
estimated from the prior fiscal year. In the event of a projected deficit in
the current fiscal year, the City Manager shall recommend in the budget for the
ensuing year either expenditure reductions or revenues sufficient to eliminate
any deficit anticipated to be carried over from the preceding fiscal year.
   (F)   Attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in the
discussion, but with no right to vote.
   (G)   Recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem
necessary or expedient.
   (H)   Appoint, remove, suspend, and discipline all officers and employees of
the administrative service of the city, except those city officials, board and
commission members who are appointed by the Mayor as provided by statue.
   (I)   Negotiate all labor contracts on behalf of the city.
   (J)   Keep current accounts showing the fiscal condition of the city and
prepare and submit financial reports to the Council on at least a quarterly
basis.
   (K)   Prepare and submit to the Council the annual tax levy ordinance.
   (L)   Be the general purchasing agent of the city and make all purchases of
supplies, material, and equipment authorized by Council, in the manner
prescribed by law and subject to limitations imposed by law.
   (M)    Maintain a current inventory of all real and personal property of the
city and its location, and be responsible for the care and custody of all such
property which by law is not assigned to some other officer or body for care
and control.
   (N)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by statute or may be
required of him by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 2834, passed 6-14-93)
§ 31.095 NO INTERFERENCE.
   No official of the city shall dictate the appointment of any person to
office or his removal from office by the City Manager, nor give orders to any
subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.
(Ord. 2834, passed 6-14-93)
§ 31.096 AUDIT.
   Audits of all accounts of the city shall be conducted independently of the
City Manager by a certified public accountant selected by Council.
(Ord. 2834, passed 6-14-93)
HEALTH, BUILDING AND ZONING OFFICER
§ 31.105 POSITION CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the position to be known as Health, Building and
Zoning Officer. This officer of the city will be appointed by the City Manager
and shall be under the supervision and control of the City Manager. The Manager
may appoint these duties to a current city officer. Technical guidance and
assistance can be obtained by this officer from the Henry County Health
Department, which is established per ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-25001. Additional
technical guidance and assistance can be obtained by this officer from the
various national professional organizations that promulgate building,
electrical and plumbing regulations.
(Ord. 2812, passed 12-14-92)
§ 31.106 OATH; BOND; COMPENSATION.
   Before entering upon the duties of his position, the Health, Building and
Zoning Officer shall take the oath prescribed by law for all city officers, and
shall execute and deliver a bond payable to the city in the penal sum of
$1,000, surety and its cost to be approved and paid for by the city,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office. If this
officer has a bond from a concurrent position of at least $1,000, an additional
bond is not required. As authorized by the Council's annual budget resolution,
salary will be set by the City Manager.
(Ord. 2812, passed 12-14-92)
§ 31.107 DUTIES.
   The Health, Building and Zoning Officer shall perform such duties as are
provided for by law or ordinance, and in addition thereto such other duties as
from time to time may be imposed upon him by the City Manager. Specifically he
will:
   (A)   Oversee and have charge of the enforcing of the abatement of nuisances
of every description on public and private property;
   (B)   Carry out the administration and enforcement of the duties specified
in the zoning code (
Ch. 155);
   (C)   Assist the City Manager in executing the requirements of the
subdivision code (
Ch. 154);
   (D)   Be in charge of the various building and construction codes adopted by
the City Council. The Building and Zoning Officer shall coordinate all
inspection procedures required by the various building and construction codes
adopted by the City Council. He shall receive all appeals to be heard by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (E)   The Health, Building and Zoning Officer shall submit an annual budget
to the City Manager.
(Ord. 2812, passed 12-14-92)
§ 31.108 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS; NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS:
   The Health, Building and Zoning Officer, subject to constitutional
limitations, and after proper identification, is authorized and shall have the
power to enter at reasonable times, upon private or public property for the
purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement
of city ordinances and regulations issued hereunder. Written notice of all
violation shall be given to the owners, operators, and licensees of the
inspected property.
(Ord. 2812, passed 12-14-92)
PLUMBING INSPECTOR
§ 31.120 OFFICE CREATED; TERM.
   There is hereby created the office of Plumbing Inspector, who shall be
appointed by the City Manager.
('71 Code, § 1-18-1)
§ 31.121 BOND; OATH.
   The Plumbing Inspector shall take the oath prescribed for all city officers,
and shall execute and deliver a bond payable to the city in the minimum penal
sum of $2,500, with sureties to be approved by the City Council, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office. He shall receive
such salary or compensation as shall be provided by the Council from time to
time.
('71 Code, § 1-18-2)
SUPERINTENDENT OF WATERWORKS
§ 31.130 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of Superintendent of Waterworks, who
shall be appointed by the City Manager.
('71 Code, § 1-21-1)
§ 31.131 BOND; OATH.
   Before entering upon the duties of his office he shall take and subscribe an
oath for city officials and shall execute and deliver a bond payable to the
city in the minimum penal sum of $2,500, with sureties to be approved by the
City Council and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his
office.
('71 Code, § 1-21-2)
§ 31.132 POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   The Superintendent of Waterworks, under the direction of the City Council,
shall have charge of the waterworks plant, water mains, hydrants, meters and
equipment; he shall have charge of all employees engaged in or about the water
meters and equipment; he shall have charge of the purchase of all materials and
supplies; he shall have charge of the distribution of water and the collection
of all accounts due for the service of such waterworks plant, and shall on May
1 of each year, or at more frequent intervals if required by the Council,
submit an itemized statement of all receipts, disbursements, costs, accounts
and an invoice of all materials and equipment on hand, with reasonable detail.
('71 Code, § 1-21-3)
§ 31.133 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation of such Superintendent of Waterworks shall be fixed by the
City Council from time to time.
('71 Code, § 1-21-4)
DEPARTMENT HEAD FOR PARKS AND CEMETERIES
§ 31.145 POSITION CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the position to be known as Department Head for
Parks and Cemeteries. The Department Head shall be in charge of the Parks and
Cemeteries Department, and shall be appointed by the City Manager. This
position may be filled by the head of another department or by another officer
of the city. The Department Head for Parks and Cemeteries is vested with police
power.
('71 Code, § 1-22-1) (Am. Ord. 2805, passed 11-9-92)
§ 31.146 OATH; BOND; COMPENSATION.
   Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Department Head for Parks
and Cemeteries shall take the oath prescribed by law for all city officers, and
shall execute and deliver a bond payable to the city in the penal sum of
$1,000, surety and its cost to be approved and paid for by the city,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office. As
authorized by the Council's annual budget resolution, his salary will be set by
the City Manager..
('71 Code, § 1-22-2) (Am. Ord. 2805, passed 11-9-92)
§ 31.147 DUTIES.
   (A)   He shall perform such duties as are provided for by law or ordinance,
and in addition thereto such other duties as from time to time may be imposed
upon him by the City Manager. In general, he will:
      (1)   Be responsible for the operation, administration, maintenance, and
supervision of the city's cemeteries, parks, campgrounds and recreation areas.
      (2)   Be responsible for the proper control of grass, weeds and trees,
and in general, for the good appearance of all city-owned or controlled land.
   (B)   Exceptions are grounds maintained by the Fire Department, grounds
inside the work area of other departments, and grounds associated with storm
water drainage ditches maintained by the Public Works Department.
   (C)   This responsibility includes lots whose owners have failed to comply
with the requirements of the city code, and where the city takes the
responsibility to abate a nuisance. In the event the city is abating a nuisance
on property not owned by the city, the Department Head for Parks and Cemeteries
will maintain an accounting of manpower and equipment so that the property
owner can be charged for the cost of abating the nuisance.
   (D)   The Department Head for Parks and Cemeteries shall also prepare the
annual departmental budget.
('71 Code, § 1-22-3) (Am. Ord. 2409, passed 4-30-79; Am. Ord. 2805, passed 11-
9-92)
§ 31.148 EMPLOYEES.
   In executing his duties, the department head will be assisted by a cemetery
sexton, a working foreman, and such other employees that are authorized by the
City Manager, based on the manpower authorization and budget approved by the
City Council. The cemetery sexton and working foreman may, if authorized by the
City Manager, be the same person.
(Ord. 2805, passed 11-9-92)
CEMETERY SEXTON
§ 31.160 POSITION CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   There hereby is created the position of Cemetery Sexton, who shall be
appointed by the City Manager upon the recommendation of the Department Head
for Parks and Cemeteries.
('71 Code, § 1-15-1) (Am. Ord. 2806, passed 11-9-92)
§ 31.161 GENERAL DUTIES; ASSIGNMENT.
   He shall be under the supervision and control of the Department Head for
Parks and Cemeteries, and shall perform such duties as are imposed upon him by
law or ordinance, and in addition thereto such other duties as from time to
time he may be directed to perform by the Department Head.
('71 Code, §§ 1-15-2) (Am. Ord. 2806, passed 11-9-92)
§ 31.162 BOND; OATH.
   Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall take the oath
prescribed for all city officers. A bond is not required as the Sexton is not
authorized to take payments for services rendered at city cemeteries. All funds
associated with the cemetery will be processed through the office of the City
Clerk.
('71 Code, § 1-15-3) (Am. Ord. 2806, passed 11-9-92)
§ 31.163 RECORD OF LOTS.
   The Sexton shall keep a record, in which shall be recorded the number of
every lot heretofore or hereafter surveyed in the cemetery. Information on each
lot will contain the name of the purchaser, the appraisal, price sold for, and
date of sale.
('71 Code, §§ 1-15-4 and 1-15-6) (Am. Ord. 2806, passed 11-9-92)
§ 31.164 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   The Sexton shall do, among other duties prescribed by the Department Head
from time to time, the following:
   (A)   He shall take charge of the city cemeteries and shall keep the
grounds, walks, and avenues of the same in good order and condition, and free
from obstructions.
   (B)   He shall enforce all ordinances and regulations of the city respecting
the cemetery, report violations of the same to the proper officers for
prosecution, and may arrest any person found hunting, discharging firearms, or
doing any unlawful act therein.
   (C)   He shall prevent the burial of any body in an unsold lot, or the lot
of any private individual without his consent; and he shall superintend all
burials in the commons, and specify their manner and place, and by night keep
the gates of the cemetery closed and locked, and he shall see that all
soldiers' and sailors' graves in the cemeteries are properly kept and cared
for.
   (D)   In an unusual situation, the Sexton may authorize the performance of
services and land transfers without prepayment of the fees required by the
code, but only with a written and signed document from the receiver of such
services or land promising to pay for the services or land within five working
days after the service is performed or land is received.
('71 Code, §§ 1-15-5) (Am. Ord. 2806, passed 11-9-92)
§ 31.165 COLLATERAL DUTY.
   If approved by the City Manager, the Sexton may also serve as a working
foreman within the Parks and Cemeteries Department. In such case, the Sexton
will assist the Department Head for Parks and Cemeteries in executing his
duties as specified in this code. Specifically, the Sexton as a working foreman
will assist the Department Head in ensuring the most efficient use of the labor
force to maintain and control all lands and buildings under the cognizance of
the Parks and Cemeteries Department.
(Ord. 2806, passed 11-9-92)
§ 31.166 RECORDS; REPORT.
   It shall be the duty of the Sexton, or a person designated by the City
Manager, to keep books of record, to be furnished by the city, in which shall
be recorded the name, age, sex, and date of death of every person interred in
the cemetery or grounds for which such record is kept, and also the number of
the lot where the person is buried.
(Ord. 2806, passed 11-9-92)
§ 31.167 MAINTAIN BUILDING; POLICE POWERS.
   He shall, under the direction of the Department Head for Parks and
Cemeteries, keep in good repair the fences or enclosures around the cemetery,
and all vaults and building therein belonging to the city. He shall have all
the powers of a police patrolman within the bounds of the city cemeteries.
('71 Code, § 1-15-7) (Am. Ord. 2806, passed 11-9-92)
§ 31.168 MONTHLY REPORTS.
   On or before the first Council session of the month, he shall make out and
furnish to the City Manager, via the Department Head, a monthly report of the
number of internments made in the cemeteries during the preceding month, the
number of lots sold, the percentage of lots remaining to be sold, the manpower
used the prior month, and any other matters considered informative by the
Sexton.
('71 Code, § 1-15-8) (Am. Ord. 2806, passed 11-9-92)
STREET DIVISION EQUIPMENT OPERATOR
§ 31.170 DUTIES.
   (A)    General nature of work. An employee in this position normally
performs his duties on the grounds of the city, although at times the position
may require off site work in order to ensure the proper operation of the city's
infrastructure or to provide services to other units of government. An employee
in this position may also perform minor administrative tasks, such as providing
information on equipment and parts used on a particular job so that the city
may properly bill for the work. Duties are performed under the guidance of a
working foreman, a leadman, or a management superintendent, and under the
overall supervision of the Department Head.
   (B)   Special Nature of Work.
      (1)   In this position, an employee will frequently come into contact
with citizens who must be considered customers of the city. Citizens are
frequently concerned only with how city services are being provided to them at
a particular instant. Employees must recognize the citizen's concerns, and
ensure that each citizen is treated in a courteous manner. Maintaining a
courteous and respectful demeanor towards the city's customers does not mean
that an employee is expected to accept abusive language or behavior from any
one. Should abuse occur, the employee should report the situation to his
supervisor as soon as practical.
      (2)    city services must be maintained outside of normal working hours,
and this employee will be required to work overtime hours on occasion. An
inability of the employee to work overtime, or an unwillingness to do so in an
emergency situation, will make the employee ineligible for this position.
      (3)    This position will require an employee that has an ability to
routinely lift 50-pound objects from ground to chest level, and also requires
the ability to quickly enter and exit equipment cabs.
   (C)    Examples of Duties. Any one position may not include all of the
duties listed nor do the listed examples include all duties which may be found
in positions of this class.
      (1)    Operates equipment assigned to the division or department which
may include, but is in no way limited to, such items as end-loaders, backhoes,
graders, trucks, mowers, street sweepers, tractors, and sewer cleaning
machines.
      (2)    Perform routine maintenance on all the equipment used in the
division or department and notify the appropriate person of any problems that
need attention. Responsible to ensure that equipment to be used is in safe,
operational condition prior to leaving the garage, and is cleaned, fueled and
operational when stored each day.
      (3)   Perform the daily work of the department which may include street
and alley maintenance, repairs, and improvements; storm sewer and sanitary
sewer maintenance, repairs, and improvements; tree and brush pruning, removal,
and pickup; traffic control devices maintenance, repairs, and improvements;
snow removal; and other general maintenance actions on city infrastructure.
      (4)   Ensure that assigned work orders issued by the foreman/leadman,
Operations Manager, or his designee are completed in a timely manner, and
results are communicated back concerning the same.
      (5)   Inform the foreman/leadman, Operations Manager, or his designee if,
in his opinion, routine work cannot be attended to as new work orders may
exceed the individual or crews ability to conduct the same. Examples of routine
work are work orders issued by foreman/leadman, Operations Manager, or his
designee; seasonal work of snow removal, street & alley patching, inlet
cleaning; or brush pickup, traffic control device maintenance, and household
maintenance of facilities and equipment.
      (6)   As necessary and as assigned, perform the daily work of the
division which involves equipment operation and infrastructure maintenance,
both preventative and as occurring.
      (7)    Assist in maintaining an inventory of parts and supplies adequate
to the conduct of preventative and emergency maintenance and repairs by
communicating such needs to the leadman/foreman, Operations Manager or his
designee before a supply shortages occurs.
      (8)    As directed ensure Street Division spaces and grounds are kept in
good condition.
      (9)    Performs related duties as directed by the leadman/foreman,
Operations Manager or his designee.
(Ord. 3191, passed 12-14-98)
§ 31.171 KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, AND ABILITIES.
   (A)   Ability to establish and maintain an effective relationship with
municipal officials, other municipal employees, and the general public.
   (B)   Ability to effectively communicate with management and other
employees.
   (C)   Ability to work harmoniously with the management team for the
effective and efficient provision of city services.
   (D)   Ability to operate front end-loader, back-hoe, dump truck, and other
tools, equipment, and machinery used in the course of the Street Division's
operations, and to accept the physical demands of operating such equipment.
   (E)   General knowledge of machinery operation, and the duties and tasks as
may be assigned.
   (F)   Ability to understand and follow written and oral instructions.
   (G)   Willingness to perform assigned tasks properly, and work with minimal
or no direct supervision.
   (H)   Conscientious and dependable.
(Ord. 3191, passed 12-14-98)
§ 31.172 DESIRED EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND EXPERIENCE.
   High School graduate or equivalent, supplemented by some experience in
operating power equipment and machinery; or any combination of experience and
education which provides the desired knowledge, skills, and abilities.
(Ord. 3191, passed 12-14-98)
§ 31.173 ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   These essential items are considered "Conditions of Employment". Failure to
have or maintain these essential functions and qualifications may result in
termination from this specific position.
   (A)   Ability to efficiently and safely operate the machinery and equipment
within the Street Division, along with providing routine and ongoing
maintenance to same, and a willingness to work overtime, as assigned.
   (B)   Maintenance of a State of Illinois issued CDL drivers' license.
   (C)   Maintain an ability to quickly enter and exit heavy equipment and
trucks.
   (D)   Ability to use existing records, and create new records, within the
Division to effectively communicate information to the leadman/foreman,
Operations Manager and to other persons needing such information.
   (E)   Must satisfy a police check that reveals no past criminal activity and
no history of misdemeanor convictions that may indicate anything but the
highest level of personal integrity and sobriety.
   (F)   No history of an inability to meet just obligations. An inability to
meet just obligations may, among other things, be indicated by bad debt letters
and orders requiring garnishments from pay due to bad debts.
   (G)   Ability to be easily understood over radio circuits and land lines, in
regard to clear pronunciation. This is required in order to communicate
efficiently with co-workers and management staff.
   (H)   Pass an employment physical and maintain the physical ability to
perform job tasks, duties and assignments throughout employment period.
(Ord. 3191, passed 12-14-98)
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Administrative departments created Department of Public Affairs
   
32.015   Establishment; organization
Department of Accounts and Finances
   
32.025   Powers
   
32.026   Bond
Department of Public Health and Safety
   
32.040   Powers
   
32.041   Bond
Department of Public Works
   
32.055   Department of Public Works
   
32.056   Assignment of personnel
   
32.057   Compensation of Public Works employees
Ambulance Service Department
   
32.070   Establishment
   
32.071   Director; duties
   
32.072   Assistant director
   
32.073   Transfer ambulance service fees
   
32.074   Ambulance service fund
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS CREATED.
   (A)   The executive and administrative powers, authority and duties of the
city are hereby distributed into and among five departments, as follows:
      (1)   Department of Accounts and Finances.
      (2)   Department of Parks and Cemeteries.
      (3)   Department of Public Works.
      (4)   Fire Department.
      (5)   Police Department.
   (B)   The Mayor shall be Superintendent of the Department of Public Affairs;
and the City Council shall, at the first regular meeting after election of its
members, designate by a majority vote, the Commissioners which are to be
Superintendents of the different departments of the city government.
('71 Code, § 1-6-4) (Am. Ord. 2811, passed 11-23-92)
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS
§ 32.015 ESTABLISHMENT; ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be Commissioner of Public Affairs, and such
Commissioner shall be Superintendent of the Department of Public Affairs.
   (B)   The Department of Public Affairs shall include:
      (1)   The Water Department.
      (2)   The City Attorney and any assistant.
      (3)   The Police Department.
      (4)   Engineering Service Department.
      (5)   Civil Defense Director.
      (6)   The Municipal sewerage system, including sewer disposal plant and
all employees therein.
      (7)   The streets and alleys of the city; and the said Mayor shall have
and exercise supervision and control of the Street Commissioner and the
employees in the Street Department and shall otherwise superintend the
improvements and repair and cleaning of the streets, sidewalks, paving,
viaducts and shall have charge of the purchase of equipment, apparatus and
materials used in the Street Department.
('71 Code, § 3-1-1) (Am. Ord. 2045, passed 4-24-79; Am. Ord. 2363, passed 4-25-
83; Am. Ord. 2571, passed 4-28-86)
DEPARTMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND FINANCES
§ 32.025 POWERS.
   (A)   The Superintendent of the Department of Accounts and Finances shall
have charge of and supervision over all accounts and records of the city,
unless other wise provided herein, and all officers, boards or departments
required to keep or make accounts, records or reports. He shall have
supervision of the collection of all moneys due the city. He shall inspect or
cause to be inspected, all records or accounts required to be kept in any of
the offices or departments of the city, and shall cause proper accounts and
records to be kept and proper reports to be made. He shall audit or cause to be
audited at frequent intervals the accounts of every officer or employee who
does or may receive or disburse money. He shall have charge of the purchase,
care and distribution of all supplies and other articles not otherwise provided
by law. He shall have charge and supervision over ail printing by or for the
city, unless otherwise provided by law. He shall have charge of and cause to be
prepared and published, all statements and reports required by law or
ordinance, or resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Said Commissioner shall be Superintendent of the cemeteries owned and
controlled by the city and all employees therein, and shall have charge of the
purchase of apparatus, equipment and materials for necessary use in said
cemeteries, and shall have charge of the parks and boulevards within and owned
and controlled by the city.
   (C)   He shall examine or cause to be examined and report to the Council,
upon all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims before they are acted upon or
allowed, unless otherwise provided by law.
   (D)   He shall supervise the City Clerk's office and all accounts and
records of the city, unless otherwise provided herein, and all employees in
said Clerk's office, and all boards and departments required to keep and
maintain accounts, records and reports.
   (E)   He shall have supervision of the collection of all money due the city
and shall cause to be inspected all records and accounts required to be kept in
any of the offices and departments of the city, and shall cause proper accounts
and records to be kept and proper reports to be made.
   (F)   He shall audit or cause to be audited at frequent intervals the
accounts of every officer or employee who does or may receive or disburse money
on behalf of the city.
   (G)   He shall have charge of and cause to be prepared and published all
statements and reports required by law or ordinance to be prepared and
published and all resolutions of the Council required to be published.
   (H)   The Commissioner in charge of the Department of Accounts and Finances
shall also be Vice President of the Council, and in the absence of the Mayor or
his inability to act, shall preside over the Council, and shall perform all the
usual duties of the Mayor and head of the Department of Public Affairs.
('71 Code, § 3-2-1)
§ 32.026 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Commissioner of Accounts
and Finances shall execute a bond in the form prescribed by law in the penal
sum of $3,000, with sureties to be approved by the judge of the county court.
Said bond shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk.
('71 Code, § 3-2-2)
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 32.040 POWERS.
   The Commissioner of Public Health and Safety shall have charge of the
Department of Public Health and Safety which includes the following:
   (A)   Fire Department and officers and employees therein, the fire station
and apparatus, and the purchase of all equipment, apparatus and materials for
said Department.
   (B)   Health Department, City Health Officer and Sanitary Inspector and
employees in said Department, and all materials, apparatus and equipment used
in said Department.
   (C)   Building Commissioner, all materials, apparatus and equipment used by
said office and all employees supervised by said office.
   (D)   City Landfill and Garbage Pick Up Departments and officers and
employees therein, and all materials, apparatus and equipment used in said
Departments.
('71 Code, § 3-3-1) (Ord. 2194, passed 5-26-81)
§ 32.041 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Commissioner of Public
Health and Safety shall execute a bond payable to the city in the penal sum of
$3,000 with sureties to be approved by the judge of the county court,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office. The said
bond shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk.
('71 Code, § 3-3-2)
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 32.055 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   There is hereby established a department of the city government to be
known as the Department of Public Works. The head of this department shall be
known as the Director of Public Works, who shall be appointed by the City
Manager. The Department of Public Works shall include:
      (1)   The Water Division, which includes the storage, distribution, and
production of potable water; the maintenance of these facilities; all equipment
and materials necessary to carry out these functions; a Superintendent, who
may, with the authorization of the Manager be the Director of Public Works; and
all personnel, under the supervision of the Water Superintendent, necessary to
carry out the functions of this division. If the Water Superintendent is not
qualified, per the state requirements, to be the Chief Operator, a Chief
Operator will be appointed by the City Manager upon the recommendation of the
Director of Public Works.
      (2)   The Sewer Division, which includes the sanitary sewer system; the
storm sewer system, including storm water ditches and creeks; the waste water
treatment plant; all equipment and materials necessary to carry out these
functions; and all personnel necessary to carry out the functions of this
division.
      (3)   The Street Division, which includes the streets and alleys of the
city; the repair and cleaning of the streets, paving, viaducts; all equipment
and materials necessary to carry out these functions; and all personnel
necessary to carry out the functions of this division.
      (4)   The Sanitation Division, which includes the City's landfill, pick-
up of trash and rubbish, recycling; all equipment and materials necessary to
carry out these functions; and all personnel necessary to carry out the
functions of this division.
   (B)   Should the City Council authorize a contractor to carry out any of the
above functions or parts of them, the Director of Public Works shall be
responsible for monitoring the contracts, and reporting to the City Manager any
actions that maybe in non-compliance with the contracts.
(Ord. 2811, passed 11-23-92)
§ 32.056 ASSIGNMENT OF PERSONNEL.
   Personnel assigned to the various divisions of this department shall be used
by the Director of Public Works in a manner that is most effective and
efficient for the department as a whole.
(Ord. 2811, passed 11-23-92)
§ 32.057 COMPENSATION OF PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by “An Act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by the state, county,
city or any public body or any political subdivision or by any one under
contract for public works,” approved June 26, 1941 (ILCS Ch. 820, Act 130, §§ 1
et seq), as amended, the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for
laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in construction of public works
coming under the jurisdiction of the city is hereby ascertained to be the same
as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the Henry County area
as determined by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June 5,
2017, a copy of that determination being attached to Ord. 3932 and incorporated
herein by reference. Copies of said determination are obtainable from the City
Clerk. As required by the Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of
wages by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois shall supersede the
Department’s June determination and apply to any and all public works
construction undertaken by the city. The definition of any terms appearing in
this section which are also used in the Act shall be the same as in the Act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply the general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of the city to the extent required by the Act.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by
an interested party in the main office of the city, this determination or any
revisions of such prevailing rate of wages. A copy of this determination or of
the current revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in effect
shall be attached to all contract specifications.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall mail a coy of this determination to any employer,
and to any association of employers and to any person or association of
employees who have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workers
whose wages will be affected by such rates.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of Ord. 3932 with
both the Secretary of State Index Division and the Department of Labor of the
State of Illinois.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the area an abbreviated copy of Ord. 3932 to announce that
the same has been passed and is on file, and such publication shall constitute
notice that the determination is effective and that this is a determination of
this public body, with the complete ordinance to be published and made
available for public inspection in pamphlet form.
(Ord. 3108, passed 6-23-97; Am. Ord. 3162, passed 7-8-98; Am. Ord. 3309, passed
6-11-01; Am. Ord. 3470, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 3511, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord.
3676, passed 6-13-11; Am. Ord. 37-5, passed 6-11-12; Am. Ord. 3833, passed 6-
13-16; Am. Ord. 3932, passed 6-11-18)
AMBULANCE SERVICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.070 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created an executive department of the municipal government
of the city to be known as the Ambulance Service Department which shall consist
of a Director of Ambulance Service, Assistant Director of Ambulance Service and
such members thereof as may from time to time be fixed by resolution of the
City Council.
('71 Code, § 3-10-1) (Ord. 1840, passed 10-14-74; Am. Ord. 2321, passed 10-11-
82)
Cross-reference:
   Emergency ambulance service through Fire Department, see §§
35.35 through
35.38
§ 32.071 DIRECTOR; DUTIES.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Ambulance Director who shall be
appointed pursuant to the provisions of this code and statutes of the state. He
shall be the Director of the Ambulance Service of the city and shall perform
such duties as are imposed upon him by law or ordinance, and in addition
thereto, he shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him from time
to time by the Council or the Commissioner in charge of his Department. He
shall receive such salary or compensation as the Council by resolution may
direct. Before entering upon the duties of his office he shall take the oath
prescribed for all city officers and enter into a bond in the penal sum of
$1,000 with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the Council
conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of his duties in
office.
   (B)   The Director of Ambulance Service shall have the following powers and
duties:
      (1)   He shall, in subordination to the Commissioner of Public Health and
Safety, have the full management and control of the ambulance service of the
city and all regulations and orders of said Department shall be promulgated
through him. All members and officers of the Ambulance Service Department shall
be subject to such rules and regulations as from time to time shall be
prescribed by said Director of Ambulance Service with the concurrence of the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety.
      (2)   He shall be responsible for obtaining personnel, including
volunteer workers for the operation of the program.
      (3)   He shall submit monthly reports in writing to the Council of the
state of the ambulance service, with such statistics and suggestions as he may
deem advisable for the improvement of the service.
      (4)   He shall have charge of all the equipment assigned to him for the
operation of the Department, including the maintenance thereof.
      (5)   When his term of office has expired, he shall turn over all
records, files and all property in his possession in connection with said
Department to his successor in office.
('71 Code, § 3-10-2) (Ord. 1840, passed 10-14-74)
§ 32.072 ASSISTANT DIRECTOR.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director who shall be
appointed pursuant to the provisions of this code and the statutes of the
state. Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall take the oath
prescribed for all city officers and enter into a bond in the penal sum of $500
with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the City Council
conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of his duties in
office.
   (B)   He shall, in subordination to the Director of Ambulance Services and
the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety and in case of absence or
disability of the Director of Ambulance Services, have the full management and
control of the Ambulance Service of the city and shall possess all the powers
and perform all the duties of the Director of Ambulance Service.
('71 Code, § 3-10-3) (Ord. 2321, passed 10-11-82)
§ 32.073 TRANSFER AMBULANCE SERVICE FEES.
   (A)   Charges. Users of the transfer ambulance service shall pay fees as
established herein.
      Service                     Fee
      Basic Life Service (BLS)            $400
      Advanced Service, Ambulance (ALS)      $500
      Standby Service, Ambulance            $150 per hour or part thereof
      Standby Service, Attendant            $50 per attendant per hour or part
thereof
      Third attendant               $50 per hour or part thereof
      Mileage                  $15 per loaded mile
      Disposable supplies and ancillary procedures   As established by Fire
Chief
(‘71 Code, § 3-10-4) (Ord. 2673, passed 6-13-88; Am. Ord. 2764, passed 11-25-
91; Am. Ord. 3315, passed 7-23-01; Am. Ord. 3467, passed 4-25-05; Am. Ord.
3633, passed 4-26-10)
   (B)   All charges and fees are payable at the office of the City Clerk and
become due and payable immediately upon the furnishing of the service.
(‘71 Code, § 3-10-5) (Am. Ord. 3315, passed 7-23-01)
§ 32.074 AMBULANCE SERVICE FUND.
   (A)   There is established a separate fund to be created in one of the named
city depositories, to be designated as the Ambulance Service Fund. All moneys
received in payment of services rendered by the city ambulance service shall be
deposited in this Fund and all money received from any governmental agency with
whom the city contracts for ambulance service shall be deposited in said Fund.
('71 Code, § 3-10-6)
   (B)   All expenses, bills and charges incurred by the city for the operation
of the ambulance service shall be paid from the Ambulance Service Fund so far
as the money deposited therein will allow, the remainder of said bills, charges
and expenses for the City Ambulance Service, should there by any, shall be paid
as heretofore provided.
('71 Code, § 3-10-7)
(Ord. 1851, passed 12-23-74; Am. Ord. 2321, passed 10-11-82)
CHAPTER 33: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
   
33.001   Board created; membership
   
33.002   Oath; bond
   
33.003   Duties
   
33.004   Rules; performance of duties and functions
   
33.005   Annual report
Board of Local Improvements
   
33.045   Board created; membership
   
33.046   Adoption of rules and regulations
   
33.047   President of Board
Zoning Board of Appeals
   
33.060   Board created; membership
   
33.061   Appeals and review
   
33.062   Variances
   
33.063   Council action
   
33.064   Rules and procedure
   
33.065   Change of zoning
   
33.066   Order for variances; length of time permitted
Cemetery Board of Managers
   
33.075   Establishment
   
33.076   Officers and bonds
   
33.077   Powers
   
33.078   Funds; how invested
   
33.079   Reports
Plan Commission
   
33.090   Purpose
   
33.091   Membership
   
33.092   Term of office
   
33.093   Organization
   
33.094   Powers and duties
   
33.095   Land subdivision or resubdivision
   
33.096   Improvements
   
33.097   Expenditures
Commission on Human Relations
   
33.110   Commission created
   
33.111   Purpose
   
33.112   Members; officers
   
33.113   Duties
   
33.114   Recommendations to Council
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
§ 33.001 BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners in
accordance with the provisions of Article 14 of the "Revised Cities and
Villages Act" approved August 15, 1941, as amended, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-
2.1-1. The Board shall consist of three members who shall be appointed and
serve for such length of time as is provided by the aforesaid statute of the
state.
('71 Code, § 2-4-1)
§ 33.002 OATH; BOND.
   The members of said Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, before they
enter upon the duties of their office, shall take oath of office and shall
execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of $500 conditioned upon the
faithful performance of their duties as members of said Board.
('71 Code, § 2-4-2) (Ord. 1266, passed 10-10-49)
§ 33.003 DUTIES.
   The said Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint all officers
and members of the Fire and Police Department of the city, except that the
Chief of the Fire Department and Chief of the Police Department shall be
appointed by the City Manager. All appointments to each Department other than
that of the lowest rank, however, shall be from the rank next below that to
which the appointment is made, except that the Chiefs of the respective
Departments may be appointed by the City Manager from either among or outside
the members of the respective Departments.
('71 Code, § 2-4-3) (Ord. 1359, passed 6-25-56)
§ 33.004 RULES; PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   The said Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall make rules to carry
out the purpose of the said Article 14 of the "Revised Cities and Villages
Act," ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-1, and for appointments and removals in
accordance with the provisions of said Article 14. They shall perform such
duties and functions as are provided by law or ordinance.
('71 Code, § 2-2-4)
§ 33.005 ANNUAL REPORT.
   Annually, at the end of each fiscal year, the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall submit to the Mayor a report of its activities and of the
rules in force and the practical effect thereof. In this report the Board may
make suggestions which the Board believes would result in greater efficiency in
the Fire or Police Department. The Mayor shall transmit the report to the City
Council.
('71 Code, § 2-4-5) (Ord. 1266, passed 10-10-47)
Editor's note:
   The Board of Trustees of Police Pension Fund and the Board of Trustees of
Firemen's Pension Fund which previously appeared in this code have been
superseded by the Administrative Code of the City of Kewanee on file with the
City Clerk.
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
§ 33.045 BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby created the Board of Local Improvements of the city, which
shall consist of the Mayor, the Commissioner of Public Property, the
Commissioner of Accounts and Finances, the Commissioner of Public Health and
Safety, the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements, the Safety
Engineer and Superintendent of Streets.
('71 Code, § 2-3-1) (Ord. 1487, passed 11-8-65)
§ 33.046 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Said Board of Local Improvements shall have power to make and adopt, subject
to the approval of the City Council, all necessary and proper rules and
regulations to carry out the functions of said Board.
('71 Code, § 2-3-2)
§ 33.047 PRESIDENT OF BOARD.
   The Mayor shall be President of said Board, and shall preside at all
meetings thereof.
('71 Code, § 2-3-3)
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 33.060 BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals. Said Board of
Appeals shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor of the city and
confirmed by the City Council. The members of the Board of Appeals shall serve
respectively for the following terms:
      (1)   One for one year.
      (2)   One for two years.
      (3)   One for three years.
      (4)   One for four years.
      (5)   One for five years.
      (6)   One for six years.
      (7)   One for seven years.
   (B)   The successor of each member so appointed shall serve for a term of
five years. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation
by the Council, for the unexpired term. Members may be removed by the Mayor for
cause after written charges have been filed and after a public hearing has been
held, if demanded by the member so charged.
   (C)   One of the members of said Board shall be designated by the Mayor,
with the consent of the Council, as Chairperson of said Board and shall hold
said office as Chairperson until a successor is appointed. Such Chairperson, or
in his absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall act as clerk for the Board and shall make and
keep a record of all its meetings and official acts.
('71 Code, § 2-12-1)
§ 33.061 APPEALS AND REVIEW.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a ruling of the Health, Building and Zoning
Officer charged with the enforcement of the zoning chapter or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of the city concerning the interpretation of the
zoning code, may take an appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by
the Zoning Board of Appeals by general rules adopted by it, and shall be taken
by filing with the City Clerk and with the Zoning Board of Appeals, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with such plats and exhibits as
are reasonably necessary. Such appeal shall be taken upon forms provided by the
Zoning Board of Appeals. The Clerk shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
   (C)   The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or
amend the order, requirements, decisions or determination appealed from to the
extent and in the manner that the Board may decide to be fitting and proper in
the premises, and to that end, the Board shall also have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken.
   (D)   The City Board shall also hear and decide all matters referred to it
or upon which it is required to pass under the zoning chapter.
   (E)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Building
Commissioner or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is
authorized by the zoning chapter to render decisions.
   (F)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for
the hearing of such appeals and shall give notice thereof to the persons
appealing and to the officer from whom the appeal is taken. It shall hear and
decide the appeal within a reasonable time. At the hearing, parties of interest
may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
   (G)   Stay of proceedings. The appeal shall stay all proceedings and
furtherance of action appealed from, unless the Health, Building and Zoning
Officer certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after notice of appeal has
been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property; in which case
the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by court of record on
application, with notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and all
due causes shown.
   (H)   All final administrative decisions of the Board under this section
shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the
"Administrative Review Act," of the state, approved May 8, 1945, and all
amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
The term ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION is defined in Section I of the "Administrative
Review Act."
('71 Code, § 2-12-2)
§ 33.062 VARIANCES.
   (A)   When a property owner or his agent shows that a strict application of
the terms of the zoning chapter relating to the use, construction or alteration
of buildings or structures or the use of land, imposes upon him, practical
difficulties or particular hardship, then the Board of Appeals may recommend
such variances of the strict application of the terms of the zoning chapter as
are in harmony with its general purpose and intent when the Board is satisfied,
under the evidence heard before it, that such a variance will not merely serve
as a convenience to the applicant, but is necessary to alleviate some
demonstrable hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variance from the
provisions of the zoning chapter, or in the following instances:
      (1)   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a lot in single ownership as shown on record prior to the date
of passage of the zoning chapter.
      (2)   To permit a front yard, a side yard or a rear yard less than that
required by the zoning chapter, but such variation shall not exceed 25% of the
depth of front yard, or the depth of the rear yard, or the width of the side
yard, as required by the zoning chapter.
      (3)   To permit a building to exceed the height limit by not more than
10% of the height limit established by the zoning chapter.
      (4)   To permit the use of a lot less in area by not more than 20% of the
lot area required by the zoning chapter.
      (5)   To permit the use of a lot less in width by not more than 20% of
the lot width as required by the zoning chapter.
      (6)   To permit coverage of a lot in excess of 35% of the lot area but
not more than 50% of the lot area as required by the zoning chapter.
      (7)   To interpret the provisions of the zoning chapter where the street
layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the
zoning chapter of the city fixing the several districts.
   (B)   In considering all proposed variations to the zoning chapter, the
Board shall, before recommending any variation from the zoning chapter in a
specific case, first determine and make a finding of fact that the property in
question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to use used only under
the conditions allowed by the regulations in that zone; the plight of the owner
is due to unique circumstances; and the variance, if granted, will not alter
the essential character of the locality. A variance shall be permitted only if
the evidence, in the judgment of the Board of Appeals, sustains each of the
three conditions enumerated; and further, the proposed variation will not
impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, unreasonably
increase the congestion in public streets, increase the danger of fire or
endanger the public safety, unreasonably diminish or impair established
property values within the surrounding area or in any other respect impair the
public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare of the inhabitants of the
city.
   (C)   No variance shall be made except in a specific case and after a public
hearing before the Board of Appeals of which there shall be a notice of the
time and place of the hearing published at least once, not more than 30 days
nor less than 15 days before the hearing, in one or more newspapers published
in the city. This notice shall contain the particular location for which the
variance is requested as well as a statement of what the proposed variance
consists.
   (D)   The Board shall report its findings and recommendations to the Council
within 15 days after the public hearing.
('71 Code, § 2-12-3)
§ 33.063 COUNCIL ACTION.
   (A)   No variance in any specific case shall be made by the Council without
a hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals as required herein nor without a
report thereof having been made by the Board to the Council, and every such
report shall be accompanied by a finding of fact specifying the reasons for the
report.
   (B)   Upon the report of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Council, without
further public hearing, may adopt or deny any proposed variation or may refer
the report back of the Board for further consideration. Any proposed variation
which fails to receive the approval of four members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of
all elected members of the Council. In making any variances, the Council shall
be governed by the same considerations and restrictions as the variations in
particular instances under §
33.062.
('71 Code, § 2-12-4)
§ 33.064 RULES AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question or, if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Findings of
fact shall be included in the minutes on each case and the reasons for granting
or denying each application shall be specified. Every rule, regulation, and
every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public
record.
   (B)   The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure, a copy of which and
all recommendations thereto, shall be filed in the office of the Clerk.
   (C)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and all minutes
of the Board shall be open to public examination at reasonable hours.
('71 Code, § 2-12-5)
§ 33.065 CHANGE OF ZONING.
   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the Zoning
Board of Appeals the power or authority to alter or change the zoning chapter
or any use district made a part of the zoning chapter; such power and authority
being reserved to the Council, and the Board shall not have any power or
authority with respect to any alterations or change of the zoning chapter
except to make recommendations to the City Council in such specific cases as
may properly come before the Zoning Board of Appeals.
('71 Code, § 2-12-6)
§ 33.066 ORDER FOR VARIANCES; LENGTH OF TIME PERMITTED.
   (A)   No order for a variance permitting the erection or alteration of a
building shall be valid for a period longer than six months, unless such use is
established within such period; however, where such use permitted is dependent
upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in
force and effect if a building permit for said erection or alteration is
obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and
proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.
   (B)   No order for a variance permitting a use of a building or premises
shall be valid for a period longer than six months, unless such use is
established within such period; provided, however, that where such use
permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such
order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection
or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is
stated and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.
('71 Code, § 2-12-7) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
CEMETERY BOARD OF MANAGERS
§ 33.075 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-49-1 and 11-52.2-1, there is hereby
established a Cemetery Board of Managers, which shall consist of three persons
to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, and
shall hold office for a period of four years and until their successors are
appointed and qualified.
('71 Code, § 2-8-1) (Am. Ord. 2794, passed 8-24-92)
§ 33.076 OFFICERS AND BONDS.
   As soon as may be convenient after appointment, this Board shall meet and
select the officers in the manner and number as prescribed by the previously
cited Illinois statutes. Bond shall be paid for by the city and in the amount
as specified by the statute. The City Manager will insure that administrative
support is provided to this Board.
('71 Code, § 2-8-2) (Am. Ord. 2794, passed 8-24-92)
§ 33.077 POWERS.
   The Cemetery Board of Managers is hereby authorized and empowered to receive
and hold in perpetual trust, any such money, securities, funds, and property so
given to it by the city. The principal of such trust fund shall be kept intact,
and perpetually invested, and the income thereof shall be perpetually applied
to the maintenance, expansion, acquisition, and upkeep of city cemeteries and
their appurtenances. The income from the principal of the trust fund will be
deposited with the City Clerk when received. The City Clerk will deposit all
such income receipts in the cemetery fund. All other functions and
responsibilities associated with city cemeteries will be the responsibility of
the City Manager and the Sexton as specified in this code.
('71 Code, § 2-8-3) (Am. Ord. 2794, passed 8-24-92)
§ 33.078 FUNDS; HOW INVESTED.
   All sums of money received by the Cemetery Board of Managers shall be
invested in bonds or other financial instruments that have as a first objective
or proven history the preservation of principal.
('71 Code, § 2-8-4) (Am. Ord. 2794, passed 8-24-92)
§ 33.079 REPORTS.
   Reports will be as specified by Illinois Statutes.
('71 Code, § 2-8-5) (Am. Ord. 2794, passed 8-24-92)
PLAN COMMISSION
§ 33.090 PURPOSE.
   In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a
comprehensive City Plan for the guidance, direction and control of the growth
and development of the city, a Plan Commission, which shall be a department of
the city government, is hereby created under authority of an Act of the General
Assembly of the State of Illinois entitled "The Revised Cities and Villages
Act, approved August 15, 1941, and effective January 1, 1942, and as amended,
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-4."
('71 Code, § 2-5-1) (Ord. 1382, passed 1-27-58)
§ 33.091 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Plan Commission shall consist of nine members to be appointed by the
Mayor on the basis of their particular fitness for their duties on said
Commission, and subject to the approval of the City Council.
('71 Code, § 2-5-2) (Ord. 1382, passed 1-27-58; Am. Ord. 3-54, passed 4-22-96)
§ 33.092 TERM OF OFFICE.
   Of the nine appointed citizen members five shall serve for a period of one
year, two for a period of two years, and two for a period of three years.
Thereafter, such appointed citizen members shall serve for a period of three
years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. The
Members of the Plan Commission and its Secretary may receive such compensation
as may be fixed from time to time by the Council and provided for in the budget
and appropriation ordinance.
('71 Code, § 2-5-3) (Ord. 1382, passed 1-27-58; Am. Ord. 3054, passed 4-22-96)
§ 33.093 ORGANIZATION.
   Immediately following their appointment, the members of the Plan Commission
shall meet, organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary and adopt
and later change or alter rules and regulations of organization and procedure
consistent with provisions of this code and state laws. The Commission shall
keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to
public inspection. The Commission shall also file an annual report with the
Mayor and Council, setting forth its transactions and recommendations.
('71 Code, § 2-5-4) (Ord. 1382, passed 1-27-58)
§ 33.094 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   (1)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive
plan of public improvements looking to the present and future development and
growth of the city. Such a plan, after its adoption by the Council, will be
known as the Official Plan of the city.
      (2)   Such Plan shall include reasonable requirements in reference to
streets, alleys, and public grounds within the corporate limits and in
contiguous territory outside of and distant not more than 1½ miles from such
limits, and not included in any municipality, such requirements to be effective
whenever such lands shall be subdivided after the adoption of such Plan.
   (B)   To prepare and recommend to the Council from time to time such changes
in the Plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by the Council or by
the Plan Commission.
   (C)   To prepare and recommend to the Council from time to time plans and/or
recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of such Official Plan.
   (D)   To give aid to the officials of the city charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan, to further the
making of such improvements, and generally to promote the realization of the
Official Plan.
   (E)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
   (F)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
   (G)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of an Act of the General Assembly of the state entitled "The Revised
Cities and Villages Act" approved August 15, 1941, and effective January 1,
1942, as amended, as may be conferred by the Council.
('71 Code, § 2-5-5) (Ord. 1382, passed 1-27-58)
§ 33.095 LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION.
   Following the adoption of an Official Plan in the manner prescribed in this
Act, no map or plat of any subdivision presented for record, affecting land
within the corporate limits of the city, or in contiguous territory outside of
and distant not more than 1½ miles from such limits and not included in any
other municipality, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the
subdivision thereon shall provide for streets, alleys, and public grounds in
conformity with any requirements applicable thereto of such Official Plan.
('71 Code, § 2-5-6) (Ord. 1382, passed 1-27-58)
§ 33.096 IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for its consideration a
copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The Plan Commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a report
necessary advisable, for the consideration of the City Council.
('71 Code, § 2-5-7) (Ord. 1382, passed 1-27-58)
§ 33.097 EXPENDITURES.
   The Plan Commission may at the discretion of the City Council employ
necessary help whose salaries, wages and other necessary expenses shall be
provided for by adequate appropriation made by the Council from the public
funds. If said Plan Commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advise or service, it may be done upon authority from the Council and
appropriations by the Council therefor.
('71 Code, § 2-5-8) (Ord. 1382, passed 1-27-58)
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RELATIONS
§ 33.110 COMMISSION CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Commission on Human Relations, consisting of
not more than 18 members.
   (B)   The term shall be no more than three years in length for each member
of the Commission.
('71 Code, § 2-7-1) (Ord. 1535, passed 2-12-68; Am. Res. 4262, passed 9-9-02)
§ 33.111 PURPOSE.
   Such Commission on Human Relations shall make a broad study of those areas
and situations in which there is a need for human relations between people.
('71 Code, § 2-7-2) (Ord. 1535, passed 2-12-68)
§ 33.112 MEMBERS; OFFICER.
   Said Commission on Human Relations shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the City Council. The members of such Commission shall be composed
of a broad representation of community interests, be residents of the city,
serve individual terms of three years without compensation, choose their own
Chairperson and such other officers as they may desire, and prepare and adopt
their own bylaws to regulate the meetings and procedures. The Chairperson of
said Commission on Human Relations shall be and is hereby appointed an ex
officio member of the Citizen's Committee on Urban Renewal of the city.
('71 Code, § 2-7-3) (Ord. 1535, passed 2-12-68)
§ 33.113 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Commission on Human Relations shall encourage and work towards the
bringing about of mutual understanding and respect among all peoples in the
city in order that prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, discrimination and disorder
occasioned thereby be eliminated and shall cooperate with civic, religious and
educational organizations in these endeavors.
   (B)   It is the intent and objective of the City Council that the following
broad purposes be sought:
      (1)   To encourage understanding and respect between persons of various
racial, religious and nationality backgrounds;
      (2)   To safeguard the rights of all citizens as defined by our laws and
constitution; and
      (3)   To open opportunities for full participation in community life to
all including opportunities in housing, employment, public accommodations and
education.
('71 Code, § 2-7-4) (Ord. 1535, passed 2-12-68)
§ 33.114 RECOMMENDATIONS TO COUNCIL.
   Such Commission on Human Relations shall recommend to the Council from time
to time such measures and legislation as they may deem to be needed to assist
in the accomplishment of the objectives of the Commission.
('71 Code, § 2-7-5) (Ord. 1535, passed 2-12-68)
CHAPTER 34: [RESERVED.]
Editor's note:
   This chapter has been superseded by the Administrative Code of the City of
Kewanee on file with the City Clerk.
CHAPTER 35: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Department established
   
35.02   Fire Chief; duties
   
35.03   Deputy Fire Chief
   
35.04   Firefighters
   
35.05   Fire Chief to establish rules
   
35.06   Working conditions
   
35.07   Personnel to have telephones
   
35.08   Holiday pay
   
35.09   Fees and charges to non-residents
Scene of Fire
   
35.20   Authority at scene of fire
   
35.21   Property saved at fire
   
35.22   Trespassing at scene of fire
Emergency Ambulance Service
   
35.35   Provision of service; area of jurisdiction
   
35.36   Permissible points of transportation
   
35.37   Fees; fire rescue ambulance services
   
35.38   Obligation of service
Cross-reference:
   Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, see §§
33.001 through
33.005
   Police officers to aid Fire Department during scene of fire, see § 34.13
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established an executive department of the Municipal
government of the city which shall be known as the Fire Department. This
Department shall be under the supervision and control of the City Manager, and
shall consist of one Fire Chief, one Deputy Fire Chief and such other employees
as the City Council, from time to time provide.
(‘71 Code, § 3-7-1) (Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.02 FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES.
   (A)   There hereby is created the office of Fire Chief. He or she shall be
appointed pursuant to the provisions of this Code pertaining to the Civil
Service status of said office, and shall hold the office pursuant to said
provisions.
   (B)   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office he or she shall
take the oath prescribed by law for all city officers, with sureties to be
approved by the City Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of his or her office.
   (C)   The Fire Chief shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   He or she shall be the head of the Fire Department and shall have
full control over the same and over all members thereof while in the line of
their duty, subject to the control and supervision of the City Manager.
      (2)   He or she shall have the custody of the fire trucks, ladders, and
all buildings belonging or appertaining to said Fire Department, and all other
property and equipment belonging or appertaining to the Fire Department,
subject to the supervision of the City Manager.
      (3)   He or she shall at least once every month examine into the
condition of the fire engines, hooks and ladders, fire trucks and all other
fire apparatus, and engine house, and report the same to the City Manager
immediately after said examination, together with any recommendations that he
or she may deem proper to make for the good of the Department, which report
shall be communicated to the Council by said City Manager.
      (4)   He or she shall keep himself or herself fully informed on the
condition and efficiency of all property or apparatus belonging to the
Department. Whenever any of said apparatus shall require alterations or
repairs, he or she shall report the same to the City Manager and shall cause
the same to be done under his or her supervision and direction, subject
however, to the operating procedures of the city for the purchase of materials
and supplies and to the laws of the state and the provisions of this Code.
      (5)   He or she shall attend whenever possible all fires occurring within
the city, and take command of the Department at such fire, and see that the
members of the Fire Department faithfully perform their respective duties.
      (6)   He or she shall, either upon his or her own knowledge or upon
information communicated to him or her by others, proffer written charges to
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of said city against any member of
the Fire Department for a violation of the rules of said Board.
      (7)   He or she shall keep a record of all the members of the Department,
showing the day of their appointment and discharge, together with their rate of
pay and amount due them, and shall report, upon request, the same to the
Director of Finance.
      (8)   He or she shall keep an accurate record of all fires occurring in
the city, the date and location of each fire, the name of the owner of the
property destroyed, the cause of the fire, if known, the loss incurred thereby,
the amount of insurance, and such other information as he or she may deem
important to the city.
      (9)   He or she shall have power, when he or she deems it necessary, to
check the progress of any fire, and to order the demolition of any building or
structure.
      (10)   He or she shall cause all provisions of this Code regarding the
prevention of fires, and all other ordinances and regulations in reference to
the Fire Department, to be strictly enforced.
      (11)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or designee to examine
while in course of construction, all churches, school houses, hotels, halls,
theaters, rinks or other public buildings and whenever he or she is of the
opinion that such building is being unsafely constructed, he or she shall at
once report the same to the City Manager and the Director of Community
Development. He or she shall at least twice each year carefully inspect all
hotels, church buildings, school houses, halls, theaters, rinks and other
public buildings in the city limits and if in his or her opinion any such
building is dangerous to public safety, he or she shall at once report the same
to the City Manager.
   (D)   The Fire Chief shall provide himself or herself with a suitable
uniform, indicative of his or her ranks, as prescribed by the rules and
regulations of the Department, and upon the expiration of his or her term of
office, or his or her resignation or removal therefrom, he or she shall deliver
to his or her successor in office all books, records, equipment and property of
every description in his or her possession belonging to the city or
appertaining to his or her office.
(‘71 Code, § 3-7-2) (Ord. 1324, passed 6-27-53; Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.03 DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Deputy Fire Chief who shall also
be known as the Deputy Chief of the Fire Department. He or she shall be
appointed by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the city pursuant to
the rules of said Board, and shall hold his or her office pursuant to the same
rules.
   (B)   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Deputy Fire
Chief shall take the oath prescribed for all city officers with sureties to be
approved by the City Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of his or her office.
   (C)   The Deputy Fire Chief shall be second in command of the Fire
Department, in subordination to the Fire Chief, and in case of the absence or
disability of the Fire Chief, he or she shall possess all the powers and
perform all the duties of the Fire Chief.
   (D)   The Deputy Fire Chief shall wear a uniform as may be designated by the
rules and regulations of the Department, indicative of his or her rank.
(‘71 Code, § 3-7-3) (Ord. 1324, passed 7-27-53; Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.04 FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   There shall be in the Fire Department as many captains, lieutenants,
engineers and firefighters as the City Council, by resolution, may direct. All
such personnel of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners of the city.
   (B)   Said firefighters shall perform such duties as are provided for them
by law or ordinance, and in addition thereto such other duties as from time to
time may be imposed upon them by the Council, the City Manager or the Fire
Chief.
   (C)   The members of the Fire Department shall be on duty at all such hours
of the day and night as shall be prescribed by the rules and regulations of the
Fire Department except when otherwise ordered by the Fire Chief, and in
addition to their general duties they shall keep their fire apparatus in first
class condition for actual service, and not expose them to unnecessary hazards.
A schedule shall be worked out by the City Manager and the Fire Chief in
conjunction with the Firefighter's Union and the collective bargaining
agreement (CBA) to determine the normal shift schedule for firefighters.
   (D)   The City Manager shall prescribe a suitable uniform for the members of
the Fire Department, to be worn by them while in the line of their duty. All
members of the Department shall be required to provide themselves with such
uniform as may be prescribed, with clothing allowance funds furnished by the
city.
(‘71 Code, § 3-7-4) (Ord. 1324, passed 7-27-53; Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.05 FIRE CHIEF TO ESTABLISH RULES.
   The Fire Chief may, with the approval of the City Manager, prescribe and
establish such rules and regulations as he or she may deem proper for the
government of the Fire Department and the members thereof. He or she shall
furnish each member of said Department with a copy of such rules and
regulations, and it shall be his or her duty to see that said rules and
regulations are enforced.
(‘71 Code, § 3-7-5) (Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.06 WORKING CONDITIONS.
   The City Manager and the Fire Chief shall establish a set of working
conditions, which working conditions shall be in writing and a copy thereof
placed on the bulletin board and/or other suitable places in the Fire
Department. This set of rules and working conditions shall meet with the
approval of the City Council.
(‘71 Code, § 3-7-6) (Ord. 1360, passed 7-9-56; Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.07 PERSONNEL TO HAVE TELEPHONES.
   All members of the Fire Department and heads of the various departments of
the city are required to have telephone installed and maintained in their place
of residence or a working mobile phone on their person while off-duty and in
the employ of the City of Kewanee.
(‘71 Code, § 3-7-7) (Ord. 1491, passed 11-22-66; Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.08 HOLIDAY PAY.
   The corporate authorities of the city have heretofore established pay, known
as holiday pay. Henceforth, that pay shall be a part of the wages for the
firefighters of the city and shall be payable in the pay period in which they
occur. This section and the provisions contained herein shall in no way
decrease benefits and wages previously granted by the corporate authorities of
the city.
(‘71 Code, § 3-7-8) (Ord. 1836, passed 9-23-74; Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.09 FEES AND CHARGES TO NON-RESIDENTS.
   (A)    If the Fire Department deems necessary and performs services of fire
extinguishments for individuals that are considered non-residents of the city,
or services of hazardous materials containment for any person or firm
regardless of residence, the responsible party(s) may be charged a fee for
apparatus and manpower associated with such services. These fees shall mirror
and follow the fee schedule set forth by the Henry County Office of Emergency
Management (OEM). Current rates are as follows:
      (1)   Apparatus: $250 per hour for each piece of apparatus dispatched to
the scene.
      (2)   Firefighters: $75 per hour for each firefighter dispatched to the
scene.
   (B)   An additional charge may be levied for extraordinary expenses of
materials used in rendering services.
(Ord. 3414, passed 10-14-03; Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
SCENE OF FIRE
§ 35.20 AUTHORITY AT SCENE OF FIRE.
   The Fire Department officer in command, or any firefighter designated by him
or her, may exercise the authority of a police officer in directing traffic at
the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to an
emergency call for so long as Fire Department equipment is on the scene in the
absence of or in assisting the police.
(‘71 Code, § 10-2-2) (Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.21 PROPERTY SAVED AT FIRE.
   No person shall be permitted to remove or take away any property in the
possession of the Fire Department saved from any fire until proof of the
ownership has been made to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief.
(‘71 Code, § 6-1-4) (Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.22 TRESPASSING AT SCENE OF FIRE.
   The Mayor, City Council members, City Manager or the Fire Chief may, and the
Chief of Police and all police officers shall, during the progress of any fire,
arrest any person found stealing or trespassing upon any property, willfully
injuring or breaking any engine or other fire apparatus, or any person found
stealing or trespassing upon any property, or willfully injuring or breaking
any engine or other fire apparatus, or any person resisting or obstructing any
member of the Fire Department in the discharge of his or her duty, or otherwise
conducting himself or herself in a riotous or disorderly manner.
(‘71 Code, § 6-1-5) (Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE
§ 35.35 PROVISION OF SERVICE; AREA OF JURISDICTION.
   The city, through its Fire Department, shall provide emergency ambulance
service within the corporate limits of the City of Kewanee, by contract to the
Kewanee Community Fire Protection District and the Neponset Fire Protection
District, and within any area specially designated by the City Council, and
within any area designated for such service by an intergovernmental service or
mutual aid agreement; however, the Fire Chief may respond to requests for aid
outside of said service area in cases of major disaster.
(‘71 Code, § 3-7-9) (Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
Cross-reference:
   Ambulance Service Department, see §§
32.070 through
32.074
§ 35.36 PERMISSIBLE POINTS OF TRANSPORTATION.
   (A)   Unless directed to do so by the doctor in charge, on duty, or their
authorized designee, at the Resource Hospital under no circumstances will the
ambulance rescue vehicle and the personnel of the Fire Department transport a
person to any place other than OSF Saint Luke's Medical Center of Kewanee.
   (B)   Under no circumstances will the Fire Department personnel take orders
regarding transport of a person from anyone other than the doctor in charge, on
duty, or their authorized designee, at the Resource Hospital.
   (C)   The only choices available to a person provided with transportation in
the emergency rescue vehicle are transportation as directed by the doctor in
charge or on duty, or their authorized designee, at the Resource Hospital, to
the nearest appropriate hospital or refusal to be transported.
   (D)   Fire Department personnel shall not make the decision not to transport
a person on the basis of instructions from a relative or a person with power of
attorney.
   (E)   When directed to do so by the doctor in charge, on duty, or their
authorized designee at the Resource Hospital, transportation of a person to a
place other than OSF Saint Luke's Medical Center of Kewanee, shall be made by
the ambulance and personnel on-duty.
   (F)   Persons who refuse transport to the OSF Saint Luke's Medical Center of
Kewanee should be advised that transport to another hospital will create a
delay in definitive care until the destination hospital is reached.
   (G)   If ambulance personnel operating an ambulance for out-of-town
transport determine that the person is not capable of withstanding the
transport to the out-of-town site, ambulance personnel will refuse to transport
the person unless said personnel receive authorization from a doctor in charge
or on duty with the Resource Hospital.
(‘71 Code, § 3-7-10) (Ord. 2262, passed 2-22-82; Am. Ord. 2743, passed 10-9-90;
Am. Ord. 3650, passed 7-12-10; Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.37 FEES; FIRE RESCUE AMBULANCE SERVICES.
   Rescue ambulance service fee and collection. Charges. Users of the fire
rescue ambulance service shall pay fees as established herein. This fee
schedule shall be reviewed by the Fire Chief no less than every three years to
ensure compatibility with associated costs of providing EMS services.
Service                           Fee
Basic life service - emergent     $900
Basic life service - emergent     $1,100 (non- resident)
Advanced life service one (ALS-1) $1,000
Advanced life service one (ALS-1) $1,300 (non- resident)
Advanced life service two (ALS-2) $1,500
Advanced life service two (ALS-2) $1,700 (non- resident)
Refusal - with assessment         $50
ALS-1 treated but not transported $350
Mileage                           $25 per loaded mile
Oxygen                            $75
Supplies                          $50
Extrication                       $500
 
(Ord. 3315, passed 7-23-01; Am. Ord. 3806, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. 3894,
passed 7-24-17; Am. Ord. 4220, passed 12-9-24)
§ 35.38 OBLIGATION OF SERVICE.
   Section
35.35 does not create a contractual obligation to provide emergency ambulance
service to any person but merely describes that the city is endeavoring to
provide said service to the general public. The city will endeavor to provide
said service upon proper notification and when emergency ambulance vehicles are
available for service; however, failure to provide said service shall not
create liability on behalf of the city or its officers or employees.
('71 Code, § 3-7-13) (Ord. 2262, passed 2-22-82)
CHAPTER 36: TAXATION
Section
Municipal Use Tax
   
36.01   Imposition of tax
   
36.02   Collection of tax
Municipal Retailers Occupation Tax
   
36.15   Imposition of tax
   
36.16   Report to be filed
   
36.17   Payment of tax
Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
36.20   Tax imposed; rate
   
36.21   Collection of tax by retailers
Foreign Fire Insurance Companies Tax
   
36.30   Imposition of tax
   
36.31   Duties of agents
   
36.32   Doing business if in default prohibited
   
36.33   Penalty for failure to make report
   
36.34   Proceeds benefit Fire Department
Vehicles For-Hire Tax
   
36.45   Definition
   
36.46   Imposition of tax
Municipal Utility Tax
   
36.50   Tax imposed
   
36.51   Exceptions
   
36.52   Additional taxes
   
36.53   Collection
   
36.54   Reports to municipality
   
36.55   Imposition of tax on natural gas
   
36.56   Collection of natural gas tax
   
36.57   Electric and gas utilities notified
   
36.58   Credit for over-payment
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
   
36.70   Tax imposed
Non-Home Rule Retailers’ Occupation Tax
and Service Occupation Tax (Sales Taxes)
   
36.80   Imposition of taxes
   
36.81   Applicable date
   
36.82   Filing with Illinois Department of Revenue
Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Municipal Grocery Service
Occupation Tax
   
36.90   Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax imposed
   
36.91   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
   
36.92   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer both taxes
 
   
36.99   Penalty
MUNICIPAL USE TAX
§ 36.01 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 8-11-6 upon the privilege of using in the municipality any item of
tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a
retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of state government.
The tax shall be at a rate of 1% of the selling price of such tangible property
with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act, approved
July 14, 1955.
('71 Code, § 4-23-1)
§ 36.02 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   Such tax shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.
('71 Code, § 4-23-2)
MUNICIPAL RETAILERS OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.15 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the city at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this chapter
is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-
1.
('71 Code, § 4-24-1)
§ 36.16 REPORT TO BE FILED.
   Every such person engaged in such business in the city shall file on or
before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department
of Revenue required by Section 3 of “An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons
Engages in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for
Use or Consumption” approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
('71 Code, § 4-24-2)
§ 36.17 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
('71 Code, § 4-24-3)
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.20 TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City of Kewanee at the
rate of 3% of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business.
   (B)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 8-11-23, of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-23).
(Ord. 3988, passed 12-19-19)
§ 36.21 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this subchapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
   (B)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department. The
Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of
this section.
(Ord. 3988, passed 12-19-19)
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES TAX
§ 36.30 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   All corporations, companies and associations not incorporated under the laws
of this state and which are engaged in the city, in effecting or soliciting
fire insurance, shall pay to the City Treasurer, on or before July 15 of each
and every year, a sum equal to 2% of the net receipts of premiums received by
such corporation, company or association, or their agency or agents for
business effected or transacted for fire insurance within the city for the year
ending July 1, preceding said dates. The sum herein named shall be a tax or
license fee upon all such corporations companies or associations transacting
such business within the city.
('71 Code, § 4-22-1)
§ 36.31 DUTIES OF AGENTS.
   (A)   Every person who shall act in the city as agent or otherwise, for or
on behalf of any such foreign insurance corporation, company or association,
shall on or before April 1 of each year, render to the City Clerk a written or
printed list of all such corporations, companies of associations of which he
acts as agent or otherwise for such list or statement to be verified by oath of
such party or parties.
   (B)   Every person acting as agent or otherwise, for or upon behalf of such
corporation, company or association, shall, on or before July 15 of each and
every year, render to the City Clerk a full, true and just account, verified by
oath, of all the premiums that, during the year ending on July 1 of each and
every year, shall have been received by him or any other person for him in
behalf of such corporation, company or association, and shall fully and
specifically set out in said report the amount or amounts received as premiums
for fire insurance.
   (C)   The said agent or agents shall also at the time of the making of the
above mentioned report, any to the City Treasurer 2% upon the net receipts of
such corporation, company or association, obtained as premiums for effecting
fire insurance in the city, as specified aforesaid.
('71 Code, § 4-22-2)
§ 36.32 DOING BUSINESS IF IN DEFAULT PROHIBITED.
   If such account be not rendered on or before the day herein designated for
that purpose, or if the above mentioned rates for the said tax or license fee
shall remain unpaid after that date, it shall be unlawful for any such
corporation, company or association to transact any business of fire insurance
in the city until the requirements hereof have been fully complied with;
nevertheless, this provision shall in no way affect the validity of any risk
that may be taken in violation thereof, between such corporations, company or
association and the person so insured.
('71 Code, § 4-22-3)
§ 36.33 PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO MAKE REPORT.
   If any such corporation, company or association shall fail to render the
account or reports herein designated by the day required, or if the rates set
forth in this subchapter, as a tax or license fee, shall remain unpaid after
the day designated, being July 15, every such corporation, company or
association shall forfeit and pay to the city a sum of not less than $25 nor
more than $200, upon conviction, for each and every offense. In addition to
such penalty, the city shall recover in an action in its name, for its use
against such corporation, company or association, so failing to make such
report, or pay such license fee or tax the full amount of the said license fee
or tax, which would be due under the provisions hereof.
('71 Code, § 4-22-4)
§ 36.34 PROCEEDS BENEFIT FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   Any and all sums so received under the provisions hereof, shall be used for
the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department of the city.
('71 Code, § 4-22-4)
VEHICLES FOR-HIRE TAX
§ 36.45 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR PASSENGER BUSES. Any self-propelled motor vehicles which are used in
the furnishing of motor passenger service, not on fixed rails, over fixed or
regular routes.
('71 Code, § 4-3-1)
§ 36.46 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of operating motor
passenger buses within the corporate limits of the city, in the amount of $125
a year for the first motor passenger bus, and $50 a year for each additional
motor passenger bus. Said tax herein imposed shall be due and payable in
advance on May 1 of each year, and shall be paid to and collected by the City
Clerk.
('71 Code, § 4-3-2)
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
§ 36.50 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations
or privileges:
      (1)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a
purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
municipality at the following rates calculated on a monthly basis for each
purchaser:
         (a)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
.3416 cents per kilowatt-hour (.003416/kilowatt-hour);
         (b)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
.2240 cents per kilowatt-hour (.002240/kilowatt-hour);
         (c)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
.2016 cents per kilowatt-hour (.002016/kilowatt-hour);
         (d)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
.1960 cents per kilowatt-hour (.001960/kilowatt-hour);
         (e)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
.1904 cents kilowatt-hour (.001904/kilowatt-hour);
         (f)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; .1792 cents per kilowatt-hour (.001792/kilowatt-hour);
         (g)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; .1764 cents per kilowatt-hour (.001764/kilowatt-hour);
         (h)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; .1736 cents per kilowatt-hour (.001736/kilowatt-hour);
         (i)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; .1708 cents per kilowatt-hour (.001708/kilowatt-hour); and
         (j) For all electricity used-or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month: .1680 cents per kilowatt-hour (.001680/kilowatt-
hour).
      (2)   The tax rates set forth in the preceding table will be used at
least through December 31, 2008 are proportional to the rates enumerated in 65
ILCS § 5/8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act 90-56 1), and do not exceed the
revenue that could have been collected during 1997 using the rates enumerated
in 65 ILCS § 5/8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act 90-56 1).
   (B)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS § 5/8-1 1-2 the rates set forth in subsection (A)
above shall be effective:
      (1)   On August 1 1998 for residential customers; and
      (2)   On the earlier of:
         (a)   The last bill issued prior to December 31, 2000 or
         (b)   The date of the first bill issued pursuant to 220 ILCS § 5/16-
104 for nonresidential customers.
   (C)   The provisions of Subsection (B)(1) shall not be effective until
August 1, 1998.
(Ord. 3152, passed 4-21-98)
§ 36.51 EXCEPTIONS.
   None of the taxes authorized by this chapter may be imposed with respect to
any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the
business or privilege may not under the Constitution and statutes of the United
States be made the subject of taxation by this state or any political
subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing supplying, finishing, or selling or transmitting gas, water or
electricity or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this chapter for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the “Municipal Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act” authorized by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1; nor shall any
tax authorized by this chapter be imposed upon any person engaged in a business
or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same
rate upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the
municipality whether privately or municipally owned or operated or exercising
the same privilege within the municipality. Any account(s) of the City of
Kewanee shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by this ordinance(s).
(Ord. 3152, passed 4-21-98; Am. Ord. 3815, passed 11-23-15)
§ 36.52 ADDITIONAL TAXES.
   Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its
business.
(Ord. 3152, passed 4-21-98)
§ 36.53 COLLECTION.
   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the purchaser by
the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser
to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this chapter and any
such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt
owed to the municipality by such person delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such
tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering
electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount
equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the
expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing
returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the municipality upon request.
If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
municipality in the manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering
electricity who file returns pursuant to this division (C) shall, at the time
of filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of the tax collected
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 3152, passed 4-21-98)
§ 36.54 REPORTS TO MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the city for the preceding month stating:
      (1)   His name.
      (2)   His principal place of business.
      (3)   His gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the month upon
the basis of which the tax is imposed.
      (4)   Amount of tax.
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the City of Kewanee the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may if he so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable gross receipts.
(Ord. 3152, passed 4-21-98)
§ 36.55 IMPOSITION OF TAX ON NATURAL GAS.
   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 8-11-2 upon persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the municipality and not for resale, at a rate of three
percent of the gross receipts therefrom, effective January 1, 1992.
('71 Code, § 4-30-1) (Am. Ord. 3152, passed 4-21-98)
§ 36.56 COLLECTION OF NATURAL GAS TAX.
   The tax shall be collected by the company or companies engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the municipality and not for resale.
The collector of the tax shall deposit the tax with the City Treasurer in a
time frame similar to how it is collected, reasonable administrative time
allowances granted.
('71 Code, § 4-30-2) (Am. Ord. 3152, passed 4-21-98)
§ 36.57 ELECTRIC AND GAS UTILITIES NOTIFIED.
   The City Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the affected utility or
utilities a certified copy of this subchapter not later than ten days after its
effective date.
('71 Code, § 4-30-3) (Ord. 2758, passed 8-26-91; Am. Ord. 2765, passed 11-18-
91)
§ 36.58 CREDIT FOR OVER-PAYMENT.
   (A)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake
of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
(3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
   (B)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be commenced more than thee (3) years after the due date
of such amount.
(Ord. 3152, passed 4-21-98)
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
§ 36.70 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   The rate of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax imposed
under the provisions of sections 5-25 and 5-30 of the Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq., is hereby
changed to 6%.
   (B)   This section shall take effect for all gross charges billed by
telecommunications retailers on and after the first day of January 2008.
(Ord. 3362, passed 9-9-02; Am. Ord. 3550, passed 8-13-07)
NON-HOME RULE RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX (SALES
TAXES)
§ 36.80 IMPOSITION OF TAXES.
   (A)   Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailer’s Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered
with an agency of this state's government, at retail in this municipality at
the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this section is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-
1.3.
   (B)   Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making
sales of service, of the selling price of all tangible personal property
transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in division (A), above. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.4.
   (C)   Department of Revenue to administer both taxes. The taxes hereby
imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto,
shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of
Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Limitation on the use of proceeds. The city shall only expend the
proceeds generated from any tax imposed by virtue of this section on: (a)
expenditures related to "municipal roads and streets, sidewalks, storm water
drainage and retention facilities;" (b) efforts to "reduce the levy for real
estate taxes or avoid an increase in the levy for real estate taxes that would
otherwise have been required" by the city ; or (c) any other or further
permitted uses under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1 as may now or hereafter be
authorized therein.
   (E)   Qualified exception of aviation fuel from both taxes. No provision of
this section shall be interpreted to impose any tax on aviation fuel, as
defined in § 3 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act (ILCS Ch 35, Act 120),
unless the proceeds of said tax are expended for airport-related purposes, as
that term is defined in § 6z-20.2 of the State Finance Act (ILCS Ch. 30, Act
105), and said expenditures are made in compliance with the certification
requirements for airport-related purposes under § 2-22 of the Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120).
(Ord. 3603, passed 4-27-09; Am. Ord. 4250, passed 9-8-25)
§ 36.81 APPLICABLE DATE.
   §
36.80 shall take effect on: (i) the first day of July next following the
adoption and filing of §
36.80 with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding April
1; or, (ii) the first day of January next following the adoption and filing of
§
36.80 with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
October 1.
(Ord. 3603, passed 4-27-09; Am. Ord. 4250, passed 9-8-25)
§ 36.82 FILING WITH ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   As required under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.3, the Clerk is hereby
directed to file a certified copy of Ordinance No. 4250 with the Illinois
Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2025.
(Ord. 3603, passed 4-27-09; Am. Ord. 4250, passed 9-8-25)
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE
OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.90 MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 4240, passed 6-9-25)
§ 36.91 MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in §
36.90, above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24).
(Ord. 4240, passed 6-9-25)
§ 36.92 ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 4240, passed 6-9-25)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return,
or who willfully violates any other provision of this subchapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $200 in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of
tax due. (See 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2)
(Ord. 3152, passed 4-21-98)
CHAPTER 37: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
   
37.01   Classification of expenditures
   
37.02   Unrestricted fund balance regulations
   
37.03   [Reserved]
   
37.04   Annual budget
   
37.05   Audits of accounts
   
37.06   Public Funds Investment Policy
Awarding of Public Works Contracts
   
37.20   Definitions
   
37.21   Considerations when selecting bidder
   
37.22   Exclusions to competitive bid requirements
Economic Development Incentives
   
37.30   Policy for economic development incentives
   
37.31   Goals for economic development incentives
   
37.32   Incentives
   
37.33   Evaluation of economic development incentive projects
   
37.34   Performance and monitoring standards
§ 37.01 CLASSIFICATION OF EXPENDITURES.
   The fees and salaries of the various officers of the city, and all other
items of corporate expenditure, shall be classified as contained in the
municipal budget as provided for annually, or with any amendments thereto.
('71 Code, § 1-26-1) (Am. Ord. 3641, passed 6-14-10)
§ 37.02 UNRESTRICTED FUND BALANCE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The City Council finds it to be necessary to amend regulations
regarding appropriate level of unrestricted reserves for certain funds of the
city. Suggested guidelines in the literature related to government finance,
from the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA), the National Advisory
Council on State and Local Budgeting Practice (NACSLBP), Governmental
Accounting Standards Board (GASB), and other sources, were originally reviewed.
Equally important review included past experience in spending and fund balances
for the city, since each municipality has a unique pattern of services,
revenues, and expenditures.
   (B)   The literature on the topic recommends a policy related to
unrestricted fund balance in any given fund should consider many factors,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Predictability of revenue sources and the volatility of
expenditures. Unpredictable fluctuations in revenues or operating expenses
tends to require larger unrestricted fund balance to deal with the high degree
of variability.
      (2)   Perceived exposure to significant one-time outlays such as
disasters, immediate capital needs, reduction in revenues due to change in
legislation or volatility of the political environment, or the chance to take
advantage of one-time opportunities.
      (3)   Potential drain upon the General Fund by availability of resources
in other funds of the city, along with existing fund balances in other funds
which may be dependent in some fashion on the General Fund for revenue.
      (4)   Liquidity of financial resources and timing of receipt of revenue.
      (5)   Commitments and assignments of existing portions of the
unrestricted balance in the General Fund.
      (6)   Ability to stabilize tax rates, to address temporary revenue
shortfalls, to maintain service levels, and in broad terms provide financial
stabilization.
   (C)   Fund operating ranges. All three funds listed below shall be operated
above a minimum unreserved fund balance range. In the event any of the
unreserved fund balances are less than the minimum balance indicated, the City
Council shall take actions in no less than three months from said event of
shortfall to either reduce fund expenditures, increase fund revenue, or some
combination thereof, to bring the unreserved fund balance back above the
minimum balance. Said time period to raise the balance back to the minimum
level shall be as practical as reasonably possible.
   (D)   Table of funds.
 
FUND         MINIMUM
General Fund 30% of the audited operating expenditures for the General Fund, as
             averaged over the prior three fiscal years.
Water Fund   25% of the audited operating expenditures for the Water Fund, as
             averaged over the prior three fiscal years.
Sewer Fund   25% of the audited operating expenditures for the Sewer Fund, as
             averaged over the prior three fiscal years.
(‘71 Code, § 1-34-1) (Ord. 1708, passed 11-22-71; Am. Ord. 3641, passed 6-14-
10; Am. Ord. 4064, passed 7-26-21)
§ 37.03 [RESERVED].
§ 37.04 ANNUAL BUDGET.
   (A)   Policy. It shall be the policy and purpose of the City Council that
they shall each year in the preparation of their budget for the fiscal year of
May 1 to April 30, prepare a budget wherein the expenditures or outlays set
forth in the budget shall not exceed the anticipated receipts or revenues of
the city for that fiscal year.
('71 Code, § 1-36-1)
   (B)   Expenditures by Council. It shall be the policy and purpose of the
City Council that the Mayor and all the Commissioners shall not exceed the
expenditures or outlays set forth in the budget adopted by the Council for any
given fiscal year.
('71 Code, § 1-36-2)
   (C)   It shall be the purpose and policy of the City Council that the
Council shall as part of the budgetary process each fiscal year, seek
suggestions information and input from the citizens of the city as to the
expenditures to be made by the City Council and as to the establishment of
priorities by the Council.
('71 Code, § 1-36-3)
(Ord. 2280, passed 4-26-82)
§ 37.05 AUDITS OF ACCOUNTS.
   Audits of all accounts of the city shall be conducted independently of the
City Manager, by a certified public accountant selected by the City Council
annually.
('71 Code, § 1-37-6) (Ord. 2599, passed 11-24-86)
§ 37.06 PUBLIC FUNDS INVESTMENT POLICY.
   (A)   The City Council has previously adopted an investment policy in
Resolution 4100.
   (B)   City of Kewanee Public Funds Investment Policy. It is always prudent
for any public unit to have an Investment Policy in place for the purpose of
safeguarding funds, equitably distributing the investments and maximizing
income of the governmental unit. The following policy is hereby promulgated for
use by the city.
   (C)   Scope of policy. This investment policy applies to the investment
activities of all funds under the jurisdiction of the city. This investment
policy shall also apply to any new funds or temporary funds placed under the
jurisdiction of the city. The Illinois State Statutes shall take precedence
except where this policy is more restrictive wherein this policy shall take
precedence.
   (D)   Objectives. The purpose of this investment policy is to establish cash
management and investment guidelines for the stewardship of public funds under
the jurisdiction of the city. The specific objectives of this policy shall be
as follows:
      (1)   Safety. The security of moneys, whether on hand or invested, shall
be the primary concern of the Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk in
selecting depositories or investments.
      (2)   Liquidity. The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently
liquid to meet all operating requirements, which might be reasonably
anticipated.
      (3)   Return. The Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk shall seek to
attain a market average or better rate of return throughout budgetary and
economic cycles, taking into account risk, constraints, cash flow, and legal
restriction on investment.
      (4)   Local considerations. The Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk
shall have preference to depositories located within the city provided that the
afore-described objectives are met, and such investments would be in compliance
with all other conditions and limitations of this investment policy; however,
the Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk may approve qualified
depositories regardless of location with the concurrence of the City Manager.
   (E)   Guidelines. To assist in attaining the stated objectives, the
following guidelines shall be observed:
      (1)   Investments shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to insure
preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. To avoid unreasonable risks
diversification of investments is required.
      (2)   The portfolio should remain sufficiently liquid to meet operating
requirements, which may be reasonably anticipated. Cash flows shall be reviewed
quarterly.
      (3)   To maximize earnings, all funds shall be deposited/invested within
two working days at prevailing rates or better.
      (4)   All investments shall be selected on the basis of competitive
proposals.
   (F)   Diversification. To avoid unreasonable risks diversification of the
investment portfolio shall be consistent with the objectives in the investment
policy. Commercial paper shall not exceed 10% of the investment portfolio.
   (G)   Responsibility. All investment of funds under the control of the
Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk is the direct responsibility of the
Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk. The Director of Accounts & Finance/
City Clerk shall be responsible for all transactions and shall establish a
system of controls for all authorized subordinates who are directly involved in
the assistance of such investment activities.
   (H)   Performance measures (bench mark). The use of U.S. Treasury bills,
average Fed Fund rate. IPTIP, or other stable markets can be used to determine
whether market yields are being achieved.
   (I)   Periodic review. The Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk should
establish annual independent review for internal control, which assures
compliance within the investment policy. This will be accomplished with
external auditors.
   (J)   Reporting. All investment transactions shall be recorded by the
Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk or their staff. A report will be
generated, at least weekly, listing all active investments, location of
investments, maturity of investments, interest rate and other pertinent
information deemed necessary. This report will be submitted monthly to the City
Manager and City Council.
   (K)   Investment vehicles. The city shall limit its investments to those
allowed by law as set out in ILCS Chapter 30, Act 235, § 2. A summary of
allowable securities follows:
      (1)   Notes, bonds, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills, or
other securities, which are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the
United States of America.
      (2)   Bonds, notes, debentures, or other similar obligations of the
United States of America or its agencies.
      (3)   Interest bearing accounts, certificates of deposit or interest
bearing time deposits or any other investment constituting direct obligations
of any bank as defined by the Illinois Banking Act.
      (4)   Short-term obligations (corporate paper) of corporations organized
in the United States with assets exceeding $500,000 if such obligations are
rated at the time of purchase within the three highest classifications
established by at least two standard rating services and which mature not later
than 180 days from the date of purchase, and such purchases do not exceed 10%
of the corporation's outstanding obligations or in money market mutual funds
registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940.
   (L)   Financial institutions. The city shall have the sole responsibility to
select which financial (IPTIP, banks, savings and loan, credit unions and other
non-banks) institutions shall be depositories for the city. Any financial
institution, upon meeting the requirements of the Illinois Compiled Statutes
and of this policy, may request to become a depository for the city. The city
will take into consideration security, size, location, financial condition,
service, fees, competitiveness, and the community relations involvement of the
financial institution when choosing depositories.
   (M)   Collateralization.
      (1)   At all times in order to meet the objective of safety of capital,
the Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk shall require deposits in excess
of the federally insured amount to be collateralized to the extent of 110% and
evidenced by an approved written agreement.
      (2)   Eligible collateral instruments and collateral rates (market value
divided by deposit) are as follows:
         (a)   Negotiable obligations of the United States Government   = 110%
         (b)   Negotiable obligations of any agency or instrumentality of the
United States Government backed by the full faith and credit of the United
States Government:   = 110%
         (c)   Negotiable obligations of the State of Illinois which are rated
A or better by Moodys or Standard and Poors, or insured;   = 110%
         (d)   Negotiable obligations of the city which are rated A or better
by Moodys or Standard and Poors, or insured.   = 110%
      (3)   Maturity of acceptable collateral shall not exceed 120 months.
      (4)   The ratio of fair market value of collateral to the amount of funds
secured shall be reviewed weekly and additional collateral shall be requested
when the ratio declines below the level required.
      (5)   Safekeeping of collateral.
         (a)   Third party safekeeping is required for all collateral. To
accomplish this the securities will be held at a safekeeping depository as
approved from time to time by the Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk.
         (b)   Safekeeping shall be documented by an approved written
agreement. Substitution, exchange or release of securities held in safekeeping
may be done upon two days prior written notice to the Director of Accounts &
Finance/City Clerk.
         (c)   When collateral is extended, the Director of Accounts & Finance/
City Clerk should receive a copy of the financial institutions board minutes,
indicating the Board of Directors' approval.
   (N)   Safekeeping of securities. Securities, unless held physically by the
Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk, require third party safekeeping. The
Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk shall have the sole responsibility
for selecting safekeeping agents. Safekeeping shall be documented by an
approved written agreement.
   (O)   Indemnification.
      (1)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment considering the probable safety of their
capital as well as the possible income to be derived.
      (2)   In maintaining its investment portfolio, the Director of Accounts &
Finance/City Clerk shall avoid any transaction that might impair public
confidence in the city.
      (3)   The above standards are established as standards for professional
responsibility and shall be applied in the context of managing the portfolio.
      (4)   Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk and their employees
acting in accordance with this investment policy and procedures as have been or
may be established, and exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal
liability for an individual security's credit risk or market changes.
   (P)   Security controls. Only the Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk
is authorized to establish financial accounts for the office or City Council.
At all times either the Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk, singly or
two, jointly, of two or more signatories as designated by the City Council
should be authorized to sign on financial accounts of the office of the
Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk. Authorized signatories are NOT
permitted to reconcile bank accounts at any time.
   (Q)   The Corrupt Practices Act. The Illinois Compiled Statue governs
ethics.
   (R)   Bonding. The Director of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk and all
employees shall be bonded for the benefit of the city for an amount determined
to be reasonable by the City Council. The surety shall be a corporate surety
company.
   (S)   Amendment. This policy may be reviewed from time to time and revised
upon approval of the City Council, with the advice and counsel of the Director
of Accounts & Finance/City Clerk and City Manager.
(Res. 4100, passed 2-14-00; Am. Ord. 3641, passed 6-14-10)
AWARDING OF PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
§ 37.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER. The term RESPONSIBLE BIDDER for public works contracts
means a bidder who meets all of the applicable criteria, and submits evidence
of such compliance:
   (1)   All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in Illinois;
   (2)   Evidence of compliance with:
      (a)   Federal employer tax identification number or social security
number (for individuals);
      (b)   Provisions of Section 2000(e) of Chapter 21, Title 42 of the United
States Code and Federal Executive Order No. 11246 as amended by Executive Order
No. 11375 (known as the Equal Opportunity Employer provisions).
   (3)   Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverages: general
liability, worker's compensation, completed operations, automobile, hazardous,
product liability and professional liability.
   (4)   Compliance with all provisions of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act,
including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and retirement for those
trades as covered in the "act".
   (5)   Submits to the city a statement of bidders qualifications containing
the information requested by said statement which is attached hereto and made a
part hereof.
   (6)   Participation in apprenticeship and training programs approved by and
registered with the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of
Apprenticeship and Training, or employment of a work staff with comparable
training and/or work experience to insure a qualified work force.
(Ord. 3178, passed 9-14-98; Am. Ord. 3552, passed 8-27-07)
§ 37.21 CONSIDERATIONS WHEN SELECTING BIDDER.
   In selecting the lowest responsible bidder, the city shall at least consider
the following factors:
   (A)   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract
or provide the service required.
   (B)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference.
   (C)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
   (D)   The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
   (E)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service.
   (F)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide service.
   (G)   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services for the use of the subject contract.
   (H)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject contract.
   (I)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
   (J)   Bidder's record of experience in constructing improvements of the size
and type required in the bid specifications.
   (K)   Lowest bids received.
   (L)   Bidder's record as the percentage of work sublet on previous
contracts, subcontractors selected for contract including the name, address and
number of employees for each subcontractor. Preference may be given to
subcontractors employing local employees.
(Ord. 3178, passed 9-14-98; Am. Ord. 3552, passed 8-27-07)
§ 37.22 EXCLUSIONS TO COMPETITIVE BID REQUIREMENTS.
   The City Council shall not be bound by the preceding requirements for the
acceptance of a lowest responsible bid in the following circumstances.
   (A)   Contracts for purchases or service which are estimated to be an amount
less than $100,000.
   (B)   When determined by a two-thirds majority of the City Council that an
emergency situation requires prompt action and the formal bidding process would
not be in the best interests of the city.
   (C)   In the event the public works project is funded through federal or
state agencies, in whole or in part, any requirement of said funding agency in
conflict with the provisions contained in this subchapter shall supersede the
provisions of this subchapter and shall apply to the bidding and awarding of
bid procedure.
(Ord. 3178, passed 9-14-98; Am. Ord. 3552, passed 8-27-07)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES
§ 37.30 POLICY FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.
   The city recognizes that it is necessary for the public purposes of
development, redevelopment, diversification of the economy and commerce, and
relief from conditions of unemployment and underemployment, to have a policy to
stimulate business and commercial activity in the community. In order to
implement these public purposes the city, under the authority of ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 8-1-2.5 hereby establishes an Economic Development Incentive program.
The city may agree to offer incentives to a developer, business or property
owner for a specific project at a given location.
(Ord. 3757, passed 3-10-14; Am. Ord. 3846, passed 9-12-16)
§ 37.31 GOALS FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.
   Shown below are the goals of the Economic Development Incentive program. No
project shall be eligible unless the project directly and materially serves one
or more of the goals of the program. However, compliance with one or more
program goals does not assure participation in the program, with the City
Council reserving all rights and discretion to provide incentives or
assistance.
   (A)   Encourage development or redevelopment that would not occur without
public efforts.
   (B)   Address blighted and economically obsolete areas.
   (C)   Create and retain jobs, income, and economic activity.
   (D)   Diversify and expand the tax base, which mitigates economic risk and
provides funding for services to the community.
   (E)   Facilitate infrastructure improvements for which no other funding
source is available.
   (F)   Reverse or slow the long-term trend of population loss in the
community.
   (G)   Revitalization of neighborhoods, downtown, and key commercial
corridors.
   (H)   Encourage private investment.
   (I)   Complete infrastructure improvements which support commercial,
industrial, and residential development and redevelopment.
   (J)   Reduce vacancy rates in existing buildings and develop underutilized
properties to their highest and best use.
   (K)   Provide a higher qualify of life for city residents, with better
services and resources.
(Ord. 3757, passed 3-10-14; Am. Ord. 3846, passed 9-12-16)
§ 37.32 INCENTIVES.
   An incentive is any inducement or assistance by the city offered to an
applicant to pursue a project that meets the goals and related criteria of this
section of the City Code, as determined by the City Council. Said incentives
shall be defined in detail in the city’s Incentive Guidelines, detailing the
assistance offered, purpose, authorization, eligibility criteria, eligible
uses, eligibility areas (if applicable), program description, funding sources,
application and approval procedures, reporting procedures, and other pertinent
information. All economic development incentive programs in existence as of the
effective date of this subchapter including: low interest loans with
possibility of incremental loan forgiveness for meeting periodic investment and
employment benchmarks, reimbursement agreements, tax abatements or exemptions,
and no cost, or reduced value, of land or buildings for sale or lease by the
city, remain in effect. Such incentive guidelines shall be adopted by
resolution of the City Council and updated through resolution to provide for
the addition or removal of incentive programs.
(Ord. 3757, passed 3-10-14; Am. Ord. 3846, passed 9-12-16)
§ 37.33 EVALUATION OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE PROJECTS.
   (A)   Comparison to Economic Development Incentive criteria. Each project
application shall be compared to the goals and criteria contained in this
section to ensure substantial compliance with said goals and criteria prior to
the approval of incentives and execution of award documents.
   (B)   Specific criteria.
      (1)   The project shall directly serve one or more of the goals stated in
§
37.31.
      (2)   The applicant requesting an incentive shall provide, at their sole
expense, sufficient documentation on the proposed project and agree to furnish
good faith estimates for information required for staff and the City Council to
evaluate the application, which may include projected job retention/creation,
projected assessed valuation, projected sales tax, historical and current
financial data and other information needed to evaluate the project.
      (3)   Where applicable, the applicant shall agree to annual monitoring of
the project progress by the city and shall provide the city information
reasonably related thereto as provided for in any incentive or award documents.
      (4)   Any incentive or award documents shall contain terms related to
reversion of some, or all, of prior incentive payments back to the city in the
event of breach of the agreement by the applicant.
      (5)   Projects shall be wholly within the corporate limits of the city.
      (6)   Illinois Prevailing Wage Act will apply where required by law.
      (7)   Projects shall be investments of new funds. Refinancing of existing
debt shall not be permitted as a part of the project.
      (8)   Value of incentives offered shall be as contained in the incentive
agreement or award documents.
(Ord. 3757, passed 3-10-14; Am. Ord. 3846, passed 9-12-16)
§ 37.34 PERFORMANCE AND MONITORING STANDARDS.
   Where applicable, any incentive agreement or award documents shall contain
performance and monitoring standards as determined to be required during the
evaluation process or as a part of the incentive program itself. Performance
standards shall be used to gauge the effectiveness of the Economic Development
Incentive Program and shall also be the basis for recovery of, or reversion of,
prior incentives in the event of failure to achieve the performance benchmarks
in any incentive agreements or award documents. Monitoring shall include
mandatory submission of data and documents by the investor to allow periodic
evaluation of the project as contained in any incentive agreements or award
documents.
(Ord. 3757, passed 3-10-14; Am. Ord. 3846, passed 9-12-16)
CHAPTER 38: EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
38.01   Equal employment opportunity clause
   
38.02   Physical examinations
   
38.03   Residence requirement for city employment
Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
Editors's note:
   The Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund which previously comprised §§ 38.15
through 38.18 of this code has been superseded by the Administrative Code of
the City of Kewanee on file with the City
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 38.01 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY CLAUSE.
   (A)   Provisions established.
      (1)   All contracts and agreements hereafter entered into by or on behalf
of the city for the procurement of anything for service or value, such as any
real or personal property, equipment, merchandise, goods, materials, labor or
service for or by the city, shall contain as a material term of all such
agreements and contracts, the following provisions:
      (2)   Equal employment opportunity. In the event of the contractor's
noncompliance with any provision of this Equal Employment Opportunity Clause,
the Illinois Fair Employment Practices Act or the Fair Employment Practices
Commission's Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts, the contractor may be
declared nonresponsible and therefore ineligible for future contracts or
subcontracts with the State of Illinois or any of its political subdivisions or
municipal corporations, and the contract may be cancelled or avoided in whole
or in part, and such other sanctions or penalties may be imposed or remedies
involved as provided by Statute or regulation. During the performance of this
contract, the contractor agrees as follows:
         (a)   It will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry;
and further that he will examine all job classifications to determine if
minority persons or woman are under utilized and will take appropriate
affirmative action to rectify any such under utilization.
         (b)   If it hires additional employees in order to perform this
contract, or any portion hereof, it will determine the availability (in
accordance with the Commission's Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts) of
minorities and women in the areas from which it may reasonably recruit and it
will hire for each job classification for which employees are hired in such a
way that minorities and women are not under utilized.
         (c)   In all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by
it or on its behalf, it will state that all applicant will be afforded equal
opportunity without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin or ancestry.
         (d)   It will send to each labor organization or representative of
workers with which it has or is bound by a collective bargaining or other
agreement or understanding, a notice advising such labor organization or
representative of the contractor's obligations under the Illinois Fair
Employment Practices Act and the Commission's Rules and Regulations for Public
Contracts. If any such labor organization or representative fails or refuses to
cooperate with the contractor in its efforts to comply with such Act and Rules
and Regulations, the contractor will promptly so notify the Illinois Fair
Employment Practices Commission and the contracting agency and will recruit
employees from other sources when necessary to fulfill its obligations
thereunder.
         (e)   It will submit reports as required by the Illinois Fair
Employment Practices Commission's Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts,
furnish all relevant information as may from time to time be requested by the
Commission or the contracting agency, and in all respects comply with the
Illinois Fair Employment Practices Act and the Commission's Rules and
Regulations for Public Contracts.
         (f)   It will permit access to all relevant books, records, accounts
and work sites by personnel of the contracting agency and the Illinois Fair
Employment Practices Commission for purposes of investigation to ascertain
compliance with the Illinois Fair Employment Practices Act and the Commission's
Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts.
         (g)   It will include verbatim or by reference the provisions of
division (A)(2)(a) through (g) of this section in every performance subcontract
as defined in section 2.10 (b) of the Commission's Rules and Regulations for
Public Contracts so that such provisions will be binding upon every such
subcontractor; and that it will also so include the provisions of division (A)
(2)(a),(e)(f) and (g) of this section in every supply subcontract as defined in
section 2.10(a) of the Commission's Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts
so that such provisions will be binding upon every such subcontractor. In the
same manner as with other provisions of this contract, the contractor will be
liable for compliance with applicable provisions of this clause by all its
subcontractors; and further it will promptly notify the contracting agency and
the Illinois Fair Employment Practices Commission in the event any
subcontractor fails or refuses to comply therewith. In addition, no contractor
will utilize any subcontractor declared by the Commission to be nonresponsible
and therefore ineligible for contracts or subcontracts with the state or any of
its political subdivisions or municipal corporations.
   (B)   Purchase orders subject to provisions. All purchase orders, whether
such purchases are made by a Commissioner or by contract entered into by the
City Council, shall be subject to the provisions of this section and all such
purchases and contracts shall either contain the provisions provided for in
division (A)(1)(a) of this section or shall be subject to the said provisions
by reference to this section.
('71 Code, § 1-35-1) (Ord. 1852, passed 12-23-74)
§ 38.02 PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS.
   (A)   Civil service positions. All applicants for civil service positions in
the city shall submit a record of physical examination certified by a licensed
physician.
(Ord. 1899, passed 11-14-75)
   (B)   Temporary employees. Every temporary employee before reporting for
duty must furnish the city, at his own expense, a report of his physical
condition from a duly licensed physician. Such physical examination shall
include a general examination together with x-rays of the chest and lumbo-
sacral area and electrocardiogram.
(Ord. 2006, passed 1-9-78)
('71 Code, § 1-7-7)
§ 38.03 RESIDENCE REQUIREMENT FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   All future employees of the city shall be residents of the city or
become residents of the city within the time period as provided in the
following subsections. All city employees shall remain residents of the city
during the course of their employment.
   (B)   Any present employee of the city who is not a resident of the city
need not become a resident if the employee remains at his or her present
residence. However, if a nonresident present employee changes his or her
residence, he or she shall be required to establish a new residence within the
city.
   (C)   Any future employee of the city who is not a resident of the city
shall become a resident within six months from the date of his or her
employment.
   (D)   The residency requirements of this section shall not apply to police
officers and firefighters. Residency requirements for police officers and
firefighters shall be those set forth in the rules and regulations of the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners of the city. If there is no residency
requirement in said rules and regulations, then the residency requirements of
this section shall also apply to police officers and firefighters.
('71 Code, § 1-35-4) (Ord. 2731, passed 6-11-90)
Editor's note:
   § 38.04, previously titled "Health Insurance, Eligibility," has been
superseded by the Administrative Code of the City of Kewanee on file with the
City Clerk.
   The subchapter entitled "The Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund," which
previously appeared in this Code has been superseded by the Administrative Code
of the City of Kewanee on file with the City Clerk.
CHAPTER 39: [RESERVED.]
Editor’s note:
   This chapter has been superceded by The Simplified Telecommunications Tax
Rate, §
36.70, adopted by Ordinance 3362, passed 9-9-02.
CHAPTER 40: CIVIL DEFENSE
Section
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
   
40.01   Establishment
   
40.02   Coordinator
   
40.03   Functions and duties
   
40.04   Service as mobile support team
   
40.05   Agreements with other political subdivisions
   
40.06   Emergency action
   
40.07   Compensation
   
40.08   Reimbursement by state for training expenses
   
40.09   Purchases and expenditures
   
40.10   Oath
   
40.11   Location of office
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
§ 40.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created the City Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
(ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting
from disaster caused by hostile action, or from natural or man-made disaster,
in accordance with “the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act (ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 3305) or subsequent act.”
(‘71 Code, § 2-6-1) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88;
Am. Ord. 4262, passed 12-8-25)
§ 40.02 COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The Coordinator of the City ESDA shall be appointed by the Mayor and
City Council, and shall serve until removed by the same.
   (B)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction
and control of the Mayor as provided by statute.
   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve
as the Coordinator, the Mayor or any person designated by the Mayor, shall be
and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this
chapter.
(‘71 Code, § 2-6-2) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88;
Am. Ord. 4262, passed 12-8-25)
§ 40.03 FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.
   The City ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the city as shall be
prescribed in and by the State ESDA Plan and Program prepared by the Governor,
and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor,
and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may
be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided in
“the Illinois Emergency management Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305) or subsequent
act.”
(‘71 Code, § 2-6-3) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88;
Am. Ord. 4262, passed 12-8-25)
§ 40.04 SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   (A)   All or any members of the City ESDA Organization may be designated as
members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State ESDA as
provided by law.
   (B)   The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the
Coordinator of the City ESDA Organization.
   (C)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a city employee or officer
while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall
receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities
incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid
officer or employee of the city, while so serving, shall receive from the state
reasonable compensation as provided by law.
(‘71 Code, § 2-6-4) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88;
Am. Ord. 4262, passed 12-8-25)
§ 40.05 AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Mayor, City Council and by the
State Director of ESDA.
('71 Code, § 2-6-5) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88)
§ 40.06 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual hostile action upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of a major disaster resulting from hostile action, or from man-made or natural
disaster, it shall be the duty of the City ESDA to cooperate fully with the
State ESDA and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as
provided by law.
(‘71 Code, § 2-6-6) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88;
Am. Ord. 4262, passed 12-8-25)
§ 40.07 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the city, if
called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held; members who are not such city employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the Mayor and
City Council.
(‘71 Code, § 2-6-7) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88;
Am. Ord. 4262, passed 12-8-25)
§ 40.08 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE FOR TRAINING EXPENSES.
   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA, compensation
for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the city in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of
ESDA as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident
to ESDA activities as provided by law.
(‘71 Code, § 2-6-8) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88;
Am. Ord. 4262, passed 12-8-25)
§ 40.09 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may, on recommendation of the City
Coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the
city in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the
explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public
health and safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims
in the case of such disaster, or from man-made or natural disaster.
   (B)   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the City Coordinator
of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the city, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view
of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law pertaining to city contracts or obligations, as
authorized by “the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act (ILCS Ch. 20, Act
3305) or subsequent act,” provided that if the Mayor and City Council meet at
such time, the Coordinator shall act subject to the directions and restrictions
imposed by that body.
(‘71 Code, § 2-6-9) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88;
Am. Ord. 4262, passed 12-8-25)
§ 40.10 OATH.
   Every person appointed to service in any capacity in the City ESDA
Organization shall, before entering upon their duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
      “I                 , a member of the City ESDA do solemnly swear (or
affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public
and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic, that I take this
obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion, and
that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to
enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor
have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Kewanee ESDA
Organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence.”
(‘71 Code, § 2-6-10) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88;
Am. Ord. 4262, passed 12-8-25)
§ 40.11 LOCATION OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a city building or elsewhere,
as may be provided for by the Mayor and City Council for the City ESDA as its
office.
('71 Code, § 2-6-11) (Ord. 1907, passed 2-33-76; Am. Ord. 2684, passed 9-26-88)
CHAPTER 41: AGGREGATION OF ELECTRIC LOAD
Section
   
41.01   Definitions
   
41.02   Aggregation of electrical load
   
41.03   Adoption and amendment of plan of governance and operation
   
41.04   Solicitation and acceptance of proposals
§ 41.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Illinois Power Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3855, §§ 1-1 et seq.,
as amended from time to time.
   AGGREGATION PROGRAM. A program for the aggregation of residential and small
commercial retail electrical loads in accordance with the Act.
   PLAN OF OPERATION AND GOVERNANCE. The plan of operation and governance for
the Aggregation Program as adopted pursuant to this chapter as such plan is
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 3709, passed 6-25-12)
§ 41.02 AGGREGATION OF ELECTRICAL LOAD.
   (A)   The City Council may operate an Aggregation Program in the manner
provided by the Act.
   (B)   The Aggregation Program shall be operated pursuant to an opt-out
procedure in accordance with the Act.
(Ord. 3709, passed 6-25-12)
§ 41.03 ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF PLAN OF GOVERNANCE AND OPERATION.
   The Aggregation Program shall be operated in accordance with the plan of
operation and governance. The City Council may from time to time amend the plan
of operation and governance by resolution approving such amendment.
(Ord. 3709, passed 6-25-12)
§ 41.04 SOLICITATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF PROPOSALS.
   The city shall solicit and accept and/or reject proposals for the supply of
electricity in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Act and in
accordance with the plan of operation and governance.
(Ord. 3709, passed 6-25-12)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
   
50.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
   
51.   SEWERS
   
52.   WATERWORKS SYSTEM
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section
   
50.01   Intent
   
50.02   Purpose
   
50.03   Definitions
   
50.04   Residential refuse and garbage pickup
   
50.05   Required residential recycling
   
50.06   Residential yard waste pickup
   
50.07   Residential bulk brush pickup and Christmas trees
   
50.08   Special events
   
50.09   Rates and rules for solid waste pickup
   
50.10   Solid waste transfer station
   
50.11   Billing and payments
   
50.12   Fund accounting
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Awarding of public works contracts, see §§
37.20 -
37.22
§ 50.01 INTENT.
   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-19-1 et seq., the City of Kewanee,
Henry County, Illinois can manage solid waste or enter into contracts for the
management of solid waste. This chapter will set out rates, rules, regulations,
and penalties pertaining to the management of solid waste.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93)
§ 50.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that all water service customers of
Kewanee will receive a good, safe, and sanitary method of removing refuse,
recyclables, and yard waste from their home, as further delineated herein. Also
addressed in this chapter is the operation of the city's Solid Waste Transfer
Station. The transfer station rates are set for solid waste that is not
municipal residential solid waste from Kewanee.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 3347, passed 6-24-02)
§ 50.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BULK BRUSH. Tree limbs, large shrubbery, and similar landscape waste that
cannot be conveniently placed in the yard waste bags.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. A single family dwelling, duplex, triplex, up to
and including a four-unit apartment building, and boarding houses.
   SOLID WASTE. Refuse, garbage, yard waste, bulk brush, and recyclable
material.
   YARD WASTE. Grass clippings, leaves, small twigs, and garden waste.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93)
§ 50.04 RESIDENTIAL REFUSE AND GARBAGE PICKUP.
   (A)   Collection of refuse and garbage shall be performed once each week at
each residential dwelling unit in the city that is being provided water service
from the city, and outside the city limits as deemed by staff to be a
reasonable extension of existing collection routes. This collection shall not
start before 6:00 a.m. Weeks containing holidays and unforeseen emergencies may
require alteration of the schedule. Collection shall be on the same day of the
week for each established collection district, except for emergencies and
holidays. The city shall give notice to the public of any changes to the pickup
schedule. Carts and recycling shall be placed out for collection no sooner than
noon of the day prior to scheduled collection. Carts shall be rolled back to
private property as soon as possible after collection, and no later than noon
of the day following collection. Carts placed out for collection prior to this
time or not rolled back, shall be considered littering and subject to penalty
for same.
   (B)   Provision and use of standardized carts. The city will provide, free
of charge, one standardized 95-gallon refuse cart for use by residential
customers. Carts will be embossed with a unique serial number and RFID tag
which will be recorded in a city database for each household. Every residential
customer receiving refuse service from the city shall be required to use the
city-provided standardized carts. The cart weight must not exceed 150 pounds.
   (C)   Out-of-cart set outs. Residents are required to place all household
refuse inside the cart except as follows: residents will be allowed to set out
two additional 32-gallon bags, free of charge, on the first scheduled
collection after Christmas.
   (D)   Second cart for residential customers. Large households may require an
additional cart. Additional carts will be distributed and collection charged at
the same rate as the initial cart (two times base rate). No more than one
request per year for an additional cart.
   (E)   Second cart return policy. Residents who have two carts may opt to
switch back to one cart at any time, thereby returning their monthly rate to
the original one-cart rate. Residents must notify the City Utility Billing
Clerk of their desire to return their second cart at least seven days in
advance. The city will schedule to pick up the cart and confirm the cart is in
good working condition. The customer will be charged a cart return fee of $15
plus any cost of repairing the cart if damaged, not to exceed the replacement
cost of the cart.
   (F)   Theft/vandalism of carts. Carts that are stolen or vandalized will be
replaced or repaired free of charge by the city. Households that report more
than two thefts or vandalized carts over a one-year period may be required to
pay for the cost of repair, not to exceed replacement cost, prior to receiving
a replacement cart.
   (G)   Cart care and use. All refuse shall be placed in bags prior to deposit
in the carts. Lids on carts should be kept closed at all times to prevent
windblown litter, access to animals, and pooling of rainwater inside the cart.
Carts shall not be filled in excess of 150 pounds. Dirt, rocks, and concrete
shall not be placed in the carts. Hot coals/embers and household hazardous
waste (chemicals, motor oil, paint, and the like) should not be placed in the
carts. Dimensional lumber and large household items shall not be physically
forced into the cart, but first must be dismantled or cut down to a size and
shape that fits easily in the cart with the lid closed. Residents who place
these materials in carts in such a manner that damage is caused to the cart or
to the collection vehicle, or otherwise use the carts for other purposes that
result in damage to the cart, shall be liable for the replacement cost of the
cart and/or repairs to the collection vehicle, as well as a $15 new cart
delivery fee.
   (H)   Cart storage. Carts may be stored in the garage, carport, shed, or
under cover of the household. Carts may also be stored outdoors to the side or
rear of the household, but may not be stored in the front yard unless they are
not visible from the street.
   (I)   Cart set out placement. Carts shall always be set at the curb with the
lids closed and with no material on top of the lids. Carts shall be placed
within three feet of the curb. The most common placement is at the end of the
driveway near the street. Carts shall not be placed within four feet of trees,
mailboxes, vehicles, power poles, or other curbside impediments to either side
of the cart (including another cart). Carts shall not be blocked by parked
cars, as the automated collection vehicle needs room to maneuver the automated
arm to collect the cart without risk to personal property. Carts that are
placed too close to cars or impediments may result in the trash not being
collected. Carts should be placed with the lid opening facing the street (the
handle should face away from the street).
   (J)   Tampering with carts. Carts are the sole property of the city. It
shall be unlawful for any person to deface a city-provided cart in any way, to
cause damage to a cart by either intent or negligence, or to remove a cart,
with the intent of theft, from the residence or residential customer to which
it was provided by the city. No unauthorized person shall open, pilfer,
disturb, or remove a cart that has been set out for collection or otherwise
scatter or disperse the contents thereof. No person shall remove or leave open
the cart lid except for the purpose of depositing refuse therein or for the
cleaning thereof.
   (K)   Large item collection. Residential refuse customers may purchase a tag
from the City Clerk’s office and schedule an appointment for collection on a
Monday, excluding observed Holidays, for the removal of large items or white
goods (e.g., kitchen appliances, washers, dryers). Large items may only consist
of materials that may be accepted at the transfer station (e.g., chairs,
couches, and televisions). The following conditions must be adhered to:
      (1)   A tag must first be purchased from the City Clerk’s office for $10,
or the resident’s free transfer station dump coupon may be surrendered for two
large item pick ups, and the collection must be scheduled the week prior to
Monday upon which collection is desired;
      (2)   All items must be placed near the curb or street surface, but not
in a manner to interfere with moving traffic or to create a visibility hazard;
      (3)   Each item to be collected must have an appropriate tag and can
weigh no more than 500 pounds;
      (4)   White goods (e.g. refrigerators, freezers, dehumidifiers) may not
contain any Freon or other regulated gases when placed for collection;
      (5)   Any large item that has a door must be modified so the door may of
shut and become latched by either removing or securing shut before placement at
curb;
      (6)   Carpet will also be collected as long as it is cut into lengths no
greater than 5 ft., rolled and secured (tied).
   (L)   No scavenging of refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to scavenge or in any way disturb, rummage through, overturn, or
scatter refuse, garbage, solid waste, or recyclable waste material that has
been placed by users for collection by the city. Violations of this section are
subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (M)   Free dump coupon.
      (1)   On an annual basis, the city shall issue to all water accounts one
free dump coupon, to be used exclusively at the city’s solid waste transfer
station to deposit a volume of rubbish equal to one pickup truck-sized load,
with a maximum of 1,500 pounds net weight.
         (a)   The free dump coupon shall be presented to the transfer station
operator and surrendered at the time of use.
         (b)   The weigh ticket resulting from use of the free dump coupon
shall be signed by, along with the printed name of, the person depositing the
rubbish.
         (c)   The signature shall be accompanied by a statement from the
person depositing the rubbish that the rubbish was generated at the address
printed on the free dump coupon.
      (2)   The free dump coupon must be used within 12 months of the date it
is issued.
         (a)   Upon expiration of the 12-month period from the date of
issuance, the free dump coupon shall be null and void.
         (b)   Free dump coupon use shall be limited to one per water account
annually.
      (3)   Falsification, copying, reproduction or tampering with a free dump
coupon with the intent to submit such falsified, copied, reproduced or tampered
item for service is unlawful.
      (4)    Anyone, whether user of the coupon, recipient of the coupon, or
both, found to be using the coupon in a manner inconsistent with the provisions
contained herein, shall forfeit all future rights to receive and/or use the
coupon, and shall further lose all rights to deposit rubbish at the solid waste
transfer station.
      (5)   All rights to deposit rubbish at the solid waste transfer station
are subject to administrative review and possible relief by the City Manager,
or his or her designee.
      (6)   In addition to loss of rights and privileges regarding the use of
the free dump coupon and the solid waste transfer station, violations of this
section are subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 3117, passed 8-11-97; Am. Ord. 3262,
passed 7-10-00; Am. Ord. 3338, passed 3-11-02; Am. Ord. 3347, passed 6-24-02;
Am. Ord. 3509, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 3518, passed 10-10-06; Am. Ord. 3600,
passed 3-23-09; Am. Ord. 3958, passed 4-22-19)
§ 50.05 REQUIRED RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING.
   (A)   Commencing on a date to be specified, each residential dwelling unit
shall cooperate in the recycling of refuse. All recyclable material shall be
separated from other garbage and refuse and grouped together and placed for
collection. Recyclable materials will be collected at each and every
residential dwelling unit in the city that is being provided water service.
   (B)   Collection shall be performed once each week in which there is not a
city holiday, shall not start before 6:00 a.m., and will be collected on the
same day as refuse throughout the city. Unforeseen emergencies may require
alteration of the schedule.
   (C)   All recyclable materials shall be collected at the curb, also referred
to as the terrace, and near the street in front of the residential unit.
Collection will not be made in alleys.
   (D)   Recyclable refuse shall consist of and be contained as follows:
      (1)   In a transparent blue or clear plastic bag #1:
 
Recyclable Category Allowed Material    Prohibited Material Material
                                                            Preparation
                                        Light bulbs; Pyrex
                    Glass containers,   glass; crystal or
                    clear, brown, green mirrors; coffee     Rinse well and
Glass               or blue; juice      mugs, plates or     remove lids. Labels
                    bottles; beer, wine other ceramics;     may remain. No
                    or liquor bottles;  drinking or canning broken glass.
                    food jars           glassware; window
                                        glass
                    Aluminum, steel and Needles or other    Rinse well and bend
                    tin cans of all     sharps or hazardous metal lids if sharp
Cans and Metals     types; aluminum     material            edges are exposed.
                    foil and aluminum   containers.         Labels may remain.
                    pie pans
                    #1, #2, #3, #4, #5, Plastic bags or
                    #7 plastic          plastic wrap;
                    containers          Styrofoam; oil,     Rinse well. Remove
Plastics            including most      chemical or other   caps. Flatten after
                    milk, juice and     hazardous material  rinsing.
                    other beverage      containers; Melmac-
                    containers.         type plastic;
                                        plastic tableware.
 
      (2)   Transparent blue or clear plastic bag #2:
 
Recyclable Category Allowed Material   Prohibited Material Material Preparation
Newsprint           Newspapers and     Paper towels and     
                    inserts.           napkins.
                    Magazines;
                    catalogs; phone                        Keep paper dry.
White Paper and     books; junk mail;  Construction paper  Remove paper clips,
other Office        office paper;      or bright colored   binder clips and
Products            envelopes; copy    paper; photographs. other non-paper
                    paper and mixed                        items.
                    paper.
                    Cereal and tissue
                    boxes; shoe boxes; Wax covered
                    beer and soda      chipboard including Keep dry and
Chipboard           boxes; paper egg   milk cartons and    flatten.
                    cartons; toilet    beverage boxes.
                    paper and paper
                    towel tube cores.
 
      (3)   Cardboard. Corrugated cardboard, excluding wax covered boxes, shall
be collected as a recyclable, whether placed in a transparent blue plastic bag
or flattened and secured in the flattened position with string, paper tape or
secured inside a larger corrugated cardboard box. Maximum size of bundle or box
is three feet by three feet by one foot.
      (4)   Acknowledging that the market for recyclables is subject to change,
the City Manager is authorized to include additional items for recyclable
collection in the event that the firm accepting the recyclables agree to accept
the additional items. The City Manager is also authorized to delete items from
recyclable collection in the event the firm accepting the recyclables no longer
will take the deleted items. The authority to add or delete items is
conditioned upon there being no cost increase to the city in relation to adding
or deleting recyclables.
   (E)   Nonrecyclable materials.
      (1)   Nonrecyclable garbage and refuse. All other garbage and refuse, not
specifically mentioned as a recyclable item, shall not be placed in a container
or bagged with recyclable items. If nonrecyclable materials are placed in the
recycling bags the bags will not be picked up and it will be considered a
violation of this chapter.
   (F)   Ownership of recyclable waste material.
      (1)   After recyclable waste material has been placed in a designated
container for such purpose at a designated recycling collection location for
collection by the city or its authorized agent, the recyclable waste material
shall become the property of the city or its authorized agent.
      (2)   During the 24 hour period commencing at 6:00 p.m. on any day
preceding a day designated for collection of recyclable waste material, no
person, other than the city's authorized agent, shall remove recyclable waste
material from a designated container which has been placed at a designated
recycling collection location. Each collection in violation of this section
from each separate designated recycling collection location during that period
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter.
      (3)   Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of an individual
person, organization, or other entity to donate, sell, or otherwise dispose of
recyclable waste material, if such disposal does not violate any applicable
statute, regulation, or ordinance.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 2961, passed 2-27-95; Am. Ord. 2971,
passed 5-8-95; Am. Ord. 3667, passed 1-10-11; Am. Ord. 3708, passed 6-11-12;
Am. Ord. 3727, passed 2-25-13; Am. Ord. 3812, passed 11-9-15)
§ 50.06 RESIDENTIAL YARD WASTE PICKUP.
   (A)   This is an optional service provided to city residents.
   (B)   Collection shall be performed once each week in which there is not a
city holiday, shall not start before 6:00 a.m., and will be collected on the
same day throughout the city. Unforeseen emergencies may require alteration of
the schedule.
   (C)   Yard waste collection will be available from March 15 through the
first Monday of December.
   (D)   Operation of the optional yard waste program.
      (1)   Only paper yard waste bags supplied by the user shall be used.
These user-supplied paper bags must be biodegradable because they will be mixed
with yard waste material to form mulch. Yard waste bags shall have a maximum
capacity equivalent to 30 gallons of liquid, shall be biodegradable, shall be
two-ply Kraft paper, shall be self-standing, shall be assembled with water-
resistant adhesive, and shall be purposely constructed to carry yard waste. The
maximum weight of a full bag shall not exceed 50 pounds.
      (2)   The city shall collect only those paper yard waste bags that have
affixed to them, in a prominently visible location, either an excess tag sold
by the city as specified in §
50.09(D), or a tag or sticker sold specifically by the city to be used on paper
yard waste bags, the cost of the specific tag or sticker to be equal to the
excess tag fee in §
50.09(D).
      (3)   Yard waste bags will be placed at the curb side and must be in a
bag approved by the city and sold by the city or an authorized sales point. No
collections shall be made from alleys.
      (4)   No material such as glass, cans, plastic, and garbage shall be
placed in the yard waste bags. Yard waste bags will not be picked up if they
are not constructed in compliance with the provisions of this division, or if
they contain any material other than yard waste. Failure to comply with this
provision will be considered a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 3282, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 3599,
passed 2-9-09) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 RESIDENTIAL BULK BRUSH PICKUP AND CHRISTMAS TREES.
   (A)   This is an optional service provided to city residents by the city.
   (B)   Collection shall be performed once each week in which there is not a
city holiday, shall not start before 6:00 a.m., and will be collected on the
same day throughout the city. Unforeseen emergencies may require alteration of
the schedule.
   (C)   Bulk brush collection will be available from March 15 through November
15.
   (D)   Operation of the optional bulk brush program.
      (1)   Residents wanting bulk brush picked up must first obtain a bulk
brush sticker from the city office at a charge of $10 each for volumes of two
cubic yards, or a small bulk brush sticker at a charge of $5 for volumes of
less than two cubic yards. This sticker shall be attached to the bundle of bulk
brush in a conspicuous location for easy identification by city crews.
Residents desiring such service must contact the Public Works offices by no
later than the week prior to the desired collection, and they will then be
placed on the first available collection schedule of either the Tuesday or
Thursday of the ensuing weeks. There will be no refunds for bulk brush tags.
      (2)   No bulk brush shall be collected by city crews unless an
appropriate bulk brush sticker has been purchased and properly affixed to the
brush pile.
      (3)   Bulk brush will be placed at the curb side and must display a bulk
brush sticker. Bulk brush will not be picked up if it does not have a proper
sticker. Bulk brush will not be picked up if the bundle contains any material
other than bulk brush. No collection shall be made from alleys.
      (4)   Residents should call the Public Works Department, Street Division
at 852-2583 to notify the city that they require a bulk brush pick up. The city
will schedule the bulk brush pick up on the next available and scheduled bulk
brush collection day.
   (E)   Christmas trees will be picked up at no charge. Christmas trees will
be picked up beginning on the first refuse collection day of each year.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 3167, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 3636,
passed 5-24-10; Am. Ord. 3958, passed 4-22-19)
§ 50.08 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   With the exception of the annual “hog days,” conducted during the
Labor Day weekend, all special events requiring refuse pickup will be
individually negotiated between the event organizer and the city.
   (B)   For “hog days,” the city will pickup trash bags taped to utility poles
along the parade route within 24 hours after the end of the parade and will
provide a suitable container to be used by the pork bar-b-q pits for refuse
disposal. The City Manager may negotiate with the organizers of the “hog days”
for the pickup and disposal of all other refuse.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93)
§ 50.09 RATES AND RULES FOR SOLID WASTE PICKUP.
   (A)   As specified in this chapter for the management of residential solid
waste, to include refuse, curbside recycling, yard waste, and bulk brush, there
is established a service charge of $16.84 per month. This rate shall commence
and be effective for utility bills due on, or about, January 20, 2023, and
remain in effect until amended as follows:
 
Commencing with bills payable on, or Commencing with bills payable on, or about
about January 20, 2024               January 20, 2025
$18.34 per month                     $19.84 per month
 
   (B)   All users of residential dwelling unit water service within the city
shall be required to pay the service charge whether or not they use this solid
waste pick up service.
   (C)   The above service charge for apartment complexes of two to four units,
duplexes, triplexes, and quadplexes shall be assessed for each unit of the
complex. Boarding houses shall be assessed three times the above service
charge.
   (D)   Excess tags. Excess tags sold to authorize the collection of landscape
waste bags will be $1.00 per excess tag when sold to individual users. To
encourage retail vendors to also sell such tags, thereby increasing ease of use
of the program, the cost to retail vendors re-selling the tags to users is
$0.95 per excess tag, sold only in lots with a minimum of 250 tags per lot.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not receiving solid waste
pick up service to place any solid waste with the solid waste of a resident who
is receiving such service.
   (F)   The City Clerk will render solid waste pick up bills for service and
for all rates and charges in connection with this chapter and to collect all
money due per this chapter.
   (G)   The City Manager shall have the authority to designate additional
collection agents which shall be financial institutions located within the city
for the purpose of collecting any rates and charges for the services provided
by this chapter. Unless specified otherwise in this chapter, no sum shall be
paid to any such collection agent designated by the City Manager for the
services rendered in collecting the rates and charges of this chapter.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 2971, passed 5-8-95; Am. Ord. 3051, passed
4-22-96; Am. Ord. 3409, passed 7-28-03; Am. Ord. 3505, passed 4-24-06; Am. Ord.
3599, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. 3702, passed 5-14-12; Am. Ord. 3886, passed 7-24-
17; Am. Ord. 3958, passed 4-22-19; Am. Ord. 4111, passed 10-24-22) Penalty, see
§
50.99
§ 50.10 SOLID WASTE TRANSFER STATION.
   (A)   The operator of the transfer station may accept payment for the
delivery of solid waste or any other items that will be processed through the
transfer station. For all material delivered to the transfer station the
operator will either accept payment for the items delivered or accept items
without payment because the firm or person has been placed on a monthly payment
schedule as authorized by this chapter. In either case the transfer station
operator will give the delivery person a copy of a form documenting the
delivery to the transfer station with the original of the document forwarded to
the City Clerk for billing or filing. In the case of a cash payment the form
will be annotated as being paid along with the date of payment. At the end of
each day the transfer station operator will deliver to the City Clerk all
monies collected along with all weight tickets and shall certify to the City
Clerk that all deliveries to the transfer station for that day are balanced out
against the total deliveries for the city plus cash and credit deliveries. The
operator will also deliver to the City Clerk a daily cash register tape showing
the total cash received in the register. The City Manager will specify the
form.
   (B)   Hauling equipment.
      (1)   Commercial haulers of solid waste using the city's Solid Waste
Transfer Station will use leak proof collection equipment, which shall be so
maintained that offensive orders, drippings, and scattering of refuse shall be
avoided.
      (2)   Every vehicle hauling or transporting any solid waste to or for
deposit in the Kewanee transfer station shall do so in either a vehicle that
completely encloses the debris or waste, or by a covered means of conveyance
thereof, such as with a tarp or other like material so that at no time shall
any of the solid waste so hauled be dropped, spilled, or allowed to fall or
blow onto a public way or on to the public property on and around the transfer
station. Any person refusing or failing to comply with this requirement shall
be in violation of this chapter and shall be assessed a fifty dollar ($50) fee
in addition to other dumping charges, and may also be denied admittance to or
use of the Kewanee transfer station until such time as he is in compliance with
this requirement. Such fee or prohibition shall not apply to city or contracted
vehicles participating in any Council-authorized community clean-up.
      (3)   Commercial equipment shall be maintained in a safe, efficient,
operating condition at all times. Trucks shall not be overloaded.
   (C)   Certification. If the transfer station is not permitted for regional
operations, each person bringing solid waste to the transfer station will sign
a certification that the solid waste was generated and collected within the
city. Commercial hauler will sign this certification annually. Disposing of
solid waste at the transfer station that is not generated and collected within
the city will not only subject the violator to the penalties associated with
this chapter, but also to all costs that may be associated with the recovery
and proper disposal of non-Kewanee solid waste. Any person violating the
provisions of this division shall be subject to a fine of not less than $400
and not more than $500.
   (D)   Weighing.
      (1)   The transfer station is equipped with an internal scale. The road
truck used to transport the solid waste to the landfill will normally be parked
on the scale in the lower level. Haulers of solid waste will use the upper
level to dump solid waste into the road truck on the lower level. The weight of
the road truck after and prior to receiving solid waste will be used to
calculate the number of tons delivered by the waste hauler.
      (2)   In the event the above weighing procedure cannot be followed or is
impracticable, then the transfer station operator shall use the volume of the
solid waste to determine the number of tons delivered by the waste hauler.
Three cubic yards of solid waste shall be considered to equal one ton. For
commercial haulers their trucks will be considered fully loaded to their rated
capacity when they deliver to the transfer station.
   (E)   Rates.
      (1)   Negotiated rate. The City Manager has the authority to negotiate
with both commercial solid waste haulers and the contractor who is transporting
the transfer station’s solid waste to the landfill in order to arrive at a rate
that is to the benefit of the city in regards to a long term contract with a
commercial hauler delivering solid waste to the transfer station. In order to
establish negotiated rates an agreement must be for a minimum of three years.
In addition the agreement will specify a minimum tonnage that must be
guaranteed to be delivered to the transfer station by the solid waste
collector. These negotiated rates shall be approved by the City Council.
      (2)   Special rate for construction and demolition waste. In some cases
it will be to the advantage of the city to allow this type of solid waste to be
moved directly from a site, such as a construction or demolition site, to the
landfill rather than using the transfer station as an intermediate handling
site. When, in his judgment, it is to the advantage of the city to establish
this special rate, the City Manager, or his designee, has the authority to
negotiate with both the contractor who has the contract for transporting the
city’s solid waste to the landfill and an individual or contractor who requires
solid waste removal at a particular site to establish a special rate for the
haulage of construction or demolition waste from a specific location to the
landfill. Wastes under this provision can only be the waste for which the
landfill is permitted to accept.
      (3)   Standard rate.
         (a) The standard rate will consist of a charge per ton of $60.90 with
a minimum disposal fee of $10.
         (b)   Hand carried garbage bags will be accepted with an excess trash
bag sticker attached.
         (c) The City Manager will increase the standard charge per ton by the
same dollar amount that the Contractor increases his charge to the city for
transporting solid waste to the landfill. This increase will be effective on
the same day on which the contractor’s charge to the city increases or when the
contractor, per his contract with the city, passes on to the city an increase
in federal, state, or local charges.
      (4)   Large household items and concrete and masonry. Large household
items such as bed springs, couches, and stuffed chairs will be accepted at the
transfer station. Appliances will not be accepted. If the transfer station
operator is in doubt about the acceptability of large household items he will
not accept the item. Concrete, masonry, bricks, and similar dense, non-
compressible materials, whether broken apart or in partial sub-assemblies, will
not be accepted.
      (5)   Tires. Tires can no longer be placed in landfills, accordingly the
transfer station operator must ensure that tires are not mixed in with the
trash that will be landfilled. Any hauler of solid waste to the transfer
station commingling tires with trash will be considered in violation of this
section and in addition to being required to remove the tires from the solid
waste bound for the landfill will be subject to the penalties of this code. The
transfer station operator may accept tires so long as they are placed on top of
the load being transferred to the landfill, thus allowing the landfill operator
to remove the tires prior to placing the trash in the landfill. Tires on rims
will not be accepted. The fee for each tire less than 17 inches in rim diameter
is $6 and the fee for each tire between 17 and 22 inches in rim diameter is $9.
Larger tires will not be accepted.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 2906, passed 6-27-94; Am. Ord. 2908,
passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 2952, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3051, passed 4-22-96;
Am. Ord. 3241, passed 1-24-00; Am. Ord. 3555, passed 10-9-07; Am. Ord. 3771,
passed 8-11-14; Am. Ord. 3886, passed 7-24- 17; Am. Ord. 4165, passed 12-11-23)
§ 50.11 BILLING AND PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Payment for municipal curb side services. Chapter 52 contains the
procedures for billing and payment for this service.
   (B)   Payment for large household items and tires. Payment for these items
per the prior section shall be made at the transfer station. These items will
not be accepted at the transfer station without prior payment at the transfer
station.
   (C)   Bills.
      (1)   Bills for municipal curb side solid waste pick up service shall be
sent out on the same cycle as the city water and sewer bills per
Chapter 52.
      (2)   Bills for solid waste disposal at the transfer station. Normally,
bills for solid waste disposal at the transfer station will be collected
immediately after the delivery at the transfer station.. The City Manager is
authorized to approve commercial solid waste collectors for payment of their
bills on a monthly basis, provided the City Manager is satisfied with their
credit rating. If the hauler's credit rating is unknown or not acceptable the
City Manager may allow the hauler to use the transfer station if the hauler
makes a deposit equal to the hauler's expected usage of the transfer station
over a two month period. The City Manager will determine the amount of the
deposit, such an amount to be held by the city to pay for any unpaid bills and
penalties specified in this chapter. The amount of the deposit will bear no
interest and will be refunded to the depositor upon written notification that
the depositor will no longer be using the transfer station or upon the
establishment of satisfactory credit rating as determined by the City Manager.
If the deposited funds are used to pay part or all of an overdue bill or
penalties, the deposit will be restored to its specified level and any
remaining bills and penalties will be paid before the transfer station can be
used by the specific hauler.
   (D)   Delinquent, nonpayment of bills, and termination. Procedures for
delinquent bills and utility termination are specified in
Chapter 52. Nonpayment of commercial bills incurred at the transfer station
will, at the option of the City Manager, in addition to penalties, result in
the commercial hauler not being allowed to use the transfer station or the
requirement of making a deposit in an amount determined by the City Manager
before use of the transfer station can be resumed.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 2952, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 2953,
passed 1-10-95)
§ 50.12 FUND ACCOUNTING.
   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the solid waste pickup
and the operation of the transfer station shall be placed into a fund separate
and apart from private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
city by the City Clerk. All such moneys, without any deductions whatever, shall
be deposited into the treasury on a daily basis. The City Treasurer shall
receive all such revenues from the solid waste pick up and transfer station
operation services and all other moneys incident to the operation of such
services as the same may be delivered to him, and account for the same in a
fund separate from all other funds and designated as the “Solid Waste Fund,”
which shall be considered an enterprise fund.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, unless
specified otherwise in this chapter, be subject to a fine of not less than $50
and not more than $500.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of the city
or the city's authorized agent to bring a civil action against any person who
violates this chapter, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any
person from a civil action brought by the city or an authorized agent of the
city.
(Ord. 2852, passed 10-4-93)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Definitions
   
51.002   Depositing objectionable waste prohibited
   
51.003   Discharge of untreated sewage or other polluted waters to natural
outlets
   
51.004   Privies, septic tanks and other facilities
   
51.005   Owner's responsibility to install suitable toilet facilities
   
51.006   Tampering with or damaging sewage works
   
51.007   Right of entry for purpose of inspection; indemnification; easements
on private property
   
51.008   State authority permitted access to records
Private Sewage Disposal System
   
51.020   Connecting building sewer to private sewage disposal system
   
51.021   Written permit to be obtained
   
51.022   Inspection and approval of installation
   
51.023   Compliance with state regulatory provisions
   
51.024   Connecting private sewage disposal system to public sewer
   
51.025   Maintenance of private sewage disposal facilities
   
51.026   Noninterference with additional requirements
Building Sewers and Connections
   
51.040   Connection permit required; discharges to comply with federal, state
and local standards
   
51.041   Building sewer permits; inspection and connection fees
   
51.042   Costs and expenses of installation and connection of building sewer;
indemnification
   
51.043   Emergency repairs
   
51.044   Repairs by Public Works Department
   
51.045   Separate building sewer provided for every building
   
51.046   Use of old building sewers with new buildings
   
51.047   Removal of stoppage in waste pipes; replacing broken or old sewer
lines
   
51.048   Building sewer construction and material specifications
Use of Public Sewer
   
51.060   Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage
   
51.061   Prohibited discharges to public sewers
   
51.062   Discharge of certain wastes restricted
   
51.063   Pretreatment, equalization of waste flows
   
51.064   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
51.065   Preliminary treatment facilities; maintenance
   
51.066   Control manhole
   
51.067   Measurements, tests and analyses
   
51.068   Industrial wastes; special agreement
Storm Drain System
   
51.080   Composition; maintenance and repair
   
51.081   Use of storm drain system
Wastewater Service Charges
   
51.095   Basis for wastewater service charges
   
51.096   Measurement of flow
   
51.097   Wastewater service rates and charges
   
51.098   Computation of wastewater service charges
Billings; Revenues
   
51.110   Billing and payment for sewer service
   
51.111   Delinquent, nonpayment of bills, and termination
   
51.112   Disposition of revenue; funds
   
51.113   Accounts to be kept; annual audit report
   
51.114   Notice of rates
Scavengers
   
51.130   Definition
   
51.131   License required
   
51.132   License fee; bond
   
51.133   Vehicles to be regulated; wagons to be kept clean
   
51.134   Notice to clean vaults
   
51.135   Cleaning vaults; hours of operation
   
51.136   Disposal of night soil
   
51.998   Notice of violation; liability
Cross-reference:
   Awarding of public works contracts, see §§
37.20 -
37.22
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U. S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Council of the city.
   PLUMBING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector of the city or representatives as
designated by the city.
   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   BASIC USER RATE. The assessment levied on all users of the sewer system
based upon metered water consumption.
   BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures in five days at 20° C. expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal. The physical connection which permits sewage to flow
from the building sewer to the public sewer is considered to be a part of the
building sewer, even in those cases where a single piece of pipe, or fitting,
serves the dual purpose of carrying the flow of the public main and allowing
connection of a building sewer to the public main. Building sewer is used
interchangeably with sewer lateral, private lateral, and service sewer.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the city representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of revenue bonds outstanding.
   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA. Defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 466 et seq.) as amended,
(Pub. L. 95-217).
   FEDERAL GRANT. The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II-Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS. Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or
substances into products.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. (Infiltration does
not include and is distinguished from, inflow.)
   INFLOW. The water discharge into a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders; cellar,
yard, and area drains; foundation drains; unpolluted cooling water discharges;
drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers, cross connections from
storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff,
street waters or drainage. (Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from,
infiltration.)
   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes schools, churches, penal
institutions and users associated with federal, state and local governments.
   MAINTAIN, MAINTENANCE. To clean and otherwise keep the interior of a sewer
pipe in operable condition by performing routine tasks such as "rodding",
"flushing", "jetting", etc. when the need for such cleaning does not result
from structural deficiencies of the sewer line.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. Any industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day; or
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste; or
      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuing authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly-owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l). A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 9 of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters
of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used in common, parts per million,
to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
wastewater analysis.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by
the administrator or, where appropriated by the director, after enactment of
the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the Federal Act.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs, direct and indirect (other than
debt service) necessary to insure adequate wastewater treatment on a continuing
basis, conforming with related federal, state and local requirements, and
assuring optimal long term facility management. (These costs include
depreciation and replacement.)
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual,
firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of
suspended solids. The impact on a treatment works is evaluated as the
equivalent of the highest of the three parameters. Impact on a stream is the
higher of the BOD suspended solids parameters.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than ½ inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary
sewers, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with city funds.
   REPAIR OR REPLACE. To restore, repair, or replace through excavation or
trenchless technology a portion or all of a failed or failing sanitary sewer
pipe exhibiting structural deficiencies such as cracks, collapse, and settled
pipe resulting in offset joints or other obstructions which prevent or inhibit
the normal flow of sewage.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
replacement.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, permanent multi- family dwellings.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or polluted
industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. Used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
   STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
   STATE GRANT. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORMWATER RUN-OFF. That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge, the basic
user rate and debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes
are greater in strength than the concentration values established in §
51.095.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per quarter or month levied on all
users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in §§
51.095 through
51.098 and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge, the basic user
rate, the debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or POLLUTION CONTROL
PLANT.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. Defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all
revenues received and expenses incurred in the operation of the waterworks and/
or sewerage system. These revenues and expenses shall be accounted for so that
water system revenues and expenses shall be recorded in the waterworks account
of the waterworks and sewerage fund and revenue and expenses of the sewerage
system shall be recorded in the sewerage account of the waterworks and sewerage
fund.
(‘71 Code, § 8-6-1) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord 3246, passed 3-27-00;
Am. Ord. 4031, passed 10-26-20)
§ 51.002 DEPOSITING OBJECTIONABLE WASTE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
('71 Code, § 8-6-2(A)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.003 DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED SEWAGE OR OTHER POLLUTED WATERS TO NATURAL
OUTLETS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, watercourse or
storm sewer within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city,
any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 8-6-2(B)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.004 PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS AND OTHER FACILITIES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.
('71 Code, § 8-6-2(C)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.005 OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY TO INSTALL SUITABLE TOILET FACILITIES.
   The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the city,
is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities with a building sewer directly with the
proper public sewer in a manner approved by the Plumbing Inspector within 90
days after date of the official notice to do so, provided that said public
sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. Failure to comply with the 90
day notice shall, in addition to being a violation of the City Code, result in
the start of sewer charges as if the property was connected by a building sewer
to the public sewer system.
('71 Code, § 8-6-2(D)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 2909, passed 7-25-
94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.006 TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING SEWAGE WORKS.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
('71 Code, § 8-6-6) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.007 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSE OF INSPECTION; INDEMNIFICATION; EASEMENTS
ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Superintendent, other duly authorized employees of the city, and
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The Superintendent or his representative shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point
having direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
city, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the city's employees and the city shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by the city's employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operations, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as
required in §
51.066.
   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion
of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work,
if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of
the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
   (D)   Any property owner who refuses to permit the entry of a duly
authorized employee of the city for the purpose of inspecting sanitation sewer
facilities on his or her property shall be subject to a fine as set forth in §
10.99 and to termination of water service at the location where right of entry
is refused.
('71 Code, § 8-6-7) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 3053, passed 4-22-96)
§ 51.008 STATE AUTHORITY PERMITTED ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized
representatives shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records
of the city which are applicable to the city system of user charges or
industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts
and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of the special
and general conditions to any state grant.
('71 Code, § 8-6-10(H)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
§ 51.020 CONNECTING BUILDING SEWER TO PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   In the event a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions
of §
51.005, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this subchapter.
('71 Code, § 8-6-3(A)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
§ 51.021 WRITTEN PERMIT TO BE OBTAINED.
   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the County Health
Department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished
by County Health Department which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by County Health
Department.
('71 Code, § 8-6-3(B)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.022 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OF INSTALLATION.
   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of County Health
Department. They shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
County Health Department when the work is ready for final inspection, and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by County Health Department.
('71 Code, § 8-6-3(C)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
§ 51.023 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATORY PROVISIONS.
   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Private Sewage Disposal
Licensing Act and Code and with the State of Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing insufficient subsurface soil absorption facilities until such time as
approval is received from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
('71 Code, § 8-6-3(D)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.024 CONNECTING PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM TO PUBLIC SEWER.
   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
51.005, direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned. The building sewer shall be connected
to said sewer within 90 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be
cleaned of sludge, bottoms perforated as to permit adequate drainage of the
tank and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt compacted and maintained in
a safe condition.
('71 Code, § 8-6-3(E)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
§ 51.025 MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
('71 Code, § 8-6-3(F)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
§ 51.026 NONINTERFERENCE WITH ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city.
('71 Code, § 8-6-3(G)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 51.040 CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED; DISCHARGES TO COMPLY WITH FEDERAL, STATE
AND LOCAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make any connection with the city sanitary or
storm system without having first obtained a permit therefor and paid the fee
provided in §
51.041. Application for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and shall
be accompanied by a statement as to the purpose of the connection, the premises
to be served, the specifications of the pipe to be connected and of the drain
from the house to the sewer line. Such applications shall be referred to the
sewer committee and no permit shall be issued unless they shall have found that
the ordinances of the city would be complied with in the making of such
connection.
   (B)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(A)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.041 BUILDING SEWER PERMITS; INSPECTION AND CONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   There shall be three classes of building sewer permits: for
residential services, for commercial, institutional/governmental services, and
for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the
owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the Plumbing Inspector.
('71 Code, § 8-6-2(B))
   (B)   An inspection fee of $25 shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time
the application is filed. This inspection fee is in addition to the sewer
connection permit fee and also in addition to user charge fees the provisions
of which are detailed in subsequent sections of this chapter. The industry, as
a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its
wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(B))
   (C)   An additional fee of $25 will be charged for all inspections required
other than during the regular 40-hour work week.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(C))
   (D)   Each excavation for any of the above purposes shall require a separate
permit.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(D))
   (E)   The fee for each connection permit within the corporate limits of the
City shall be $135 plus $125 where a sewer lift station is involved for
servicing the sewer main. In the case of connection to a sanitary sewer
installed at the entire expense of the city, such permit shall not be issued
until payment has been made to the city of a sewer connection fee in accordance
with the following schedule:
      (1)   Sanitary sewer lateral A located in the 700 and 800 blocks on North
Lexington Avenue and flowing thence east to Main –95 on North Madison Avenue:
Connection fee, $800. The connection fee of $800 may be paid in installments of
$65 payable quarterly or monthly depending on the classification of service for
which bills are rendered. If the installment method of paying sewerage
connection fees is selected, said installments shall be added to the quarterly
or monthly sewerage bills and shall be due and payable at the same time as and
under the same terms and conditions as said sewerage bills.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer main known as Hyster Sewer let on Contract No. 1
November 18, 1965, starting at Ladd Avenue and 4th Street at Main N, thence
north on Ladd Avenue to Lake Street, thence east through a force main to a lift
station approximately 300 feet east of Manchester Drive, thence north to
Kentville Road, thence east and north into the Hyster Plant a total distance of
5,295 lineal feet. Connection fee, $450. The connection fee of $450 may be paid
in installments of $35 payable quarterly or monthly depending on the
classification of service for which bills are rendered. If the installment
method of paying sewerage connection fees is selected, said installments shall
be added to the quarterly or monthly sewerage bills and shall be due and
payable at the same time as and under the same terms and conditions as said
sewerage bills.
      (3)   Sanitary sewer main known as the Industrial Park Sewer, starting at
a manhole on the north side of Page Street in front of Lot 15, in Block 18, of
the West End Addition to the city, thence south 2,060 lineal feet, thence
southeast 370 lineal feet to a lift station: Connection fee, $250. The
connection fee of $250 may be paid in installments of $20 payable quarterly or
monthly depending on the classification of service for which bills are
rendered: If the installment method of paying sewerage connection fees is
selected, said installments shall be added to the quarterly or monthly sewerage
bills and shall be due and payable at the same time as and under the same terms
and conditions as said sewerage bills.
      (4)   An extension of sanitary sewer main N72 commencing at manhole N72-
1 located on Fourth Street approximately 20 feet west of the west line of
Lexington Avenue, thence extending east approximately 412 feet to manhole N72-
2 located on Fourth Street approximately 15 feet west of the west line of
Chestnut Street. The connection fee for connecting to this section of sewer
shall be $5,000. The connection fee of $5,000 may be paid in installments of
$420 payable bi-monthly. If the installment method of paying sewerage
connection fees is selected, said installments shall be added to the bi-monthly
sewerage bills and shall be due and payable at the same time as and under the
same terms and conditions as said sewerage bills.
      (5)   Any and all gravity sanitary sewer main contributory to the
sanitary sewer pumping station located at the northeast corner of the
intersection of Hollis Street and South Street. The connection fee for
connecting to this section of sewer shall be $1,500 for one and two family
dwellings, and $5,000 for all other buildings or users. The connection fee of
$5,000 may be paid in installments of $420 payable bi-monthly. The connection
fee of $1,500 may be paid in installments of $125 payable bi-monthly. If the
installment method of paying sewerage connection fees is selected, said
installments shall be added to the bi-monthly sewerage bills and shall be due
and payable at the same time as and under the same terms and conditions as said
sewage bills.
      (6)   An extension of sanitary sewer main commencing at the sanitary
sewer pumping station located at the northeast corner of the intersection of
Hollis Street and South Street, running thence to the west along the north
right-of-way of South Street, to a manhole near the northeast corner of the
intersection of Payson Street and South Street. The connection fee, as
indicated in the table below, for connecting to this section of sanitary sewer
shall be based upon the capacity of the water service(s) serving the premises
for which sanitary sewer service is desired.
Water Service(s) Capacity Special Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
0.75 inch                 $350
1 inch                    $600
1.5 inch                  $1,300
2 inch                    $2,300
2.5 inch                  $3,500
3 inch                    $4,400
4 inch                    $8,900
Greater than 4 inch       $20,000
 
The connection fee shown in the table above for premises with water service
capacity greater than two inches may be paid in bimonthly installments over a
two-year period. If the installment method of paying sewerage connection fees
is selected, the installments shall be added to the bimonthly sewerage bills,
and shall be due and payable at the same time and under the same terms and
conditions as the sewerage bills. This connection fee shall be in addition to
those imposed elsewhere in this section.
   (7)   An extension of sanitary sewer main commencing at the sanitary sewer
pumping station located in Kewanee Industrial Park Subdivision, lying east of
Burlington Avenue, running thence to the southeast to a manhole on the south
side of W. South Street, at 1134 W. South Street, running thence along the
south side of W. South Street to the proposed hospital site at 1051 W. South
Street, approximately 1,630 feet in total length. The connection fee, as
indicated in the table below, for connecting to this section of sanitary sewer
shall be based upon the capacity of the water service(s) serving the premises
for which sanitary sewer service is desired.
Water Service(s) Capacity Special Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
0.75 inch                 $350
1 inch                    $600
1.5 inch                  $1,300
2 inch                    $2,300
2.5 inch                  $3,500
3 inch                    $4,400
4 inch                    $8,900
Greater than 4 inch       $20,000
 
The connection fee shown in the table above for premises with water service
capacity greater than two inches may be paid in installments over a two-year
period, payable bimonthly. If the installment method of paying sewerage
connection fees is selected, the installments shall be added to the bimonthly
sewerage bills, and shall be due and payable at the same time as and under the
same terms and conditions as the sewerage bills. This connection fee shall be
in addition to those imposed elsewhere in this section.
      (8)   Any person owning or controlling premises located outside the
corporate limits of the city and desiring to install a plumbing system on said
premises and connect same to the sanitary sewerage system of the city, may do
so by complying with the requirements of this chapter and by paying a
connection fee of $250 and by paying the sewer bills submitted to them by the
city based upon prevailing rates now in force or which may hereafter be
adopted.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(E))
   (F)   The connection fees described above shall be for a structure with one
unit only. If more than one unit will be served, there shall be an additional
charge for each and every additional unit served in the amount of $100.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(F))
   (G)   The industrial service connection fee shall be determined by the city
at the time the application is filed. The city shall base the fee with regard
to the complexity of the connection. The industry, as a condition of permit,
must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(G))
   (H)   Any person who makes any excavation, or does any other work without
first securing the permit required by this section, shall, in addition to any
other penalty imposed by this section, pay to the City Clerk within 24 hours of
receipt of demand therefor, the sum of $100 for the purpose of paying the fees
of the Building Inspector. Such Inspector shall thereupon make an inspection as
in other cases. Failure to pay the said sum on demand as provided shall
constitute a separate violation.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(H))
   (I)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sanitary sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately handle the
additional anticipated waste load.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(I))
(Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 3422, passed 1-12-04; Am. Ord. 3426,
passed 3-8-04; Am. Ord. 3519, passed 10-23-06; Am. Ord. 3534, passed 4-23-07)
§ 51.042 COSTS AND EXPENSES OF INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION OF BUILDING SEWER;
INDEMNIFICATION.
   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
original building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the city for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer or subsequent repairs or replacement
of the same. Structural damage or structural failure of the private sanitary
sewer service lateral subsequent to original installation, as it may occur
within the right-of-way, shall be repaired or replaced by the city in
accordance with this chapter, and as may be further delineated by city policy.
(‘71 Code, § 8-6-4(J)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 3293, passed 2-13-
01; Am. Ord. 4031, passed 10-26-20)
§ 51.043 EMERGENCY REPAIRS.
   The city may, in case of emergency, repair or order the repair of any sewer
lateral or sewer pipe from the city sewer main to the premises served thereby,
and if it does so, the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the city by
the owner of the premises served, which cost shall be treated and collected in
the same manner and with the same remedies as for the collection of charges for
sewer services, or by lien filed against the property. However, beginning
January 1, 2001, the city shall bear the cost for such repair or replacement of
the private sanitary sewer lateral within the right-of-way, and the owner of
the premises shall only be responsible for costs that may be incurred during
such emergency repair within the boundaries of the private property.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(K)) (Ord. 3293, passed 2-13-01)
§ 51.044 REPAIRS BY PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   Any maintenance or repair work performed by the Public Works Department of
the city, or an authorized agent thereof, on any sanitary sewer lateral located
within the private lot, shall be paid for by the owner or the occupant (both of
whom shall be liable for the cost thereof) of the property served by such
lateral at the currently going hourly rate established by the city. The city
may establish rates for equipment and manpower as they deem appropriate, and
which may reflect the Illinois Dept. of Transportation equipment rate schedules
and the actual hourly cost for staff used. All costs associated with said
maintenance or repair work, including actual charges for private contractors,
shall be treated and collected in the same manner and with the same remedies as
for collection of charges for sewer services. However, the city shall bear the
expense associated with the repair or replacement of such private sanitary
sewer lateral within the right-of-way, as established herein or by city policy,
and as directed and approved by the appropriate city staff. The city shall not
bear the expense associated with cleaning or other maintenance of such sanitary
sewer lateral within the right- of-way unless the need for such maintenance is
due to structural deficiencies requiring excavation to repair and replace.
(‘71 Code, § 8-6-4(L)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 3231, passed 11-22-
99; Am. Ord. 3245, passed 3-27-00; Am. Ord. 3293, passed 2-13-01; Am. Ord.
4031, passed 10-26-20)
§ 51.045 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER PROVIDED FOR EVERY BUILDING.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer. In no case shall any person be
permitted to maintain, without the consent of the approving authority, any
sewer connection connecting a building owned by him to the public sewer across
or under the property of another.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(M)1.) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.046 USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS WITH NEW BUILDINGS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Plumbing Inspector, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(M)2.) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
§ 51.047 REMOVAL OF STOPPAGE IN WASTE PIPES; REPLACING BROKEN OR OLD SEWER
LINES.
   No connection permit will be required for the removal of stoppage in waste
pipes, or for replacing broken or old sewer lines, provided such sewer lines
conform to the regulations contained in this subchapter.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(M)3.) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
§ 51.048 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS.
   The methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city.
   (A)   (1)   Each connection shall be made at the “Y” designated for that
property. Only where the designated “Y” is not located within three feet of the
point of measurements furnished by the Superintendent, will a tap-in connection
be allowed.
      (2)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials and the
Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and the latest
edition of Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Plumbing Inspector before installation.
      (3)   The person making the connection shall make an opening in the main
sewer a similar to the interior diameter of the “Y” branch and then properly
cement and attach a saddle in place. The saddle shall have a suitable curvature
to conform to the outside diameter of the public sewer.
   (B)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of
the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 and the latest edition of the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall
apply.
   (C)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (D)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (E)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Plumbing
Inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. Each and every part of a sewer connection shall be inspected and
approved by the Waterworks Superintendent or his representative before being
concealed or backfilled.
   (F)   Any person filling in an excavation without having first received the
written approval of the Superintendent or Building Inspector as provided in
this subchapter, shall, in addition to suffering the fine herein imposed,
expose the sewer for inspection by the Superintendent or Building Inspector at
no cost to the city. In any case where the Inspector finds the work on any
sewer not done in a satisfactory manner as herein provided, he shall serve
written notice on the person to whom the permit is issued, stating wherein such
work is deficient, and ordering said person to remedy such defect within 24
hours. In the event such person fails to comply therewith, the Inspector shall
cause such defect to be corrected at the expense of the person to whom the
permit was issued. The sum of $25 as herein provided shall be paid to the City
Clerk as a fee for the performance of the Inspector, and it shall be the duty
of the Inspector to inspect any sewer connection or sewer pipe within the city.
It shall also be the duty of said Inspector to inform the approving authority
of any violation of this section, and to assist in the prosecution of
offenders.
   (G)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall comply with the
provisions of this code relating to excavations in streets and shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard, streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
('71 Code, § 8-6-4(N)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
USE OF PUBLIC SEWER
§ 51.060 DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(A))
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm
sewer, or natural outlet.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(B))
(Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.061 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant, or to cause the effluent from the treatment works to
violate applicable effluent standards.
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment,
and personnel of the sewage works.
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(C)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.062 DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN WASTES RESTRICTED.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes to any public sewer if it appears
likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, as determined in the NPDES permit received by the city or
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In
forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these waters the Superintendent
will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited including all
limitations and prohibitions imposed by the NPDES permit of the city are:
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
   (B)   Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances that may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F.
and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.).
   (C)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of ¾ horsepower (0.76 hp
metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent.
   (D)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
   (E)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
the sewage treatment plant. The following limits on the concentration by weight
of various wastes as discharged to the sewer by an industry are hereby
established as follows:
      (1)   The concentration of chromium as discharged to the sewer shall not
exceed 3.0 mg/l.
      (2)   The concentration of zinc as discharged to the sewer shall not
exceed 1.0 mg/l.
      (3)   The concentration of copper as discharged to the sewer shall not
exceed 1.0 mg/l.
      (4)   The concentration of cadmium as discharged to the sewer shall not
exceed 3.0 mg/l.
      (5)   The concentration of lead as discharged to the sewer shall not
exceed 1.0 mg/l.
      (6)   The concentration of nickel as discharged to the sewer shall not
exceed 8.0 mg/l.
      (7)   The concentration of silver as discharged to the sewer shall not
exceed 1.0 mg/l.
      (8)   The concentration of mercury as discharged to the sewer shall not
exceed 0.0005 mg/l.
      (9)   No waste discharged to municipal sewer system shall contain
detectable levels of cyanide at any time except as permitted below:
         (a)   Any person desiring to discharge cyanide or cyanogen compounds
to the municipal sewer system shall apply for and procure approval from the
city. The application shall contain sufficient information on discharge
concentrations, flows, and the like to provide adequate data to enable the city
and its representatives to evaluate the discharge and secure required Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency approval.
         (b)   When permitted, total cyanide shall not exceed 10 mg/l, provided
any sample tested shall not release more than two mg/l of cyanide when tested
at a pH of 4.5 and at a temperature of 150° F. for a period of 30 minutes. Such
discharges shall be permitted only when the Agency has determined that no
violation of the effluent criteria of 0.025 mg/l concentration (alone or in
combination with other sources) will result from such discharge.
         (c)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
         (d)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
   (F)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
   (G)   Materials which exert or cause:
      (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residue) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
      (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
   (H)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters including the NPDES permit of the city.
   (I)   All exhaust from steam engines and all blow offs from steam boilers
shall be first connected with a proper basin, and shall not be allowed to
connect directly with the public sewers without special permission from the
approving authority.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(D)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.063 PRETREATMENT, EQUALIZATION OF WASTE FLOWS.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
51.062, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment
provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26, 1978 and any amendments thereto, and which in
the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent
may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes, and require the violator to cease and desist
discharging said materials into the sewer system immediately.
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge and
also require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by the existing sewer charges.
   (B)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(E)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
§ 51.064 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(F)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.065 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES; MAINTENANCE.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(G)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
§ 51.066 CONTROL MANHOLE.
   Each new industry shall be required to install a control manhole, and when
required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by an
existing building sewer carrying industrial or commercial wastes shall install
a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(H)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.067 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.
   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (B)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year
the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at such times and in such
manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the City. At such times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(I))
   (C)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA division of Laboratories Manual of
Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all
out-falls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are
determined from periodic grab samples.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(J))
   (D)   Any person discharging wastes having concentrations greater than the
normal concentrations as set forth herein shall upon notification by the
approving authority install a composite sample with a compatible pacing
(metering) device for monitoring said substances. The pacing and sampling
devices shall be of a type approved by the Superintendent. All testing and
measuring procedures for the analysis of pollutants shall be in conformance
with title 40-CFR-part 136.
   (E)   The cost of all required measurements, tests and analyses shall be
borne by the contributor.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(K))
(Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
§ 51.068 INDUSTRIAL WASTES; SPECIAL AGREEMENT.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor in accordance
with §§
51.095 through
51.098, of this chapter, by the industrial concern, provided such payments are
in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge systems.
('71 Code, § 8-6-5(L)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM
§ 51.080 COMPOSITION; MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
   (A)   The term storm drain system shall be considered to be composed of
catch basins, storm drains, culverts and open ditches which are intended to
receive storm water, surface water and street wash, and which are under the
care and control of the city.
   (B)   The storm drain system is to be repaired, maintained or replaced by
the Street Department.
('71 Code, § 9-1-22)(A),(B)) (Ord. 2405, passed 1-9-84)
§ 51.081 USE OF STORM DRAIN SYSTEM.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following described
waste materials into any storm drain system:
      (1)   Liquid waste materials which contain more than 100 parts of oil or
grease per million parts, determined by weight.
      (2)   Liquid waste material in which the suspended solids exceed 250
milligrams per liter.
      (3)   Any petroleum product or other product which by reason of its
nature or quality may cause a fire or explosion, or in any way be injurious to
persons or to the sewage system.
      (4)   Any industrial waste with a pH of less than 5.5 or greater than
9.0.
      (5)   Any industrial waste with a five day biochemical oxygen demand of
more than 200 milligrams per liter.
      (6)   Any industrial waste containing any toxic, or poisonous substance
in a sufficient quantity to interfere with the biologic processes used in the
sewage treatment process or that will pass through the sewage treatment plant
and harm persons or aquatic life in the receiving stream.
      (7)   Any unshredded garbage, scraps or vegetables.
      (8)   Any straw, ashes, cinders, shavings, butchers' offal, rags,
feathers or any other material capable of causing obstructions, nuisance, or
injury to or interference with the sewerage system.
('71 Code, § 9-1-23) (Ord. 2406, passed 1-9-84)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be
connected, any drain, carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink, basement, septic
tank, cesspool, industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging
polluting substances, to any storm water drain in the city.
('71 Code, § 9-1-22(C))
(Ord. 2405, passed 1-9-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
§ 51.095 BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for the service supplied by
the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user charge
established to pay administrative expenses of billing, collection, insurance
and such other expenses classified by the city as fixed expenses in the
operation and maintenance of the system; a basic user rate (OM&R) to pay all
remaining expenses, after administrative expenses, of the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement of the system classified by the city as variable
expense; a debt service charge to pay 50% of the amount required annually for
interest and principal on outstanding sewer debt including bond and
depreciation reserve requirements thereon (reserves average 30% of annual
principal and interest requirements); and a surcharge, if applicable.
   (A)   The basic user charge shall be determined by dividing the total of
fixed expenses as classified and determined by the city including
administrative salaries, office expense, insurance and other administrative
expense by the number of users connected to the system and subject to billing
for service. The annual cost so determined as a fixed expense per use shall be
designated as the basic user charge and shall be pro-rated over the number of
annual billing periods for the purpose of billing as the basic user charge.
Each bill shall be subject to the basic user charge.
   (B)   (1)   The basic user rate (OM&R) shall be based on water usage as
recorded by water meters for the purpose of paying variable costs associated
with the operation, maintenance and replacement of the system. The basic user
rate shall be determined by dividing the total of annual operation, maintenance
and replacement expense, (after deducting revenue derived from the basis user
charge) by the total number of cubic feet billed for sewer service in the
preceding year. This calculation shall produce a unit rate per 100 cubic feet
for sewer service supplied which shall be billed as the basic user rate.
      (2)   (a)   The basic user rate (OM&R) will be applicable for average and
below average strength sewage. Average strength sewage is determined to have
the following characteristics:
            1.   A five-day 20° C. biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) of 200 mg/
l.
            2.   A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l.
         (b)   It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs including
replacement and shall be computed as described above.
   (C)   The debt service charge shall consist of the total of a fixed rate
(the debt service charge) and a variable rate (the debt service rate). The debt
service charge shall be applied to each user connected to the sewerage system
of the city. The debt service rate shall be determined by dividing an amount
equal to 50% of annual principal and interest on sewer debt applicable to the
sewer system (this being the percentage applicable to the sewer system and not
the waterworks system) including 30% coverage thereon, less revenues received
from the debt service charge described above, by the total number of cubic feet
billed for sewer service in the preceding fiscal year.
   (D)   (1)   A surcharge, in addition to the above mentioned charges, will be
levied upon all users whose discharges exceed the average concentrations for
BOD5 (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge will be based on water usage
as recorded by water meters for all wastes which exceed the parameters outlined
above. Section
51.
097(E) specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge. The unit rate of BOD5
and SS surcharge calculations shall be computed as follows:
         (a)   Proportion the estimated annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including the equipment replacement fund,
to the major plant categories.
         (b)   Proportion the costs of the major plant categories to BOD5 and
SS.
         (c)   Estimate pounds of BOD5 and pounds of SS.
         (d)   Compute the unit costs per pound of BOD5 and SS.
      (2)   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed
annually and shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service
or a change in operation and maintenance costs including replacement costs.
      (3)   The users of wastewater treatment services will be notified
annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of
the user charges which are attributable to the wastewater treatment operation,
maintenance and replacement.
('71 Code, § 8-6-9(A)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 3575, passed 5-27-
08)
§ 51.096 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used for computing user charges and surcharges shall be
metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of 100 cubic feet.
   (A)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall, if directed by the Plumbing Inspector, install and maintain, at his
expense, water meters of a type approved by the Plumbing Inspector for the
purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
   (B)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the Plumbing Inspector.
('71 Code, § 8-6-9(B)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 3575, passed 5-27-
08)
§ 51.097 WASTEWATER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES.
   There shall be and there are hereby established rates and charges for the
use of and service supplied by the sewerage system of the city as follows:
   (A)   Basic user charge. A basic user charge per bimonthly period to each
single user of the wastewater facilities of the city is hereby established, as
shown in the table below. Two dollars of the bimonthly fee shall provide funds
for city repair or replacement of structural deficiencies in private sanitary
sewer laterals situated within the public right-of-way as established herein or
by city policy.
 
                  Commencing with    Commencing with      Commencing with
                  bills payable on,  bills payable on, or bills payable on, or
                  or about, July 20, about, July 20, 2024 about, July 20, 2025
                  2023
Basic User Charge $29.95 per         $32.95 per bimonthly $33.94 per bimonthly
                  bimonthly period   period               period
   (B)   Basic user rate (OM&R). A basic user rate (OM&R) per 100 cubic feet is
hereby established, as shown in the table below.
 
                Commencing with      Commencing with      Commencing with bills
                bills payable on, or bills payable on, or payable on, or about,
                about, July 20, 2014 about, July 20, 2015 July 20, 2016
Basic User Rate $2.50 per 100 cubic  $2.58 per 100 cubic  $2.67 per 100 cubic
                feet                 feet                 feet
   (C)   Debt service charge. A debt service charge per bimonthly period to
each single metered and each multiple unit user of the wastewater facilities of
the city is hereby established, as shown in the table below. A debt service
charge for users located outside the city is hereby established per bimonthly
period to each single metered and each multiple unit user of the wastewater
facilities of the city, as shown in the table below.
 
                    Commencing with     Commencing with     Commencing with
                    bills payable on,   bills payable on,   bills payable on,
                    or about, July 20,  or about, July 20,  or about, July 20,
                    2014                2015                2016
Debt Service Charge $7.76 per bimonthly $8.02 per bimonthly $8.29 per bimonthly
in City             period              period              period
Debt Service Charge $42.85 per          $44.28 per          $45.76 per
outside City        bimonthly period    bimonthly period    bimonthly period
   (D)   A debt service rate. A debt service rate per 100 cubic feet is hereby
established, as shown in the table below.
 
                  Commencing with     Commencing with      Commencing with
                  bills payable on,   bills payable on, or bills payable on, or
                  or about, July 20,  about, July 20, 2015 about, July 20, 2016
                  2014
Debt Service Rate $0.43 per 100 cubic $0.44 per 100 cubic  $0.45 per 100 cubic
for Users within  feet                feet                 feet
the City
Debt Service Rate $3.58 per 100 cubic $3.70 per 100 cubic  $3.82 per 100 cubic
for Users outside feet                feet                 feet
the City
   (E)   Surcharge rates and charges.
      (1)   The rate of surcharges for BOD5 and suspended solids shall be as
follows:
            Surcharges               Rate
         (a)   For biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)   $.08/lb BOD5
         (b)   For suspended solids         $.06/lb SS
      (2)   The surcharge per user shall be computed by the following formula:
         S      =   V (0.6238) (A (BOD5-200) + B (SS-250)
         Where S   =   Amount of surcharge in dollars
         V      =   Wastewater volume in 100 cubic feet per billing period
         (0.6238)   =   Unit weight of water
         A      =   Unit charge for BOD5 per pound
         BOD5      =   5 day biochemical oxygen demand, milligrams per liter
         200      =   Allowable average BOD5 concentration, milligrams per
liter
         B      =   Unit charge for SS per pound
         SS      =   Suspended solids, per pound
         250      =   Cable average SS concentration, milligrams per liter
(‘71 Code, § 8-6-9(C)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 2602, passed 1-26-
87; Am. Ord. 2981, passed 7-24-95; Am. Ord. 3293, passed 2-13-01; Am. Ord.
3410, passed 7-28-03; Am. Ord. 3575, passed 5-27-08; Am. Ord. 3762, passed 4-
28-14; Am. Ord. 4031, passed 10-26- 20; Am. Ord. 4056, passed 5-10-21; Am. Ord.
4111, passed 10-24-22)
§ 51.098 COMPUTATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   Following is the procedure for calculating wastewater service charges for
users located within the corporate limits:
   (A)   Metered users. The wastewater service charge for metered users shall
be computed using the following formula:
      WC      =   B + V (OM&R) + DSC + V (DSR) + S
      Where WC   =   Amount of wastewater service charge in dollars per billing
period.
      B      =   Basic user charge for the payment of billing and
administrative expense (fixed expense)
      V      =   Water volume in 100 cubic feet per billing period to the
lowest increment of one 100 cubic feet.
      OM&R   =   Basic user rate for variable OM&R costs in dollars per 100
cubic feet.
      DSC      =   Debt service charge for the fixed charge applicable to
payment of debt service in dollars per billing period.
      DSR      =   Remaining debt service rate in dollars per billing period
for the remainder of debt service cost (after deducting revenues received from
the debt service charge), such remainder of debt service requirements will be
divided by total billable flow to compute the rate per 100 cubic feet.
      S      =   Amount of wastewater surcharge in dollars as computed by the
surcharge formula.
   (B)   Charge for septic waste disposal. The operator of the wastewater
treatment plant (WWTP) is authorized to accept septic waste from haulers. Each
hauler will be charged $36 per 1,000 gallons or for any part of a 1,000
gallons. Each hauler will certify the origin of the waste and provide a billing
address. The WWTP operator will forward to the City Clerk an invoice so that
the Clerk may send out a proper sewer bill to the hauler.
('71 Code, § 8-6-9(D)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 2602,. passed 1-26-
87; Am. Ord. 2709, passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 2804, passed 11-9-92; Am. Ord.
2843, passed 8-23-93; Am. Ord. 2981, passed 7-24-95; Am. Ord. 3575, passed 5-
27-08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
BILLINGS; REVENUES
§ 51.110 BILLING AND PAYMENT FOR SEWER SERVICE.
   
Chapter 52 contains the procedures for billing and payment for sewer service.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 51.111 DELINQUENT, NONPAYMENT OF BILLS, AND TERMINATION.
   Procedures for delinquent bills and utility termination are specified in
Chapter 52.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 51.112 DISPOSITION OF REVENUE; FUNDS.
   (A)   All revenues and money derived from the operation of the waterworks
system shall be deposited in the waterworks account of the Combined Waterworks
and Sewerage Fund and all revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the
sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Waterworks
and Sewerage Fund. All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the City
Treasurer separate and apart from his or her private funds and separate and
apart from all other funds of the city and all of said sums, without any
deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the City Treasurer not more than ten
days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from
time to time be directed by the City Council.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the waterworks
and sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in
separate accounts of the fund designated as the Waterworks and Sewerage Fund of
the city, and said Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner provided by statute of the “Revised Cities and Villages Act,” and the
Illinois Municipal Code.
('71 Code, § 8-6-10(F)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-
95)
§ 51.113 ACCOUNTS TO BE KEPT; ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks and
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the waterworks and sewerage system
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the separate revenues and operating expenses of the
wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer
service charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing the total gallons received at the wastewater
plant for the current fiscal year.
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of hundred cubic feet.
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      (4)   Number of users connected to the system.
      (5)   Number of nonmetered users.
      (6)   A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged.
   (C)   The annual audit reports shall contain such other financial
information consistent with future guidelines to be promulgated by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
('71 Code, § 8-6-10(G)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-
95)
§ 51.114 NOTICE OF RATES.
   A copy of this subchapter, properly certified by the City Treasurer, shall
be filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county and shall be
deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the waterworks and
sewerage system of said city on their properties.
('71 Code, § 8-6-10(I)) (Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86; Am. Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-
95)
SCAVENGERS
§ 51.130 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SCAVENGER. Every person engaged in the cleaning of privy vaults, cesspools
or sink holes or in the removal of filth, offal or any offensive matter in this
city.
('71 Code, § 4-10-1)
§ 51.131 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall carry on the business of scavenger in the city without first
having obtained a license so to do; provided that the owners, agents or
occupants of premises having privy vaults, cesspools or sink holes connected
therewith, who may desire to remove the contents thereof or any other offensive
matter from such premises without the aid of a scavenger may be allowed to do
so upon the written permission of the Health Department but only in such manner
as shall be directed in such permit.
('71 Code, § 4-10-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Foul cellars, vaults and privies, see §
95.10
§ 51.132 LICENSE FEE; BOND.
   Application for license as scavenger and the issuing of such license shall
be controlled by the provisions of
Chapter 110 regulating the granting of licenses in general. The fee for a
license as scavenger shall be $20 per annum and a proportionate sum for any
shorter period and every person applying for such license shall execute a bond
to the city in the penal sum of $100, with at least two good and sufficient
sureties, to be approved by the City Clerk, and conditioned for the faithful
observance of all the ordinances and resolutions which may hereafter be passed
by the City Council relating to the business of scavengers.
('71 Code, § 4-10-3)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.133 VEHICLES TO BE REGULATED; WAGONS TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   (A)   Every vehicle used to cover any night soil, filth, offal or other
offensive matter through the streets of the city shall be provided with a tight
box and shall be so loaded that no portion of night soil, filth, offal or other
offensive matter shall escape or be scattered or have upon the streets or other
public places and, when necessary to prevent the escape of offensive odors,
such box shall be tightly covered. Any person who shall convey through the
streets, alleys or public places of the city any night soil, filth, offal or
other offensive matter in any vehicle not constructed as herein provided and
specified, or who shall scatter, drop, leave or deposit, or cause to be
scattered, leave or deposited, any night soil, filth, offal or other offensive
matter upon any alley or public place or ground within the city shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 4-10-4)
   (B)   Each licensed scavenger in the city may keep a slate at the police
station where persons desiring his services may leave their orders. The wagon
or other vehicle used by any scavenger shall bear the number of his license and
shall at all ,times be kept in good repair and in an inoffensive condition.
('71 Code, § 4-10-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.134 NOTICE TO CLEAN VAULTS.
   Whenever, in the opinion of the Board of Health, any privy vault, cesspool
or sink hole is in an offensive condition or in need of cleaning, it shall be
his duty to notify the owner, agent or occupant of the premises upon which the
same is situated to cleanse the same within a period named in such notice and
unless the person so notified shall comply with such notice, it shall be the
duty of said Board to cause the same to be cleaned by one or more of the city
scavengers and such person so failing to comply with such order or notice shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as exempting any such person so failing to comply with such notice from payment
of the expenses incurred in the cleaning of such privy vault, cesspool or sink
hole.
('71 Code, § 4-10-8)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.135 CLEANING VAULTS; HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No scavenger or other person shall remove the contents of any privy vault,
cesspool or sink hole, or any other offensive matter or convey the same through
the streets, alleys or public places within the city at any time between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 4-10-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.136 DISPOSAL OF NIGHT SOIL.
   The contents of all privy vaults, cesspools and sink holes and all other
offensive matter shall be conveyed beyond the city limits and disposed of in
such manner as not to become a nuisance to persons residing in the vicinity.
('71 Code, § 4-10-7)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Deposit of night soil, manure of other offensive substances, see §
95.08
§ 51.998 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; LIABILITY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this Chapter, except
§ 57.006, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
('71 Code, § 8-6-8(A))
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the
city by reason of such violation.
('71 Code, § 8-6-8(C))
(Ord. 2566, passed 4-28-86)
CHAPTER 52: WATERWORKS SYSTEM
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Contract with water system for water supply
   
52.02   Liability of owners for service
   
52.03   Injuring or interfering with water appliances
   
52.04   Taking water to supply boilers and the like
   
52.05   Claims against city for breakage of fixtures causing interruption of
supply
   
52.06   Sprinkling of lawns during fire alarm prohibited
   
52.07   Water connections outside the city limits
   
52.08   Definitions
   
52.09   Use of groundwater as potable water supply prohibited
Connections and Specifications
   
52.10   Water connection service; permittee
   
52.11   Service pipe specifications
   
52.12   Laying, repairing service pipes
   
52.13   Size and location of taps
   
52.14   Pipes on outlet side
   
52.15   Water meters furnished by city; placement of meters
   
52.16   Expense, maintenance of meters
   
52.17   Supervision; reading, testing, and installation of meters and OSRs
Rates, Charges, and Procedures
   
52.20   Establishment of rates and charges
   
52.21   Applications for service connections; deposit
   
52.22   Payment of billing; procedure; delinquency
   
52.23   Discontinuance of use; notification; fee for turning on supply
   
52.24   Tenant and owners
   
52.25   Authority to terminate water service
Administration
   
52.30   Collection of moneys
   
52.31   Receipt of revenue; deposit; accounts to be kept
   
52.32   Collection agents
   
52.33   Access to records
   
52.34   Chart of billing
Violation and Penalty
   
52.40   Illegal restoration of water service
Cross-Connection Control
   
52.75   Cross-connection control; general provisions
   
52.76   General policy
   
52.77   Definitions
   
52.78   Water system
   
52.79   Cross-connection prohibited
   
52.80   Survey and investigations
   
52.81   Where protection is required
   
52.82   Type of protection required
   
52.83   Backflow prevention devices
   
52.84   Inspection and maintenance
   
52.85   Booster pumps
   
52.86   Violations
Cross-reference:
   Awarding of public works contracts, see §§
37.20 -
37.22
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 CONTRACT WITH WATER SYSTEM FOR WATER SUPPLY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be considered a part of the contract
with every person, company, or corporation who is supplied with water through
the water system of the city, and every such person, company, or corporation by
taking water shall be considered as expressing his consent to be bound thereby.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.02 LIABILITY OF OWNERS FOR SERVICE.
   A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed
in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, and shall be deemed notice to
all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to any user
of the service of the waterworks system of the city on their properties.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.03 INJURING OR INTERFERING WITH WATER APPLIANCES.
   All persons are strictly prohibited from turning on the water into any
service pipe from the curb valve or when a meter is not in place, except by
permission of the Water Superintendent. No person shall in any way obstruct the
access to any hydrant or water valve connected with any water pipe in the city
by means of lumber, brick building material or other articles, thing or
hindrance whatsoever. No person, except the Water Superintendent or Fire Chief,
shall take water from any fire hydrant or other public water connection, except
for fire purposes or for the use of the Fire Department in case of fire, or in
any way take or use water for private use which is furnished by the waterworks,
except from a public fountain, unless such person shall receive permission from
the Water Superintendent. Private fire hydrants shall not be used for any other
purpose than the extinguishing of fires. No person shall deface, mark or in any
way injure or meddle with fire hydrants, valves or other appurtenances of the
city water system or attempt to operate them without authority. No person,
without authority, shall hitch or attach any hose, animal or any other object
to a fire hydrant.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.04 TAKING WATER TO SUPPLY BOILERS AND THE LIKE.
   The city shall have no liability to any user of water for damages due to
lack of water pressure or quality of water.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.05 CLAIMS AGAINST CITY FOR BREAKAGE OF FIXTURES CAUSING INTERRUPTION OF
SUPPLY.
   No claim shall be made against the city by reason of the breaking of any
main, service pipe, valve, or other fixture, or for any other interruption of
the supply by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage for necessary
repairs.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.06 SPRINKLING OF LAWNS DURING FIRE ALARM PROHIBITED.
   All sprinkling of lawns or streets is prohibited when there is an alarm of
fire and during the continuance of a fire, further restrictions on the use of
water may have to be placed in the event of low water system pressure.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.07 WATER CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE THE CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   Existing water lines outside of the city.
      (1)   If there is an existing agreement that allows property owners
outside of the city to connect to the water lines connected to the city's water
system the agreement shall be followed.
      (2)   If there is no agreement or an existing agreement that does not
specifically allow property owners outside of the city to connect to the water
lines connected to the city's water system and such water lines run adjacent to
the property in question and such water lines are at least four inches in
diameter, then a connection to the water line will be permitted, provided
however, that the property owner signs an agreement with the city that binds
his heirs or future owners of the property to annex into the city should at any
time in the future the property become contiguous to the city. A water service
line can only service one property and cannot run across one property to
another property. The City Manager is authorized to sign such an agreement on
behalf of the city. This division shall not apply to the following two
properties which are considered to have applied for a water connection prior to
the effective date of this section and are allowed to have a single service
line to each property:
         (a)   Legal Description: Lot 16 Waunee Estates part SE NE Section 31
and NW NW Section 32 T15N R5E. Parcel #: 20-32-101-009-0030. Owner: William W.
and LaJean Breedlove.
         (b)   Legal Description: East SW NW and part SE Section 29 T15N R5E.
Parcel #: 20-29-100- 003-0021. Owner: Royal and Laura Peed.
      (3)   Within one year of the passage of this section all water lines that
exist outside of the city and that are not owned and maintained by the city
will have installed a backflow prevention device per the cross-connection
control section of this chapter. As determined by the Superintendent of Water
the backflow prevention device shall be located as near as possible to the city
border. The city, at its discretion, may, at any time it desires, install a
stop valve on the city side of the backflow prevention device, such stop valve
being within the city limits. Should the owner of a water line outside of the
city limits fail to comply with this division, the city will install such a
backflow prevention device and charge the owner or owners for all material,
labor, and equipment used to install the device.
   (B)   Any future extensions of the city water main system outside of the
city limits is prohibited unless it is part of an annexation agreement.
(Ord. 2974, passed 6-5-94; Am. Ord. 2974, passed 6-5-95)
§ 52.08 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Regarding
word usage, "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissible.
   (A)   Charges, types of :
      (1)   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the
public water system.
      (2)   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE. A charge levied on users to improve,
extend or reconstruct the water works. 
      (3)   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal and coverage of loan, bond and the like
outstanding.
      (4)   LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE. Charges for costs other than the
operation, maintenance and replacement costs, such as debt service and capital
improvement costs.
      (5)   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
REPLACEMENT.
      (6)   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the water works will
be operated.
      (7)   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of water works for the cost
of operation, maintenance and replacement.
      (8)   WATER FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the water system.
      (9)   WATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per §
52.20 of this chapter.
   (B)   Federal Government.
      (1)   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Acts Amendments.
      (2)   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
   (C)   Local Government.
      (1)   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Mayor and council of the city.
      (2)   CITY. The City of Kewanee.
      (3)   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   (D)   State Government.
      (1)   STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
      (2)   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
      (3)   STATE LOAN. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of
the construction of water works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such loans as filed with the Secretary of State of the
State of Illinois.
   (E)   Water characteristics and equipment:
      (1)   CURB COCK. A shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe from a
water main to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a
valve key to start or stop flow in the water supply lines of a building. Also
called a CURB STOP.
      (2)   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
      (3)   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water
constituent. It is 0.001g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water analysis.
      (4)   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
      (5)   PPM. Parts per million by weight.
      (6)   SERVICE BOX. A valve box used with corporation or curb cock.
(Ord. 3376, passed 1-13-03)
§ 52.09 USE OF GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.
      POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing foods.
   (B)   Prohibition. The use or attempt to use groundwater from within the
corporate limits of the city as a potable water supply by the installation or
drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited. This prohibition
does not include the City of Kewanee.
   (C)   Memorandum of understanding. The City Manager is hereby authorized and
directed to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency in which the city assumes responsibility for
tracking all sites that have received no further remediation determinations
from the Illinois EPA, notifying the Illinois EPA of changes to this section,
and taking certain precautions when siting public potable water supply wells.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of up to $500 for each violation.
(Ord. 3917, passed 2-12-18)
CONNECTIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS
§ 52.10 WATER CONNECTION SERVICE; PERMITTEE.
   (A)   In all cases the tapping of the main and putting in of the service
pipes and all extensions, alterations or repair of any service pipe or fixture
between the main and the meter shall be done by the city, or a contractor
authorized by the Water Superintendent, at the expense of the applicant or
owner of the premises. The piping, fittings, and appurtenant equipment used and
the methods used to install same shall be as shown below, and in compliance
with Kewanee Public Works Department Regulations and Material Specification.
Piping, fixtures and appurtenances between the meter and the water main found
in improper condition shall be repaired, if deemed necessary by the Water
Superintendent, at the expense of the City of Kewanee. Said repair work shall
be funded by the repair and replacement fee established in §
52.20 (A) (1). In installing a water service the Water Superintendent, or
person authorized by him, will tap the main, inserting a stop valve which shall
be known as the corporation valve and shall lay the service pipe from the main
to the meter. The service pipe shall be laid in the trench sufficiently weaving
to allow not less than one foot extra length in its entire length. A curb stop
valve shall be furnished and installed for each service at a location as near
the property line, but on city property, as possible. A cast iron service box
shall be furnished and installed over the curb stop valve where normally
exposed to vehicular traffic and held in a truly vertical position, until
sufficient backfill has been placed to insure permanent vertical alignment of
the box. The top of all service boxes shall be adjusted and set flush with the
established ground surface grade.
   (B)   Upon application of the owners of abutting and adjacent properties, or
for others on their behalf, of permits to tap into and connect to water main
extensions in the city, a fee of $150 for each connection, in addition to all
other charges and fees for installing said service and connection, shall be
charged to and be required to be paid by each said applicant for the privilege
of connecting with and tapping such water main extensions. However, in certain
areas of the community the tap on fee shall be as delineated in division (C),
as adopted and approved by the City Council.
   (C)   This section shall establish special improvement fees in certain areas
of the city that require the extension of new water main to provide service,
and which the City Council desires to recapture a portion of the expense for
such water main extension from those adjacent property owners who will benefit
from the same. The following table indicates the areas where such special
improvement fees will be required, and the amount of such special improvement
fee, which is in addition to the normal tap on fee established above.
Street                      Between                     Special Improvement Fee
                            From a mid point between
East Street                 College and Garfield north  $350
                            to McClure
Dodge Street                From Page north to Knox     $350
West Church Street          From Dodge west to Bronson, $350
                            and Dodge east to dead end
                            From 10th Street north to
May Street                  11th Street; thence west to $350
                            mid point between Wilbur
                            and Simpson
                            From Hollis west to Payson,
West South Street           AND from Midland Drive to
                            Burlington Avenue
(The connection fee for     Water Service(s) Capacity   Special Connection Fee
premises with water service 0.75 inch                   $350
capacity greater than 2     1 inch                      $600
inches may be paid in       1.5 inch                    $1,300
bimonthly installments over 2 inch                      $2,300
a two-year period. If the   2.5 inch                    $3,500
installment method of       3 inch                      $4,400
paying water connection     4 inch                      $8,900
fees is selected, the
installments shall be added
to the bimonthly water
bills, and shall be due and
payable at the same time
and under the same terms    Greater than 4 inch         $20,000
and conditions as the water
bills. This connection fee
shall be in addition to
those imposed elsewhere in
this section.)
 
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3161, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord.. 3246,
passed 3-27-00; Am. Ord. 3520, passed 10-23-06; Am. Ord. 3535, passed 4-23-07;
Am. Ord. 4032, passed 10-26-20)
§ 52.11 SERVICE PIPE SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All service pipes having a diameter of two inches or less shall be one
of the following types:
      (1)   Copper service pipe conforming to the requirements as defined in
the current edition of the “Standard Specifications of Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois” published by the Illinois Society of Professional
Engineers, the Illinois Municipal League, and others.
      (2)   Polyethylene (PE) tubing conforming to the requirements of ASTM
D3350 and ASTM D2737, pressure class of 200 psi minimum rating, with a minimum
Dimension Ratio of SDR9, NSF listed, with an outside diameter equal to copper
tubing in size. To enable future location of the buried PE tubing, an insulated
copper wire, minimum #12 gauge shall be installed above the PE tubing in the
same trench. The copper wire shall be electrically continuous between the curb
box and the meter and terminate with an 18-inch whip in the curb box. PE tubing
shall be placed in a bed of sand three inches deep, and covered with a minimum
depth of six inches of sand. Said sand shall be free of rocks or other objects
which could cut, deform, or otherwise cause physical damage to the PE tubing.
All joints made in PE tubing shall be compression fittings with stainless steel
stiffeners.
      (3)   The length of Type K copper service pipe, or PE tubing, between the
water main and the curb stop valve, and between the curb stop valve and the
water meter shall be single pieces of pipe or tubing with no joints or unions
installed therein. For new, or replacement service installations, an exception
to this requirement is allowed only if the distances involved are larger than
the manufacturer's normally available lengths of continuous pipe. For repairs
to an existing water service no more than two repair clamps, or other fillings
installed to stop a leak, shall be allowed in the piping between the meter and
the curb stop valve. All repairs to water service piping between the meter and
the curb stop valve shall be carried out as directed by the department head in
charge of the Water Division, or his designee. No repaired water service shall
be turned on unless said repairs have been inspected and approved by the
department head or his designee. Service pipes having a diameter of exceeding
two inches shall be those approved in Table A, Appendix A, Section 890 of the
December 1993 edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code, or current revision of the
Illinois Plumbing Code.
   (B)   Each separate piece of property, lot, or building being furnished
water shall have at least one service pipe running from the water main to such
piece of property, lot, or building. In multiple tenant buildings of any use,
each tenant space, currently existing or newly created, shall have a curb stop
valve installed to control the supply of water to the given tenant space
independent of the water supply to the other portions of the building.
   (C)   When copper service pipe is used, all joints in said pipe and fittings
from the water main to, and including, the outlet side of the water meter,
shall be mechanical joints, solder joints in these areas being hereby
prohibited. The minimum amount of service pipe protruding on the interior side
of the wall or floor shall be six inches, to allow adequate pipe to which to
connect the meter.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3246, passed 3-27-00; Am. Ord. 3582,
passed 7-28-08)
§ 52.12 LAYING, REPAIRING SERVICE PIPES.
   In putting down and repairing pipes, the streets or alleys shall be opened
in the manner which will occasion the least inconvenience to the public and
admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter of the street. No
excavation in any street or other public place shall be left open overnight
except by the permission of the Water Superintendent, and every precaution
shall be taken to insure public safety. The streets and pavement shall be
restored to as good condition as it was in previous to making the excavation
using methods and procedures in compliance with the “Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Construction in Illinois” published by the Illinois Society
of Professional Engineers, the Illinois Municipal League, and others. All dirt
and rubbish shall be immediately removed after the completion of the work.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3246, passed 3-27-00)
§ 52.13 SIZE AND LOCATION OF TAPS.
   Taps of water mains for service connections shall not exceed the size and
spacing as recommended by the manufacturer of the water main. In cases where
larger taps would be required, a tee will be installed in the water main.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.14 PIPES ON OUTLET SIDE.
   To allow installation and replacement of the water meter, direct connections
to inlet or outlet ports on the water meter shall be a union fitting, provided
by or approved by the Kewanee Water Department. The piping connected to the
union fitting on the outlet side of the meter may be of such kind as the
consumer may direct, but all plumbing must be in compliance with the State of
Illinois Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3246, passed 3-27-00; Am. Ord. 3697,
passed 2-27-12)
§ 52.15 WATER METERS FURNISHED BY CITY; PLACEMENT OF METERS.
   All water furnished by the city shall be measured, normally by passing
through a meter. All meters will be furnished by the city and used by the
person paying the water bill. The size of water meter required shall be as
determined by the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code. Meters will be
supplied by the city to the customer at no charge. All meters shall be placed
on the lowest occupiable level of the building, unless special permission to
the contrary is given by the Water Superintendent. In the case of meters placed
in pits, the pit shall be a typical type A manhole, or larger, enclosure and
the approval of the Water Superintendent must be secured prior to the placement
of the water meter.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3246, passed 3-27-00; Am. Ord. 3643,
passed 6-14-10)
§ 52.16 EXPENSE, MAINTENANCE OF METERS.
   All consumers shall bear the expense of installing their meters and shall be
held responsible for damage to the same arising from theft, freezing, hot
water, breakage or any other cause, ordinary wear and tear excepted. Consumers
with meters larger than one inch, shall bear all expense for such repairs and
renewals as the Water Superintendent may deem necessary. Said expense being
limited to the actual materials and hired labor costs, if any, incurred by the
city to repair/replace the meter. All ordinary wear and tear and defects in the
construction of the meters of one inch or less capacity shall be repaired at
the expense of the city. Such repairs or alterations as the Water
Superintendent may deem necessary shall be made on all supply pipes, stop
valves and all attachments and fixtures from the meter to the water main at the
expense of the consumer; excepting therefrom expenses for repair work related
to the maintenance fee in §
52.20 (A) (1) of this chapter. After meters are once placed on a service, only
the proper persons of the Water Department shall be allowed to take off, repair
or replace the same. No person other than those authorized by the Water
Superintendent shall break the seal of any meter or in any way tamper with the
same.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3246, passed 3-27-00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.17 SUPERVISION; READING, TESTING, AND INSTALLATION OF METERS AND OSRS.
   (A)   The employees of the Public Works Department shall have free access at
all reasonable times to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of reading
the internal water meter or inspecting the piping and appurtenances connected
to the meter, which includes the wiring leading from the internal meter to the
external outside reading device (OSR) or similar remote reading device.
   (B)   Employees of the Public Works Department may remove the internal meter
the OSR, or similar remote reading device at any time for repair or for testing
and when any meter shall be found incorrect in its measurement and unfit for
further use, such internal meter, OSR, or similar remote reading device shall
be replaced at once by one approved by the Water Superintendent. The city shall
examine and test any water meter whenever it is determined that an unexplained
fluctuation has occurred in the billing contrary to past billing history. A
consumer may request such testing, or the testing may be initiated by the city,
however, in all cases the city shall determine when and if such testing will
occur. If the unexplained fluctuation continues over two billing cycles, the
meter shall be tested. Should the meter register more than or equal to 2% in
excess of the amount of water that actually passes through the same, the
customer's billing for the current and the most recent past billing period will
be adjusted downward by the percentage that the meter was found to be running
fast. Should the meter register more than 2% less than the amount of water that
actually passes through the meter the customer's billing for the current and
the most recent past billing period will be adjusted upwards by the percentage
that the meter was found to be running slow.
   (C)   The occupants of any building or premises where meters, OSRs, or
similar remote reading devices are located shall keep the same free from
obstruction and they shall be so arranged that it may be accessible at all
times for the purposes of reading, inspection, or repairing. Accessible is
defined as a minimum of two feet of clear space, in all directions, over,
under, and around the meter and/or OSR or similar remote reading device. If the
meter, OSR, or similar remote reading device is obstructed, the water will be
shut off until such obstruction is removed and the reconnection charge is paid.
   (D)   An OSR, or similar remote reading device will be installed for all
water customers. If an OSR, or similar remote reading device is not installed,
the owner or occupant of the premises will give reasonable access to employees
of the Public Works Department so that they may install an OSR, or similar
remote reading device. Under certain conditions the Public Works Director or
his designee may waive the requirement to install an OSR, or similar remote
reading device. This waiver will only be based on a unique construction
condition that would make the installation of an OSR, or similar remote reading
device cost prohibitive. Unless waived by the Water Superintendent, OSR, or
similar remote reading device will be installed in a manner recommended by the
manufacturer.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3097, passed 2-24-97; Am. Ord. 3246,
passed 3-27-00)
RATES, CHARGES, AND PROCEDURES
§ 52.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES AND CHARGES.
   There are hereby established rates or charges for the use of and for the
service supplied by the waterworks system of the city, based upon the amount of
water consumed, as shown by the water meters as follows:
   (A)   Within the corporate limits. For each user of the water services, the
bi-monthly charge shall be as follows:
 
                             Commencing with bills payable
                            on, or about, September 20,   Thereafter
                             2025
(1) For the first 500 cubic  § 53.04 per bimonthly period 4% increase annually
feet (or any part thereof)
(2) For the next 4,500 cubic $6.64 per 100 cuic feet       4% increase annually
feet
(3) Thereafter               $5.24 per 100 cubic feet      4% increase annually
 
   (B)   Outside the corporate limits. Each user of the waterworks system of
the city located outside the corporate limits shall have 100% added to the
water bill rendered for the type of service as set out above.
   (C)   Adequacy of water service charges. The adequacy of the water service
charge shall be reviewed, not less often annually, by Certified Public
Accountants for the city in their annual audit report. The water service charge
shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or O,
M and R costs.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 2971, passed 5-8-95; Am. Ord. 3224, passed
8-9-99; Am. Ord. 3354, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 3376, passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord.
3472, passed 7-11-05; Am. Ord. 3576, passed 5-27-08; Am. Ord. 3761, passed 4-
28-14; Am. Ord. 4032, passed 10-26- 20; Am. Ord. 4111, passed 10-24-22; Am.
Ord. 4242, passed 6-9-25)
§ 52.21 APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICE CONNECTIONS; DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Applications for water or sewer connections must be made in writing to
the city upon forms provided by the city. A separate application will be made
for each service connection, each building, and each residence or business
place to be supplied. All applications shall contain the common address and
parcel number, when known, of the property to which service is requested to be
made and shall be signed by the owner of such property, or by the owner's
authorized agent, with satisfactory proof of such agency required, and the
tenant, if the tenant will be billed for such service. In such application, the
owner of the real property, or his authorized agent, and the tenant, if the
tenant is going to be billed for water service, must agree to be governed by
the provisions of this code in force at the time of the application, and as the
same may thereafter be amended. The making of such written application shall be
prima facie proof of the owner's agreement to be so governed and shall be
conclusive proof of such agreement in a court of law. If after the initial
application the tenant who is being billed for water service is replaced by
another tenant a new application must be submitted to the city by the new
tenant and landlord.
   (B)   Each application for water service received on, or after, June 1,
2007, shall be accompanied by a deposit of $125 as security for water service
to be furnished. Deposits for water service shall be maintained and accounted
for separately and shall be returned to the applicant without interest upon the
written request for the discontinuance of water service by the applicant. There
shall be deducted from said deposit any moneys due and owing to the city for
water service. The deposit will be waived when the applicant is the property
owner.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3538, passed 5-29-07)
§ 52.22 PAYMENT OF BILLING; PROCEDURE; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   The person in whose name service to a premises is billed, the occupant
of the premises, the owner of the premises, and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for such service, and the service is
furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that said persons
are jointly and severally liable therefor to the city. Before relieving the
owner of the requirement to pay for a billing that is currently in the name of
the owner of the premises, a deposit of $125 must be paid by the tenant to the
city.
   (B)   Regular bill. Water, sewer, and solid waste service charges shall be
sent using a post card on or near the first day of the month succeeding the bi-
monthly period for which service was supplied. All bills for utility services
shall be due and payable for the period which the service is billed, not later
than the close of business on the twentieth day after bills have been sent. In
the event the customer fails to receive the original bill for services, and the
customer is in good standing with the city as defined herein, then the city
shall waive the late penalty. A customer in good standing is hereby defined as
not having more than one penalty for any account they were liable for in the
preceding three years.
   (C)   Penalty bill. If payment of the full amount of the bill is not made by
the due date of the post card bill, then a penalty of 10% of the amount of the
balance of the utility services bill will be added to the amount due and which
shall be the sole responsibility of the service user. The billing addressee
will be notified of the 10% penalty by the mailing of a post card, which will
allow an additional ten days for the bill plus the penalty to be paid. If the
billing addressee is a tenant, the owner will be sent a notice informing the
owner that the tenant is overdue on the utility services billing and the
consequences if the bill is not paid. If in the opinion of the City Manager or
his designee, the balance owed, is not of a sufficiently large amount to
justify the administrative costs required to collect said balance, the balance
can be retained on the account and will become payable on rendition of the next
bill. Such determination to retain balances on account will be made following
guidelines put forth by the City Manager in a Standing Order. Said Standing
Order may be amended from time to time as is determined by the City Manager to
be prudent. If upon expiration of the ten day grace period the bill remains
unpaid, the landlord may provide notice to the city, upon such form as provided
by the city, to suspend service. The city may proceed with termination of water
service upon expiration of the ten day grace period of the penalty bill unless
the person so notified shall request a hearing prior to the expiration of said
ten-day period. The hearing shall be held by the City Manager or a person
designated by him. Unless the hearing officer determines that the proposed
termination is not justified, or unless other arrangements for payment of the
bill are approved by the City Manager or his designee, the city may proceed
with termination of the water service on the date which shut off is to occur.
   (D)   Shut off. In the event the charges for utility services, penalties and
fees, are not paid by the penalty due date, such service shall be terminated
without further notice on the day after the penalty due date and shall not be
reinstated until all past-due bills, including the penalties thereon, are paid
in full or other arrangements for the retirement of the obligation are approved
by the City Manager or person designated by him. If the premises is occupied by
a tenant, the owner shall be informed in writing that the water has been shut
off and that the past-due bill, penalties, fees and the current bill must be
paid in ten days.
   (E)   Reconnection of service. In the event that water services are
terminated for nonpayment of rates or charges for water, sewer, or solid waste
services, there shall be a $40 reconnection fee paid for reconnecting such
service, plus all costs incurred in filing and recording of any lien upon the
real estate.
   (F)   Delinquent bill. In the event the charges for service are not paid as
required by this chapter such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared
to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon
the real estate for which such service was supplied, and the City Clerk is
hereby authorized to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the
office of the County Recorder of Deeds, and the filing of such statements in
the pertinent office shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for
such service. The City Clerk may, in lieu of filing a lien upon the property,
refer the delinquent bill to the City Attorney for the purpose of filing a
claim in small claims court for the collection of said delinquent bill.
   (G)   Unexpectedly high billing. A water customer, upon receipt of a water
billing that reflects water usage of three times the normal anticipated usage,
of which there is no explanation for the same, may petition the City Manager
for relief based upon the following factors:
      (1)   High billing defined. An unexpected billing that is three times the
normal, expected usage, which is not reflective of deliberate and excessive
usage, and which is further verified to be three times normally anticipated
usage by checking the average usage of the customer for the past 12 months, as
well as for the same time frame over the past 24 months. If such history is
unavailable for the customer at this particular site, then information from
past usage by that customer at another location may be utilized. However, the
lack of history shall not automatically nullify the customer from seeking
relief.
      (2)   Petition for relief. The customer responsible for the bill found to
meet the definition of a high water bill provided above, may file a petition
for relief at the office of the City Clerk, on forms provided by the Clerk,
which provides, at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   Describe the use of the property;
         (b)   Was the water used, or was there a known plumbing problem;
         (c)   Attest that the water was not used, in any way, by the customer
or other potential users;
         (d)   Have, or will, allow the city to enter the property for the
purposes of conducting a complete and satisfactory inspection of the plumbing
and fixtures and other appurtenances of the property that might contribute to
the unexpected usage;
         (e)   Attest that, if problems with plumbing contributed to the
unexpected usage, they have had the same repaired, and acknowledge their
understanding that the city may limit the number of opportunities for relief;
         (f)   Pay $25 administrative fee.
      (3)   Actions by city. The city shall ensure that the following checks
have been made:
         (a)   A complete, thorough and satisfactory inspection of the property
was made by staff;
         (b)   A complete leak check was performed;
         (c)   Flow tests performed on the meter(s);
         (d)   Install, per existing policy, a replacement meter if found
appropriate;
         (e)   Provide historical information on customer usage.
      (4)   Relief to be provided. If all conditions of this subsection have
been met, then the City Manager shall adjust the billing as follows:
         (a)   No adjustment for sanitation collection;
         (b)   Adjust the billing for the water and sanitary sewer to a level
consistent with the historic use of the customer;
         (c)   Collect the administrative fee and complete payment of the bill.
      (5)   Limitations of relief. The city understands that unknown problems
may occur that could periodically contribute to the occurrence of an
unexpectedly high water billing; however, the city expects that precautions
will be taken by users to protect and maintain plumbing which is free from
defect and not prone to failure, e.g., fixing leaking stools, dripping/running
faucets, protect exposed piping from freezing. If a customer who has previously
sought relief is to ever again seek relief, that customer shall be held to the
highest burden of proof that they in no way contributed to the conditions that
resulted in such a high bill. Further, if the customer is a renter, and the
landlord is found to have failed to provide plumbing that is free of defect
and/or free of the potential for failure, specifically when told previously by
the city of what defects may exist, then no relief will be provided, and the
city may cease water service until such time that the plumbing defects are
addressed to the satisfaction of the city.
      (6)   Length of relief. The city understands that the unexpected usage
may occur over two billing cycles. Residents should contact the city as soon as
they are made aware of the high usage to begin the relief process. If all steps
are completed and the water bill is approved for relief by the City Manager,
the second cycle's bill will be automatically adjusted by the utility billing
clerk for the duration of the unexpected usage. Failure to seek relief on the
first bill may disqualify a resident from obtaining relief on subsequent high
bills due to the same issue.
   (I)   Water lien; petition for relief. A property owner who has had a water
lien recorded against his property by the city for nonpayment of water service
charges may petition the City Manager for relief pursuant to the following
rules, factors and regulations.
      (1)   Petition for relief. The owner of the property upon which the water
lien was recorded may file a petition for relief at the Office of the City
Clerk, on forms provided by the City Clerk, which provides, at a minimum, the
following information:
         (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the property owner.
         (b)   The address, legal description and tax parcel number of the
property upon which a city water lien was recorded.
         (c)   The date recorded and recording number of the city water lien.
         (d)   The outstanding amount of the water bill, the nonpayment of
which caused the recording of the water lien.
         (e)   The name, address and telephone number of the water service
customer, whose nonpayment resulted in the filing of a city water lien.
         (f)   The reasons why relief from the city water lien is requested and
should be granted.
         (g)   The signature of the applicant seeking relief.
         (h)   Payment of a $25 non-refundable filing fee.
      (2)   City action.
         (a)   Upon his or her receipt of the petition for relief, the City
Manager shall review all information regarding the city water lien, and at his
or her discretion, shall grant the petition for relief if the applicant has met
one of the following factors:
            1.   According to the Illinois Compiled Statutes, the statute of
limitations to foreclose on the water lien has expired.
            2.    A civil judgment has been rendered against the water customer
or property owner in favor of the city for collection of the unpaid water bill
charges, acting as a statutory release of the water lien.
            3.   Maintaining and foreclosing on the water lien will result in a
particular hardship to the applicant. Such hardship must be demonstrated to be
unique to that individual and not generally applicable to other water service
customers;
            4.   Maintaining and foreclosing on the water lien would result in
a negative impact on the community.
         (b)   If at his or her discretion none of the above factors apply, the
City Manager shall deny the petition for relief. A written notification of the
decision shall be provided to the applicant of the petition for relief.
         (c)   If the petition is granted, the City Manager shall direct the
City Attorney, or such other city employee as the City Manager may elect, to
record a release of lien with the Henry County Recorder’s Office.
            1.   The applicant of the petition for relief shall bear the full
costs of recording the release of lien with the Henry County Recorder’s Office.
            2.   The release of lien shall not be recorded until such time as
the City Clerk receives such recordation costs from the applicant.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3106, passed 6-23-97; Am. Ord. 3200,
passed 2-22-99; Am. Ord. 3352, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 3503, passed 4-10-06;
Am. Ord. 3538, passed 5-29-07; Am. Ord. 3563, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 4198,
passed 8-26-24)
§ 52.23 DISCONTINUANCE OF USE; NOTIFICATION; FEE FOR TURNING ON SUPPLY.
   Users desiring to discontinue the use of water shall notify the city in
writing. Failure to do so will result in that user retaining the responsibility
to pay for the water, sewer, and solid waste usage. In every case where the
water is shut off pursuant to notice or for cause, it shall not be turned on
again except by a city employee and only after a reconnection fee is paid by
the consumer for such service, together with all service charges, penalties,
and fees that are due.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.24 TENANT AND OWNERS.
   So the city can obtain a final meter reading for prior tenants and starting
meter readings for new tenants, the owner is obligated to give the city a
minimum of a two working day written notice before a new tenant occupies the
premises. The owner also is obligated to inform the city the date when a tenant
in whose name the service is billed will vacate a premises. The city is not
responsible to keep track of tenants who may “skip-out” on an owner. In the
case where water service has been shut off due to nonpayment of service, the
water service will not be turned on until the past-due bills for water, sewer,
and solid waste, penalties, red tag fee, the current bill, and the reconnection
fee are paid by either the tenant or the owner.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.25 AUTHORITY TO TERMINATE WATER SERVICE.
   The City Manager or person designated by him is authorized to terminate or
refuse to commence water service to a user at one location for the failure of
the user to pay for water, sewer and solid waste charges for services provided
to such user at a previous location.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 52.30 COLLECTION OF MONEYS.
   It is hereby made the duty of the City Clerk to render water bills for
service and for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect
all moneys due thereon. All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of
the waterworks, sewerage system, and solid waste charges shall be held by the
Clerk separate and apart from private funds and separate and apart from all
other funds of the city, and all of said sums, without any deduction whatever,
shall be delivered to the City Treasurer not more than ten days after receipt
of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be
directed by the City Manager.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.31 RECEIPT OF REVENUE; DEPOSIT; ACCOUNTS TO BE KEPT.
   The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the waterworks,
sewerage system, and solid waste charges and all other funds and moneys
incident to the operation of such systems as the same may be delivered to him,
and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the Water Fund, the Sewer
Fund, and the Sanitation Fund, and the Treasurer shall administer such funds in
every respect in the same manner provided by the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code. Said City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts
and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and current
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks, sewerage,
and solid waste systems, and at regular annual intervals. The City Manager
shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books
to show the receipts and disbursements of the waterworks, sewerage, and solid
waste systems.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.32 COLLECTION AGENTS.
   The City Manager may designate additional collection agents which shall be
financial institutions located within the city for the purpose of collecting
any rates and charges for water services rendered by the city. No sum shall be
paid to any such collection agent designated by the City Manager for the
services rendered in collecting said rates and charges for water services
rendered by the city.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
§ 52.33 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The United States and Illinois Environmental Protection Agencies or their
authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and
records of the city which are applicable to the city system of user charges for
the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof
to insure compliance with the terms of any State Grant or State Loan.
(Ord. 3376, passed 3-13-03)
§ 52.34 CHART OF BILLING.
   The following chart is meant to assist in understanding this chapter and
shows the utility billing cycling along with charges, fees, and penalties that
are assessed.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. 3094, passed 12-23-96; Am. Ord. 3376,
passed 1-13-03)
VIOLATION AND PENALTY
§ 52.40 ILLEGAL RESTORATION OF WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   If for any valid reason water is shut off to a premises by a person
authorized by the city and water service is restored to that premises by a
person not authorized by this code, the restoration of the water service shall
be considered to be an illegal act.
   (B)   After water service to a premises has been shut off per the notice
given by the red tag and then water is illegally restored, the occupant of the
premises or the user of the service are required to notify the city that water
service has been illegally restored. Failure on the part of the occupant of the
premises or the user of the service to so inform the city within 24 hours will
make them a party to the illegal reconnection and in violation of this code.
When the city shuts off water for nonpayment, a water meter reading is taken at
the time of shut off. In this case a meter reading in excess of the meter
reading at the time of shut off shall be considered prima facie proof that
water has been used illegally within the premises.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined in
a sum not to exceed $500 for any one offense. The minimum fine for any offense
of this section shall be $100 plus court costs.
(Ord. 2953, passed 1-10-95)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 52.75 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL; GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed per the
Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If per the Illinois Plumbing
Code or in the judgment of the Superintendent of Water, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the Superintendent of Water will give notice to the water customer to
install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his
own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner per
the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA),
and all applicable regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of
such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois
Plumbing Code, IEPA, and applicable regulations.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
Superintendent of Water and the IEPA.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Water to cause surveys
and investigations to be made of commercial, industrial, and other properties
served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations
shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every
two years, or as often as the Superintendent of Water shall deem necessary.
Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a
period of at least five years.
   (D)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of
verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and that the Water
Superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the city for the purpose of verifying information
submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection control
inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served
shall furnish to the Superintendent of Water any information which he may
request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property.
The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of
the Superintendent of Water, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper
connections as provided in this subchapter.
   (E)   The Superintendent of Water of the city is authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service
to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as
he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public
water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be
restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance
with the provisions of this ordinance, and until a reconnection fee of $40 is
paid to the city. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected
when the Superintendent of Water is assured that imminent danger of harmful
contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be
followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate
disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided
that, in the reasonable opinion of the Superintendent of Water or the IEPA,
such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or
pollution of the public water supply. Neither the public water supply, the
Superintendent of Water, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any
customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from
termination of said customer's water supply per the terms of this subchapter,
whether or not said termination was with or without notice.
   (F)   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned or back pressured material
or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.76 GENERAL POLICY.
   (A)   Purposes. The purposes of these rules and regulations are:
      (1)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
      (2)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-
connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable
water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or
systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.
      (3)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   (B)   Application. These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the city.
   (C)   Policy. The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or backsiphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Water or his
authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent of Water
shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention
device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall
immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense;
failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such
device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The
consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair
as required by this subchapter for a period of at least five years. The
Superintendent of Water may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection
inspection report to the city to assist in determining whether or not service
line protection will be required. All cross-connection inspections shall be
conducted by a Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector certified by the IEPA.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.77 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated  or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
Plumbing Code and the IEPA.
   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer's
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
      (1)   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION means a cross-connection formed when a
water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
      (2)   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION means a cross-connection through which an
unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a
safe potable water system.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word “severe” as used to qualify “health hazard” means
a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   IEPA. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 lll. Adm. Code 604.
   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person, including:
      (1)   All piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of
water for all purposes, including without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems,
from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in
the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble.
      (2)   All piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including
pressure tanks in water supply systems.
      (3)   All piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of
connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604,
drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not
limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
      (2)   Process waters;
      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      (4)   Cooling waters;
      (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken
from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems;
      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use, and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve
at least 25 persons at least 60 days per year. A public water supply is either
a “community water supply” or a “non-community water supply.”
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each
end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system, and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should
not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.78 WATER SYSTEM.
   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the public
water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   (A)   Public water supply system. The public water supply system shall
consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include
all those facilities of the potable water system under the control of the
Superintendent of Water up to the point where the consumer's water system
begins. The source shall include all components of the facilities used in the
production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system. The public water supply distribution system shall
include the network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the
consumer's water system.
   (B)   Consumer's water system. The consumer's water system shall include all
parts of the facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from
the public water supply distribution system to points of use.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.79 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested, and maintained to insure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and
chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the IEPA. There
shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a
supply.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.80 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises, and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the
consumer's premises.
   (B)   On request by the Superintendent of Water, or his authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's
premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Superintendent of Water
for the verification of information submitted by the inspection consumer to the
public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection results.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable
water system. All cross- connection control or other plumbing inspections must
be conducted per ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3(1).
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      (1)   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed per the
manufacturer's instructions.
      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the IEPA as a cross-
connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing per the manufacturer's instructions.
      (4)   Testing and Records
         (a)   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by IEPA personnel per ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 4.
         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of the
most recent test, the name of the CCCDI, and the type and date of repairs.
         (d)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include the following:
date of each test; name and approval number of person performing the test; test
results; repairs or servicing required; repairs and date completed; and serving
performed and dated completed.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.81 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the IEPA's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an approved
backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a
consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Water, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply
system exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Superintendent of Water and
the source is approved by the IEPA.
      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Superintendent of Water.
      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Superintendent of Water or the Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector,
are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.
      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the IEPA's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an approved
backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a
consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following
types of facilities, unless the Superintendent of Water determines that no
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
      (2)   Laboratories.
      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants.
      (6)   Chemical plants.
      (7)   Metal plating industries.
      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      (10)    Car washes.
      (11)    Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
      (12)    Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.82 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The type of protection required under §
52.81(B)(1)–(3) shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to
health.
   (B)   The type of protection required under §
52.81(B)(4) and (5) shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source;
      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into
the fire safety system.
   (D)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.83 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made per the manufacturer's
instructions.
   (C)   Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be
performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on-site.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.84 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made per the following schedule or
more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in manufacturer's
instructions.
      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or by
passed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five days.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five
days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
IEPA as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      (3)   Test results;
      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by division (A) above.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent of Water.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.85 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the
Superintendent of Water, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
§ 52.86 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Water shall deny or discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the
Superintendent of Water, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device
has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on
the premises, or if a low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not
installed and maintained in working order.
   (B)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Water,
and the required reconnection fee is paid.
   (C)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of
Utilities/Operations.
   (D)   Neither the (name of public water supply) the Superintendent of Water,
or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers of the (name of
public water supply) for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result
from termination of said customer's water supply per the terms of this
subchapter, whether or not said termination of the water supply was with or
without notice.
   (D)   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
clean-up of the potable water supply system.
   (E)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this subchapter
shall be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violation.
   (F)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter in
addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the city for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation, whether the
same was caused before or after notice.
(Ord. 2840, passed 7-26-93)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
   
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
71.   RULES OF OPERATION
   
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
   
73.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
   
74.   PEDESTRIANS
   
75.   EQUIPMENT; LOADS
   
76.   MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
   
77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
   
78.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
In General
   
70.01   Definitions
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
   
70.10   Obedience to lawful authorities
   
70.11   Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions
   
70.12   Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles
   
70.13   Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer
Traffic Signs, Signals, and Markings
   
70.30   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
70.31   Traffic-control signal legend
   
70.32   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.33   Lane-control signals
   
70.34   Flashing signals
   
70.35   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or advertising signs
   
70.36   Interference with official traffic control devices or railroad signs or
signals
   
70.37   Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances, and structures
   
70.38   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker
   
70.39   Vehicular noise
   
70.40   No-turning signs and turning markers
   
70.41   Stop and yield signs
   
70.42   Location of city traffic-control signs
 
   
70.99   Penalty
IN GENERAL
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of
lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102)
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any U.S. or state numbered route, controlled-access
highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated
by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major
arterial system of streets or highways.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-104 [repealed])
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of city departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper state,
county, or local authorities; police vehicles; vehicles of the Fire Department;
vehicles of a HazMat or technical rescue team authorized by a county board
under Section 5-1127 of the Counties Code; ambulances; vehicles of the Illinois
Department of Corrections; vehicles of the Illinois Department of Juvenile
Justice; vehicles of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency; vehicles of the
Office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal; mine rescue and explosives emergency
response vehicles of the Department of Natural Resources; vehicles of the
Illinois Department of Public Health; vehicles of the Illinois State Toll
Highway Authority with a gross vehicle weight rating of 9,000 pounds or more
and those identified as Highway Emergency Lane Patrol; vehicles of the Illinois
Department of Transportation identified as Emergency Traffic Patrol; and
vehicles of a municipal or county emergency services and disaster agency, as
defined by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. (625 ILCS 5/1-105)
   BICYCLE.    A vehicle composed of two wheels held in a frame one behind the
other, propelled by manpower and steered with handlebars attached to the front
wheel. (Ord. 4206, passed 10-15-24)
   BUS. Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying
more than ten persons.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within 600 feet along the highway there are buildings in use for business or
industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side, or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108)
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons
or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-
hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a
ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational
vehicle not being used commercially.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8)
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street, or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the highway, street, or roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112)
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of a
highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral
line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk,
with the extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the highway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface,
placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation as authorized in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113)
   CUSTOMER . A person who buys goods or services. As applied to the downtown
"customer parking areas", it is a person who parks their vehicle for the
purpose of visiting a downtown business establishment and who may buy a good or
a service. It is not a person who parks their vehicle and proceeds to go to
work in a downtown business establishment and may or may not buy a good or a
service in the downtown area during their work period.
(Ord. 2903, passed 6-27-94)
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116)
   FARM TRACTOR.    Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines, and other implements of
husbandry, and every implement of husbandry which is self-propelled excluding
all-terrain vehicles and off-highway motorcycles as defined in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 4206, passed 10-15-24)
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle, whether operated singly or in
combination, without load, plus the weight of load thereon.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125)
   HANDICAPPED PERSON. See PERSON WITH DISABILITIES.
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or located on public school property.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126)
   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for
agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm
wagons, wagon trailers, or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for
lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry, provided that no farm wagon,
wagon trailer, or like vehicle having a gross weight of more than 36,000
pounds, shall be included hereunder.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130)
   IMPROVED HIGHWAY. Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam and
crushed stone, or gravel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131)
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (3)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not
constitute an intersection.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132)
   LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL. An official traffic-control device consisting of an
electrically controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular
design, and employing distinctive colors or symbols used to control the
direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the indication
applies.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135)
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136)
   LEASE. A written document vesting exclusive possession, use, control, and
responsibility of the lessee during the periods the vehicle is operated by or
for the lessee for a specific period of time.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137)
   LICENSE TO DRIVE. Any driver's license or any other license or permit to
operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of this state including:
      (1)   Any temporary license or instruction permit;
      (2)   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle, whether or
not the person holds a valid license or permit;
      (3)   Any nonresident's driving privilege as defined herein.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138)
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, city, and other local board or body having
authority to enact laws relating to traffic under the constitution and laws of
this state and each road district highway commissioner having that authority.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140)
   LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC SCOOTER. A device weighing less than 100 pounds, with two
or three wheels, handlebars, and a floorboard that can be stood upon while
riding, that is solely powered by an electric motor and human power, and whose
maximum speed, with or without human propulsion, is no more than ten miles per
hour. LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC SCOOTER does not include a moped or motor-driven
cycle. (625 ILCS 5/1-140.11)
   MAIL. To deposit in the United States mail properly addressed and with
postage prepaid. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-141)
   MERGING TRAFFIC. Notwithstanding the right-of-way provision in Section 11-
901 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, at an intersection where traffic lanes
are provided for merging traffic, the driver of each vehicle on the converging
roadways is required to adjust his or her vehicular speed and lateral position
so as to avoid a collision with another vehicle. (Ord. 4206, passed 10-15-24)
   MOPED. A motor-driven cycle, with or without optional power derived from
manually operated pedals, whose speed attainable in one mile is at least 20
m.p.h. but not greater than 30 m.p.h., and equipped with a motor that produces
two brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is used, the
displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and the power
drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, except for vehicles
moved solely by human power, motorized wheelchairs, low-speed electric
bicycles, and low-speed gas bicycles. For this section, motor vehicles are
divided into two divisions:
      (1)   First division. Those motor vehicles which are designed for
carrying not more than ten persons.
      (2)   Second division. Those motor vehicles which are designed for
carrying more than ten persons, those designed or used for living quarters, and
those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or
cargo, and those motor vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and
used as motor vehicles of the second division.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146)
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than
150 cubic centimeter piston displacement, including motorized pedalcycles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001)
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider, and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding an autocycle or tractor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147)
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for and used by a
handicapped excess of eight m.p.h. on level ground.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3)
   NONCOMMERCIAL VEHICLE.    Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.8)
   NOT-FOR-HIRE. Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise, but not-for-hire.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153)
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings, and devices
which conform with the state manual, and not inconsistent with this title,
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154)
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the event a
motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of the motor vehicle
is entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155)
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
( ILCS, Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156)
   PARKWAY. That portion of a street right-of-way between the curb lines, or
the lateral lines of the roadway and the adjacent property lines, including a
sidewalk, that has not been improved by the application of cement, asphalt, or
other material laid down so as to permit vehicle parking on the parkway without
causing ruts in the ground or causing eventual erosion of the ground. This
definition does not permit the application of material to a parkway area such
that it will not be considered a parkway.
(Ord. 2883, passed 4-11-94)
   PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle of the first division, including a
multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than ten
persons.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot or wearing in-line speed skates or riding a
skateboard, including a person with a physical, hearing or visual disability.
(Ord. 4206, passed 10-15-24)
   PEDESTRIAN HYBRID BEACON. A traffic-control device used to warn and control
traffic, at locations that are otherwise without a traffic-control signal, to
assist pedestrians in crossing a street or highway at a marked crosswalk. (625
ILCS 5/1-158.2)
   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES. A natural person who, as determined by a licensed
physician, by a licensed physician assistant, by a licensed advanced practice
registered nurse, or by a licensed physical therapist:
      (1)   Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane,
crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive
device;
      (2)   Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that his or her
forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second, when measured by
spirometry, is less than one liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than
60 mm/hg on room air at rest;
      (3)   Uses portable oxygen;
      (4)   Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional
limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV, according to
standards set by the American Heart Association;
      (5)   Is severely limited in the person's ability to walk due to an
arthritic, neurological, oncological, or orthopedic condition;
      (6)   Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest because of one of the
above five conditions; or
      (7)   Is missing a hand or arm or has permanently lost the use of a hand
or arm.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests and issue citations for violations of traffic regulations.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162)
   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place where any person transacts his
principal business, or where he makes up and approves his payroll, maintains a
central file of records, and maintains his principal executive offices. In the
event that not all of these functions are performed in one place, then that
place where a majority of such functions are performed, or the place where such
person does in fact principally transact and control his business affairs shall
be considered as the principal place of business.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5)
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership, and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163)
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166)
   RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING. The intersection of stationary rails owned
or used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway. (ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 1-166.1)
   RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device, other than an
official traffic-control signal or device, erected in accordance with the laws
governing the same, and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad
tracks or the approach of a railroad train or railroad track equipment. (ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167)
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168)
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every camping trailer, motor home, mini motor home,
travel trailer, truck camper, or van camper used primarily for recreational
purposes, and not used commercially nor owned by a commercial business.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169)
   REGISTRATION.    The registration certificate or certificates, registration
plates and registration stickers issued under the laws of this state pertaining
to the registration of vehicles. REGISTRATION includes digital registration
plates and digital registration stickers issued by the Secretary of State under
625 ILCS 5/3-401.5.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171)
   REGISTRATION STICKER. A device or devices to be attached to a rear
registration plate that will renew the registration and registration plate or
plates for a pre-determined period not to exceed one registration year except
as provided in subsection (1) of 625 ILCS 5/3-414. Should the Secretary of
State determine it is advisable to require a registration sticker to be
attached to a front registration plate, he may require such action and provide
the necessary additional sticker. Such determination shall be publicly
announced at least 30 days in advance of a new annual registration year.
REGISTRATION STICKER includes digital registration plates and digital
registration stickers issued by the Secretary of State under 625 ILCS 5/3-
401.5.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171)
   REMOVE. Includes removing, defacing, covering, or destroying.
   RESCUE SQUAD. A voluntary association of individuals, or a fire department,
dedicated to saving lives through the rescue of persons entrapped in wrecked
vehicles or other hazardous circumstances, and associated with some unit of
government.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6)
   RESCUE SQUAD VEHICLE. A vehicle specifically designed, configured, and
equipped for the performance of access and extrication from hazardous or life-
endangering situations. However, if such vehicles have emergency medical
transport capability, they must be classified as rescue vehicles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-223 [repealed])
   RESCUE VEHICLE. Any publicly or privately owned vehicle which is
specifically designed, configured, and equipped for the performance of access
and extrication of persons from hazardous or life-endangering situations, as
well as for the emergency transportation of persons who are sick, injured,
wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8)
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.    The territory contiguous to and including a highway,
not comprising a business district, when the property on the highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business. For purposes of establishing
maximum speed limits, a RESIDENCE DISTRICT shall be at least a quarter of a
mile long with residences or residences and buildings in use for businesses
spaced no more than 500 feet apart.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172)
   RETAIL SALE. The act or attempted act of selling vehicles or otherwise
disposing of a vehicle to a person for use as a consumer.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174)
   REVERSIBLE LANE. A lane of a two or more laned roadway upon which traffic
may be directed to move in either direction by means of lane-control signals or
other devices, in conjunction with official signs.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-175 [repealed])
   REVOCATION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE. The termination by formal action of the
secretary, of a person's license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the
public highways, which termination shall not be subject to renewal or
restoration, except that an application for a new license may be presented and
acted upon by the secretary after the expiration of at least one year after the
date of revocation.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed, and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision, unless one grants precedence to the other.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177)
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178)
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways
collectively.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179)
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181)
   SCHOOL BUS.
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (2) below,
owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the
transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in grade 12 or below
in connection with any activity of the entity:
         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school;
         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a religious
institution; or
         (c)   Any public, private, or religious nursery school.
      (2)   This definition does not include the following:
         (a)   A bus operated by a public utility, city corporation, or common
carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban transportation of passengers
when the bus is not traveling a specific school bus route but is:
            1.   On a regularly scheduled route for the transportation of other
fare-paying passengers;
            2.   Furnishing charter service for the transportation of groups on
field trips or other special trips or in connection with special events; or
            3.   Being used for shuttle service between attendance centers or
other educational facilities.
         (b)   A motor vehicle of the First Division.
         (c)   A multifunction school-activity bus.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182)
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle, and so constructed its weight and that of its load rests upon or is
carried by another vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187)
   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION.
      (1) A conviction when operating a motor vehicle for:
         (a)   A violation of division (A) of §
76.05, relating to a motor vehicle crash involving damage to a vehicle;
         (b)   A violation of §
76.04, relating to failure to stop and exchange information after a motor
vehicle collision, property damage only;
         (c)   A violation of subsection (a) of 625 ILCS 5/11-502, relating to
illegal transportation, possession, or carrying of alcoholic liquor within the
passenger area of any vehicle;
         (d)   A violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-101 relating to operating a motor
vehicle without a valid license or permit;
         (e)   A violation of §
76.04, relating to failure to stop and exchange information or give aid after a
motor vehicle collision involving personal injury or death;
         (f)   A violation relating to excessive speeding, involving a single
speeding charge of 26 miles per hour or more above the legal speed limit;
         (g)   A violation relating to reckless driving;
         (h)   A violation of subsection (d) of 625 ILCS 5/11-707, relating to
passing in a no-passing zone;
         (i)   A violation of division (B) of §
71.095, relating to limitations on backing upon a controlled access highway;
         (j)   A violation of division (B) of §
71.047, relating to driving on the left side of a roadway in a no-passing zone;
         (k)   A violation of division (E) of §
74.02, relating to failure to yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian at an
intersection;
         (l)   A violation of §
74.09, relating to failure to yield to a pedestrian on a sidewalk; or
         (m)   A violation of §
71.080, relating to failure to stop for an approaching railroad train or
railroad track equipment or signals; or
      (2)   Any other similar violation of a law or local ordinance of any
state relating to motor vehicle traffic control, other than a parking
violation.
      (3)   A violation of any of these defined serious traffic offenses shall
not preclude the defendant from being eligible to receive an order of court
supervision under Section 5-6-1 of the Unified Code of Corrections.
(625 ILCS 5/1-187.001)
   SHOULDER. That portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for
accommodating stopped vehicles or for emergency use.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1)
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)
   SPEED-CHANGE LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for
the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through
traffic lanes.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193)
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194)
   STATE. A state, territory, or possession of the United States, the District
of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a province of the Dominion of
Canada.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195)
   STATE HIGHWAYS. Defined in the Illinois Highway Code as the same may from
time to time be amended.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196)
   STATE POLICE. The Illinois state police.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197)
   STOP. The complete cessation from movement.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199)
   STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign
or signal.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200)
   STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201)
   SUBURBAN DISTRICT. That portion of the city other than the business and
residence districts.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203)
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic
is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way
to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a
yield sign, when those signs are erected as provided in this title.
((ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205)
   TOW TRUCK. Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to
push, tow, carry upon, or draw vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, towbar,
towline, or auxiliary axle, or carried upon to render assistance to disabled
vehicles, except for any truck tractor temporarily converted to a tow truck by
means of a portable wrecker unit attached to the fifth wheel of the truck
tractor and used only by the owner to tow a disabled vehicle also owned by him
or her and never used for hire.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207)
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any official traffic-control device other than a
railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to
proceed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208)
   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. Any provision of this code or other regulatory
ordinance the purpose of which is to directly control or improve traffic and
safety of both vehicles and pedestrians.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209)
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide living
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, and of a size or weight not
requiring an overdimension permit when towed on a highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01)
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211)
   TRUCK CAMPER. A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a portable
unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, travel, or camping use.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01)
   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn, or a power unit that carries as
property motor vehicles when operating in combination with a semitrailer in
transporting motor vehicles or any other commodity including cargo or general
freight, on a backhaul.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212)
   URBAN AREA. An urban area is any incorporated or unincorporated area
developed primarily for residential or business purposes.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.8)
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses,
and situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of 1/4 mile or
more.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214)
   VEHICLE.
      (1)   Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway or requiring a certificate of title
under ILCS 625 5/3-101(d), except devices moved by human power, devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and snowmobiles as defined in the
Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act.
      (2)   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise prescribed, a
device shall be considered to be a vehicle until such time it either comes
within the definition of a junk vehicle, as defined under this chapter, or a
junking certificate is issued for it.
      (3)   For this chapter, vehicles are divided into two divisions:
         (a)   First Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten persons.
         (b)   Second Division: Those vehicles which are designed for carrying
more than ten persons, those designed or used for living quarters and those
vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying property, freight, or cargo
and those motor vehicles of the First Division remodeled for use and used as
motor vehicles of the Second Division.
(625 ILCS 5/1-217)
   YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY. When required by an official sign, the act of granting
the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic
within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left, but
when the roadway is clear may proceed into the intersection.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-219 [repealed])
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
§ 70.10 OBEDIENCE TO LAWFUL AUTHORITIES.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer, firefighter, person authorized by lawful
authority to direct traffic, or school crossing guard vested by law with
authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. Any person convicted of
violating this section is guilty of a petty offense and shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of $150.
(Ord. 4206, passed 10-15-24) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Obedience to police officers, see 625 ILCS 5/11-203
§ 70.11 PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC CODE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, the state, or any county, city, town, district,
or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this
section, and subject to specific exceptions as set forth in this title with
reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (C)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property;
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing the direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
   (D)   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle,
other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is making use of
either an audible signal when in motion, or visual signals meeting the
requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215.
   (E)   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of
all persons, nor do these provisions protect the driver from the consequences
of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   (F)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this traffic
code shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles, and equipment while actually
engaged in work upon the highway, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.12 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN
VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those
provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.13 FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who,
having been given a visual or audible signal by a police officer directing the
driver or operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, willfully fails or refuses
to obey that direction, increases his speed, extinguishes his lights, or
otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer. The signal given by the
police officer may be by hand, voice, siren, or a red or blue light. However,
the officer giving the signal shall be in police uniform and, if driving a
vehicle, the vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official police
vehicle.
Penalty, see § 70.99
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKINGS
§ 70.30 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed or held in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
in this traffic code.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across
private property to avoid an official traffic control device.
   (C)   No provision of this traffic code for which official traffic-control
devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control
devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices
are erected or in place.
   (D)   Whenever any official traffic-control device is placed or held in
position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic code and
purports to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such device, such
device shall be presumed to have been so placed or held by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, and comply with the requirements of this traffic
code, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic control signal on which
no signal light facing such vehicle is illuminated shall stop before entering
the intersection in accordance with rules applicable in making a stop at a stop
sign. This provision does not apply to the driver of a vehicle approaching a
pedestrian hybrid beacon.
   (F)   Any violation of division (A) of this section that occurs within a
designated highway construction zone or maintenance zone shall result in a fine
of no less than $100 and no more than $1,000.
(625 ILCS 5/11-305) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.31 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows, successively one at a time or
in combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   Green indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by the arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as
provided in §
70.32, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal
is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
   (B)   Steady yellow indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or
that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal,
unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in §
70.32, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway
before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross
the roadway.
   (C)   Flashing yellow arrow indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a flashing yellow arrow indication may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the
arrow and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing a flashing yellow arrow indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in § 70.32, may
proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk that crosses
the lane or lanes used to depart the intersection by traffic controlled by the
flashing yellow arrow indication. Pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the flashing yellow
signal indication is first displayed.
   (D)   Steady red indication.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such
crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain standing
until an indication to proceed is shown.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, vehicular
traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter the intersection to
make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection
to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then
before entering the intersection; and shall remain standing until an indication
permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is shown.
      (3)   Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and the city
authorities by ordinance or state authorities by rule or regulation prohibit
any such turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously
enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street
into a one-way street, after stopping as required by division (C)(1) or (C)(2)
of this section. After stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction or roadways. The driver shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.
      (4)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in §
70.32, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone shall
not enter the roadway.
   (E)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can
have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made; or, in the absence of
such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.32 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or
"Don't Walk" or the illuminated symbols of a walking person or an upraised palm
are in place, these signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   "Walk" or walking person symbol. Pedestrians facing this signal may
proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given
the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
   (B)   "Don't Walk" or upraised palm signal. No pedestrian shall start to
cross the roadway in the direction of this signal, but any pedestrian who has
partly completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal or upraised palm symbol
shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" signal or
upraised palm symbol is illuminated, steady, or flashing.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.33 LANE-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official signs,
they shall have the following meanings:
   (A)   Downward-pointing green arrow. A driver facing this indication is
permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal is located.
Otherwise, he shall obey all other traffic controls present and follow normal
safe driving practices.
   (B)   Red X symbol. A driver facing this indication shall not drive in the
lane over which the signal is located, and this indication shall modify
accordingly the meaning of all other traffic controls present. Otherwise he
shall obey all other traffic controls, and follow normal safe driving
practices.
   (C)   Yellow X (steady). A driver facing this indication should prepare to
vacate the lane over which the signal is located, in a safe manner to avoid, if
possible, occupying that lane when a steady red X is displayed.
   (D)   Flashing yellow arrow. A driver facing this indication may use the
lane only for the purpose of approaching and making a left turn.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.34 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in conjunction
with a traffic-control device, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic
as follows:
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past the signal only with caution.
   (C)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.35 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS, OR ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be,
or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or the
effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   No person may place or maintain, nor may any public authority permit,
upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial
advertising.
   (C)   Every prohibited sign, signal, or marking is declared to be a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is empowered
to remove the same, or cause it to be removed without notice.
   (D)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic-control device to
be used on any street or highway in this city which does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information,
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.36 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR
SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control
device, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia
thereon, or any other part thereof.
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalties which
may be imposed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311)
§ 70.37 UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES, AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure or damage any
public highway or street, or any bridge or culvert, or to willfully damage,
injure, or remove any sign, signpost, or structure upon or used or constructed
in connection with any public highway or street for the protection thereof, or
for the protection or regulation of traffic thereon, by any willfully unusual,
improper, or unreasonable use thereof, or by willfully careless driving or use
of any vehicle thereon, or by willful mutilation, defacing, destruction, or
removal thereof.
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalty which may
be imposed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.38 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGN OR MARKER.
   The City Street Division, with reference to traffic-control signs, signals,
or markers owned by the city, is authorized to indicate the ownership of the
signs, signals, or markers in letters not less than 3/8 inch, or more than 3/
4 inch in height, by use of a metal stamp, etching, or other permanent means.
Except for employees of the City Street Division, police officers, contractors
and their employees engaged in a highway construction contract or work on the
highway approved by the city, it is unlawful for any person to possess a sign,
signal, or marker so identified.
(Ord. 4206, passed 10-15-24)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.39 VEHICULAR NOISE.
   (A)   Sound amplification system.
      (1)   No driver of any motor vehicle within the city shall operate or
permit operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside
the vehicle at a point 75 or more feet in distance from said vehicle, when the
vehicle is being operated upon a highway or street unless such system is being
operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.
      (2)   This section does not apply to emergency vehicles.
      (3)   Any violation of this provisions of this section shall be a petty
offense punishable as provided by the penalty section of this Code.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no
person operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device except in an emergency.
(Ord. 3217, passed 6-28-99)
§ 70.40 NO-TURNING SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-
turn is permitted no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the
sign. When authorized marks, buttons, or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be travelled by vehicles, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.
§ 70.41 STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
signs or yield signs as authorized in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersection
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering the intersection. (Ord. 4206, passed 10-15-24)
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for
safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.42 LOCATION OF CITY TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS.
   The locations of authorized traffic-control signs in the city are set forth
in Title XVII of this code. Any authorized traffic-control sign installed
within the city limits, even if not specifically listed in Title XVII of this
code, shall be considered valid and enforceable under this traffic code.
(Ord. 4212, passed 11-12-24)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Traffic violations. Whoever violates any provision of this traffic
code for which another penalty is not already otherwise provided, shall, for a
first or second conviction thereof, be guilty of a petty offense, and, for a
third or subsequent conviction within one year after the first conviction, be
guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 16-104)
   (B)   (1)   Any person accused of violating any provision of this traffic
code that prohibits parking in a designated area or restricts the length of
time a vehicle may be parked may settle and compromise the claim for such
illegal parking according to the following fine schedule:
         (a)   If paid within five days of the violation, a fine of $10.
         (b)   If paid within 21 days of the violation, a fine of $20.
      (2)   Payments can be made at the police station, where a receipt will be
issued for all money received. All collected funds shall be promptly turned
over to the City Treasurer and credited to the General Fund. This section does
not apply to violations involving:
         (a)   Parking that obstructs the entrance or exit of any facility
where Police or Fire Department apparatus or other emergency equipment is
housed.
         (b)   Blocking an emergency entrance at a hospital.
         (c)   Parking that completely obstructs traffic on any street or alley
or reduces traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only.
         (d)   Refusal to move an illegally parked vehicle at the request of a
member of the Police Department.
(Ord. 4206, passed 10-15-24)
CHAPTER 71: RULES OF OPERATION
Section
Speed Restrictions
   
71.001   Speed limits
   
71.002   Special speed limits while passing schools and while traveling through
highway construction or maintenance zones
   
71.003   (Reserved)
   
71.004   Minimum speed regulation
   
71.005   Speed limits in alleys
Turning and Starting; Signals
   
71.020   Required position and method of turning at intersections
   
71.021   Limitations on U-turns
   
71.022   Starting parked vehicle
   
71.023   When signal required
   
71.024   Signal by hand and arm or signal device
   
71.025   Method of giving hand and arm signals
Overtaking and Passing
   
71.040   Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions
   
71.041   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
   
71.042   Overtaking vehicles on the left
   
71.043   When overtaking on the right is permitted
   
71.044   Limitations on overtaking on the left
   
71.045   Meeting or overtaking school bus
   
71.046   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
71.047   No-passing zones
   
71.048   Driving on roadways laned for traffic
Right-of-Way
   
71.060   Vehicles approaching or entering intersection
   
71.061   Vehicle turning left
   
71.062   Vehicles entering stop crosswalk
   
71.063   Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection
   
71.064   Merging traffic
   
71.065   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
   
71.066   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
   
71.067   Funeral processions
Special Stops Required
   
71.080   Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or railroad tract
equipment
   
71.081   Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings
   
71.082   Emerging from alley, building, private road, or driveway
   
71.083   Stop when traffic obstructed
Prohibitions
   
71.095   Backing
   
71.096   Following vehicle too closely
   
71.097   Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism
   
71.098   Opening vehicle doors
   
71.099   Coasting
   
71.100   Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose
   
71.101   Driving upon sidewalk
   
71.102   Use of roller skates, coasters, or similar devices
   
71.103   Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway prohibited
   
71.104   Obstructing person in highways
   
71.105   Farm tractor operation
   
71.106   Driving on controlled-access highway
Parades
   
71.120   Definitions
   
71.121   Permit required
   
71.122   Application for permit
   
71.123   Standards for issuance of permit
   
71.124   Notice of rejection of permit application
   
71.125   Appeal procedure when permit denied
   
71.126   Alternative permit
   
71.127   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued
   
71.128   Contents of permit
   
71.129   Duties of permittee
   
71.130   Public conduct during parades
   
71.131   Revocation of permit
Operation of Qualified Non-highway Vehicles on Streets
   
71.140   Non-highway vehicles
   
71.141   Definitions
   
71.142   Vehicle requirements
   
71.143   Restrictions
   
71.144   Operation of golf carts/ROHV/UTV
   
71.145   Annual registration of golf carts/ROHV/UTV
   
71.146   Inspection of vehicles
   
71.147   Mandatory insurance
   
71.148   Operation limited to licensed drivers
   
71.149   Other laws, regulations, and ordinances
   
71.150   Use under the influence
   
71.151   Revocation or denial of registration
   
71.152   Violations and penalty
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
§ 71.001 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No vehicle may be driven upon any highway of this city at a speed
which is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the highway, or which endangers the safety of any
person or property. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the
applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching
and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person
or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and
the duty of all persons to use due care.
   (B)   No person may drive a vehicle upon any street at a speed which is
greater than the applicable statutory maximum speed limit established by
divisions (C) and (D) below, by §
71.002, or by a regulation or ordinance made under this chapter.
   (C)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this chapter,
the maximum speed limit in an urban district (as defined in §
70.01) for all vehicles is:
      (1)   Thirty miles per hour; and
      (2)   Ten miles per hour in an alley.
   (D)   Unless some lesser speed restriction is established under this
chapter, the maximum speed limit in a non-urban district is 55 miles per hour.
   (E)   A fine for this section shall be set forth as provided in Illinois
Supreme Court Rule 528.
(Ord. 3475, passed 8-22-05; Am. Ord. 3482, passed 10-11-05)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate speed, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1 and ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-604
   Similar state statute, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601
§ 71.002 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS OR WHILE TRAVELING THROUGH
HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE ZONES.
   (A)   While passing schools.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (A), SCHOOL means the following
entities:
         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school.
         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a religious
institution.
         (c)   A public, private, or religious nursery school.
      (2)   On a school day when school children are present and so close
thereto that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity of the
motorized traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess
of 20 miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling on a local,
county, or state roadway on public school property or upon any public
thoroughfare where children pass going to and from school.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division (A), a school day begins at 6:30
a.m. and concludes at 4:00 p.m.
      (4)   This division (A) shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs
are posted upon streets and highways under their respective jurisdiction and
maintained by the Department, township, county, park district, city, village or
incorporated town wherein the school zone is located. With regard to the
special speed limit while passing schools, such signs shall give proper due
warning that a school zone is being approached and shall indicate the school
zone and the maximum speed limit in effect during school days when school
children are present.
      (5)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of electronic speed-
detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a special school speed zone
indicating such zone, as defined in this division (A), nor shall evidence
obtained thereby be inadmissible in any prosecution for speeding provided the
use of such device shall apply only to the enforcement of the speed limit in
such special school speed zone.
      (6)   Except as provided in division (A)(7) of this section, a person who
violates this division (A) is guilty of a petty offense. Violations of this
division (A) are punishable with a minimum fine of $150 for the first violation
and a minimum fine of $300 for the second or subsequent violation.
      (7)   A person committing a violation of this division (A) is guilty of
aggravated special speed limit while passing schools when he or she drives a
motor vehicle at a speed that is:
         (a)   Twenty-six miles per hour or more but less than 35 miles per
hour in excess of the applicable special speed limit established under this
division (A) or a similar provision of a local ordinance and is guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor; or
         (b)   Thirty-five miles per hour or more in excess of the applicable
special speed limit established under this division (A) or a similar provision
of a local ordinance and is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605)
   (B)   While traveling through highway construction or maintenance zones.
      (1)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a construction or
maintenance speed zone at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit when
workers are present.
      (2)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a construction or
maintenance speed zone at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit when
workers are not present.
      (3)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the use of electronic speed-
detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a construction or maintenance
speed zone indicating the zone, as defined in this division (B), nor shall
evidence obtained by use of those devices be inadmissible in any prosecution
for speeding, provided the use of the device shall apply only to the
enforcement of the speed limit in the construction or maintenance speed zone.
      (4)   As used in this division (B), a CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE SPEED
ZONE is an area in which the Department, Toll Highway Authority, or local
agency has posted signage advising drivers that a construction or maintenance
speed zone is being approached, or in which the Department, Authority, or local
agency has posted a lower speed limit with a highway construction or
maintenance speed zone special speed limit sign after determining that the
preexisting established speed limit through a highway construction or
maintenance project is greater than is reasonable or safe with respect to the
conditions expected to exist in the construction or maintenance speed zone.
         (a)   If it is determined that the preexisting established speed limit
is safe with respect to the conditions expected to exist in the construction or
maintenance speed zone, additional speed limit signs which conform to the
requirements of this division (B)(4) shall be posted.
         (b)   Highway construction or maintenance speed zone special speed
limit signs shall be of a design approved by the Department. The signs must
give proper due warning that a construction or maintenance speed zone is being
approached and must indicate the maximum speed limit in effect. The signs also
must state the amount of the minimum fine for a violation.
      (5)   Except as provided under division (B)(6) of this section, a person
who violates this division (B) is guilty of a petty offense. Violations of this
division (B) are punishable with a minimum fine of $250 for the first violation
and a minimum fine of $750 for the second or subsequent violation.
      (6)   A person committing a violation of this division (B) is guilty of
aggravated special speed limit while traveling through a highway construction
or maintenance speed zone when he or she drives a motor vehicle at a speed that
is:
         (a)   Twenty-six miles per hour or more but less than 35 miles per
hour in excess of the applicable special speed limit established under this
division (B) or a similar provision of a local ordinance and is guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor; or
         (b)   Thirty-five miles per hour or more in excess of the applicable
special speed limit established under this division (B) or a similar provision
of a local ordinance and is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
      (7)   The Illinois State Police and the local county police department
have concurrent jurisdiction over any violation of this division (B) that
occurs on an interstate highway.
      (8)   The Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund, which was created
by Public Act 92-619, shall continue to be a special fund in the state
treasury. Subject to appropriation by the General Assembly and approval by the
Secretary, the Secretary of Transportation shall use all moneys in the
Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund to hire off-duty Illinois State
Police officers to monitor construction or maintenance zones.
      (9)   Each county shall create a Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back
Fund. The county shall use the moneys in its Transportation Safety Highway
Hire-back Fund to hire off-duty county police officers to monitor construction
or maintenance zones in that county on highways other than interstate highways.
The county, in its discretion, may also use a portion of the moneys in its
Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund to purchase equipment for county
law enforcement and fund the production of materials to educate drivers on
construction zone safe driving habits.
      (10)   For a second or subsequent violation of this division (B) within
two years of the date of the previous violation, the Secretary of State shall
suspend the driver's license of the violator for a period of 90 days. This
suspension shall only be imposed if the current violation of this division (B)
and at least one prior violation of this division (B) occurred during a period
when workers were present in the construction or maintenance zone.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1)
§ 71.003 (RESERVED)
§ 71.004 MINIMUM SPEED REGULATION.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and regular movement of traffic except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation of his vehicle or in compliance with law.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a))
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.005 SPEED LIMITS IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of ten miles per
hour (mph) in any alley in the city.
(Ord. 3475, passed 8-22-05)
TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS
§ 71.020 REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows:
      (1)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made
as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection
shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and
after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction
upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   The State Department of Transportation and local authorities in
their respective jurisdictions may cause official traffic-control devices to be
placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that
a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles
turning at an intersection, and when such devices are so placed no driver of a
vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and
required by such devices.
   (B)   Two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for making left turns by
drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official
traffic-control devices:
      (1)   A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.
      (2)   A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing for
or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when preparing for or making
a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.021 LIMITATIONS ON U-TURNS.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where the
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within 500 feet.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.022 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked,
unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.023 WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is
in proper position upon the highway as required in §
71.020 or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn
a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person may so turn
any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter
provided.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, change lanes, otherwise
turn a vehicle from a direct course, move right or left upon a highway, or when
required must be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the vehicle within a business or residence district, and such
signal must be given continuously during not less than the last 200 feet
traveled by the vehicle outside a business or residence district.
   (C)   No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without
first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this chapter to
the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to
give such a signal.
   (D)   The electric turn signal device required in 625 ILCS 5/12-208 must be
used and operated as prescribed in division (B) of this section to indicate an
intention to turn, change lanes, turn a vehicle from a direct course, move
right or left upon a highway, or start from a parallel parked position. Unless
the conditions of division (B) of this section are met, an electric turn signal
device required in 625 ILCS 5/12-208 shall not be left in the on position and
must not be flashed on one side only on a parked or disabled vehicle or flashed
as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching
from the rear. However, such signal devices may be flashed simultaneously on
both sides of a motor vehicle to indicate the presence of a vehicular traffic
hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, overtaking and passing.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.024 SIGNAL BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.
   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm or by an electric turn signal device conforming to
the requirements provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.025 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the
vehicle in the following manner, and the signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn - hand and arm extended horizontally.
   (B)   Right turn - hand and arm extended upward, except that a person
operating a bicycle may extend the right hand or arm horizontally and to the
right side of the bicycle.
   (C)   Stop or decrease of speed - hand and arm extended downward.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806)
Penalty, see § 70.99
OVERTAKING AND PASSING
§ 71.040 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing those movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic;
      (5)   Whenever there is a single-track paved road on one side of the
public highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on the pavement to the other
vehicle.
   (B)   Upon a two lane roadway, providing for two-way movement of traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven in the right-hand lane available for traffic, or as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or
when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic, and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the
lanes, or except as permitted under division (A) (2). However, this division
shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making
a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (D)   Upon an interstate highway or fully access controlled freeway, a
vehicle may not be driven in the left lane, except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle.
   (E)   Division (D) of this section does not apply:
      (1)   When no other vehicle is directly behind the vehicle in the left
lane;
      (2)   When traffic conditions and congestion make it impractical to drive
in the right lane;
      (3)   When snow and other inclement weather conditions make it necessary
to drive in the left lane;
      (4)   When obstructions or hazards exist in the right lane;
      (5)   When a vehicle changes lanes to comply with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§
11-907, 11-907.5, and 11-908;
      (6)   When, because of highway design, a vehicle must be driven in the
left lane when preparing to exit;
      (7)   On toll highways when necessary to use I-Pass, and on toll and
other highways when driving in the left lane is required to comply with an
official traffic control device; or
      (8)   To law enforcement vehicles, ambulances, and other emergency
vehicles engaged in official duties and vehicles engaged in highway maintenance
and construction operations.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.041 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least ½ of
the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.042 OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE LEFT.
   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding
in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and special
rules otherwise stated in this chapter:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle. In no event shall the movement be made by driving off the
pavement or the main traveled portion of the roadway.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   (C)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon the left
of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right of any
vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an unobstructed lane
of traffic available to permit the passing maneuver safely.
   (D)   The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle or individual
proceeding in the same direction on a highway shall leave a safe distance, but
not less than three feet, when passing the bicycle or individual and shall
maintain that distance until safely past the overtaken bicycle or individual.
   (E)   A driver of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the
same direction on a highway may, subject to the provisions of division (D)
above and §
71.044, pass to the left of the bicycle on a portion of the highway designated
as a no-passing zone under §
71.047 if the driver is able to overtake and pass the bicycle when:
      (1)   The bicycle is traveling at a speed of less than half of the posted
speed limit of the highway;
      (2)   The driver is able to overtake and pass the bicycle without
exceeding the posted speed limit of the highway; and
      (3)   There is sufficient distance to the left of the centerline of the
highway for the motor vehicle to meet the overtaking and passing requirements
under this section.
   (F)   A person driving a motor vehicle shall not, in a reckless manner,
drive the motor vehicle unnecessarily close to, toward, or near a bicyclist,
pedestrian, or a person riding a horse or driving an animal drawn vehicle.
   (G)   Any person convicted or division (F) of this section shall be guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor if the violation does not result in great bodily harm
or permanent disability or disfigurement to another. If the violation results
in great bodily harm or permanent disability or disfigurement to another, the
person shall be guilty of a Class 3 felony.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.043 WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle with three or more wheels may overtake and
pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn.
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the right of any
other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the unobstructed pavement
to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width of not less than eight
feet. This division does not apply to devices propelled by human power.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. Such movement
shall not be made by driving off the roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.044 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   (A)   Passing on the left.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless authorized by the provisions of this chapter, and unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction, or any vehicle overtaken.
      (2)   In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized
lane of travel as soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement
involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705)
   (B)   Conditions where passing on the left is prohibited.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under
the following conditions:
         (a)   When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within a distance as to create a
hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
         (b)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.
         (c)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of
any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.
      (2)   The limitations in division (B)(1) above do not apply upon a one-
way roadway, nor upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for two or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction, nor to the driver of
a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road, or driveway when
the movements can be made with safety.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.045 MEETING OR OVERTAKING SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle before meeting or
overtaking, from either direction, any school bus stopped on a highway,
roadway, private road, parking lot, school property, or at any other location,
including, without limitation, a location that is not a highway or roadway for
the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils. Such stop is required before
reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the school bus the visual
signals as specified in 625 ILCS 5/12-803 and 12-805. The driver of the vehicle
shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the driver of the
vehicle is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals
are no longer actuated.
   (B)   The stop signal arm required by 625 ILCS 5/12-803 shall be extended
after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or
discharging pupils and shall be closed before the school bus is placed in
motion again. The stop signal arm shall not be extended at any other time.
   (C)   The alternately flashing red signal lamps of an 8-lamp flashing signal
system required by 625 ILCS 5/12-805 shall be actuated after the school bus has
come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils and
shall be turned off before the school bus is placed in motion again. The red
signal lamps shall not be actuated at any other time except as provided in
division (D) of this section.
   (D)   The alternately flashing amber signal lamps of an 8-lamp flashing
signal system required by 625 ILCS 5/12-805 shall be actuated continuously
during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the school bus before
stopping for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils within an urban area
and during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by the school bus outside
an urban area. The amber signal lamps shall remain actuated until the school
bus is stopped. The amber signal lamps shall not be actuated at any other time.
   (D-5)   The alternately flashing head lamps permitted by 625 ILCS 5/12-805
may be operated while the alternately flashing red or amber signal lamps
required by that section are actuated.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having four or more lanes which
permits at least two lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions need not
stop such vehicle upon meeting a school bus which is stopped in the opposing
roadway; and need not stop such vehicle when driving upon a controlled access
highway when passing a school bus traveling in either direction that is stopped
in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or improved part of the controlled
access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross.
   (F)   Beginning with the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1985, the
Secretary of State shall suspend for a period of three months the driving
privileges of any person convicted of a violation of division (A) of this
section or a similar provision of a local ordinance; the Secretary shall
suspend for a period of one year the driving privileges of any person convicted
of a second or subsequent violation of division (A) of this section or a
similar provision of a local ordinance if the second or subsequent violation
occurs within five years of a prior conviction for the same offense. In
addition to the suspensions authorized by this section, any person convicted of
violating this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance shall be
subject to a mandatory fine of $300 or, upon a second or subsequent violation,
$1,000, and community service in an amount set by the court. The Secretary may
also grant, for the duration of any suspension issued under this division, a
restricted driving permit granting the privilege of driving a motor vehicle
between the driver's residence and place of employment or within other proper
limits that the Secretary of State shall find necessary to avoid any undue
hardship. A restricted driving permit issued hereunder shall be subject to
cancellation, revocation and suspension by the Secretary of State in like
manner and for like cause as a driver's license may be cancelled, revoked or
suspended; except that a conviction upon one or more offenses against laws or
ordinances regulating the movement of traffic shall be deemed sufficient cause
for the revocation, suspension or cancellation of the restricted driving
permit. The Secretary of State may, as a condition to the issuance of a
restricted driving permit, require the applicant to participate in a designated
driver remedial or rehabilitative program. Any conviction for a violation of
this division shall be included as an offense for the purposes of determining
suspension action under any other provision of this chapter, provided however,
that the penalties provided under this division shall be imposed unless those
penalties imposed under other applicable provisions are greater.
      The owner of any vehicle alleged to have violated division (A) of this
section shall, upon appropriate demand by the State's Attorney or other
designated person acting in response to a signed complaint, provide a written
statement or deposition identifying the operator of the vehicle if such
operator was not the owner at the time of the alleged violation. Failure to
supply such information shall result in the suspension of the vehicle
registration of the vehicle for a period of three months. In the event the
owner has assigned control for the use of the vehicle to another, the person to
whom control was assigned shall comply with the provisions of this paragraph
and be subject to the same penalties as herein provided.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.046 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be
driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as shall be
indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island must be driven only
to the right of the island.
   (C)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by
leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or a clearly indicated
dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle
must be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to
use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No
vehicle may be driven over, across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or
section except through an opening in the physical barrier, or dividing section,
or space, or at a cross-over or intersection as established by public
authority.
   (D)   The driver of a vehicle may turn left across a paved noncurbed
dividing space unless prohibited by an official traffic-control device.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.047 NO-PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees is authorized to determine those portions of any
highway within the city where overtaking and passing or driving on the left of
the roadway would be especially hazardous, and may by appropriate signs or
markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of the zones, and when
signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant
person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as
set forth in division (A) no driver may at any time drive on the left side of
the roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement
striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its length.
   (C)   This section does not apply under the conditions described in §
71.040(A)(2), §
71.044(E), nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley,
private road, or driveway. The pavement striping designed to mark the no-
passing zone may be crossed from the left-hand lane for the purpose of
completing a pass that was begun prior to the beginning of the zone in the
driver’s direction of travel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.048 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith
shall apply.
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-
way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same
direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or
in preparation for making a left turn or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle
is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic control
devices.
   (C)   Official traffic control devices may be erected directing specific
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the
roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.
On multi-lane controlled access highways with three or more lanes in one
direction or on any multi-laned highway with two or more lanes in one
direction, the Department may designate lanes of traffic to be used by
different types of motor vehicles. Drivers must obey lane designation signing
except when it is necessary to use a different lane to make a turning maneuver.
   (D)   Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of every such device.
   (E)   A person is not in violation of this section if he or she is complying
with 625 ILCS 5/11-907, 11-907.5, or 11-908.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709)
Penalty, see § 70.99
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 71.060 VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different roadways
at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left must
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. This rule may be modified
at through highways or streets and where otherwise inconsistent with the
provisions of this traffic code.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.061 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection
or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed
as soon as a safe interval occurs.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.062 VEHICLES ENTERING STOP CROSSWALK.
   Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection, or
flashing red signals are in place at a plainly marked crosswalk between
intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk, and pedestrians within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of
the roadway shall have the right-of-way over vehicles so stopped. Drivers of
vehicles having so yielded the right-of-way to pedestrians entering or within
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection shall also yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians within any other crosswalk at the intersection.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.063 VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION.
   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
or yield signs.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another roadway, or which
is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection,
but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed as soon as a safe interval
occurs.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience
to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and,
if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but
if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, of
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or
stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection.
   (D)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield
right-of-way sign, the collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.064 MERGING TRAFFIC.
   Notwithstanding the right-of-way provision in §
71.060, at an intersection where traffic lanes are provided for merging
traffic, the driver of each vehicle on the converging roadways is required to
adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with
another vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.065 VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley,
building, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.066 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of this chapter, or
a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible or visual
signal, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection, and
shall, if necessary to permit the safe passage of the emergency vehicle, stop
and remain in that position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907(a)(1), (b)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.067 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections when
vehicles comprising the procession have their headlights and hazard lights
lighted, subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
      (1)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an
audible or visible signal;
      (2)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way when directed to do so by a traffic officer;
      (3)   The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall
comply with stop signs and traffic-control signals but when the leading vehicle
has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with the signal or after
stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in the procession may
proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or signal, and the leading
vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed with due caution.
   (B)   The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall not
drive his vehicle in the funeral procession except when authorized to do so by
a traffic officer or when such vehicle is an authorized emergency vehicle
giving audible or visible signal.
   (C)   Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may not form
a procession or convoy and have their headlights or hazard lights or both
lighted for the purpose of securing the right-of-way granted by this section to
funeral processions.
   (D)   The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and
pass the vehicles in such procession if such overtaking and passing can be
accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering with such
procession.
   (E)   The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped with a
flashing amber light which may be used only when such vehicle is used as a lead
vehicle in such procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral procession may
utilize funeral pennants or flags or windshield stickers or flashing hazard
warning signal flashers to identify the individual vehicles in such a
procession.
   (F)   In the absence of law enforcement traffic control assistance for a
funeral procession, a funeral director or his or her designee may direct
traffic during a funeral procession.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 71.080 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN OR RAILROAD TRACK
EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing where the driver is not always required to stop, the person must
exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad track across a
highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in
this section, the driver shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until the tracks
are clear and he or she can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall
apply when:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman gives or continues to
give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
      (3)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment approaching a highway
crossing emits a warning signal and such railroad train or railroad track
equipment, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate
hazard;
      (4)   An approaching railroad train or railroad track equipment is
plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing;
      (5)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment is approaching so
closely that an immediate hazard is created.
   (A-1)   Whenever any person driving a commercial motor vehicle, as defined
in 625 ILCS 5/6-500, approaches a railroad grade crossing where the driver is
not always required to stop, the person must exercise due care and caution as
the existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and
under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall stop
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad
and shall not proceed until the tracks are clear and he or she can do so
safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman gives or continues to
give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
      (3)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment approaching a highway
crossing emits a warning signal and such railroad train or railroad track
equipment, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate
hazard;
      (4)   An approaching railroad train or railroad track equipment is
plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing;
      (5)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment is approaching so
closely that an immediate hazard is created.
   (A-5)   Whenever a person driving a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in
625 ILCS 5/6-500, approaches a railroad grade crossing where the driver is not
always required to stop but must slow down, the person must exercise due care
and caution as the existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning
of danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the
driver shall slow down within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he or she checks that
the tracks are clear of an approaching train or railroad track equipment.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   The Department, and local authorities with the approval of the
Department, are hereby authorized to designate particularly dangerous highway
grade crossings of railroads and to erect stop signs thereat. When such stop
signs are erected the driver of any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall proceed only
upon exercising due care.
   (D)   At any railroad grade crossing provided with railroad crossbuck signs,
without automatic, electric, or mechanical signal devices, crossing gates, or a
human flagman giving a signal of the approach or passage of a train or railroad
track equipment, the driver of a vehicle shall in obedience to the railroad
crossbuck sign, yield the right-of-way and slow down to a speed reasonable for
the existing conditions and shall stop, if required for safety, at a clearly
marked stopped line, or if no stop line, within 50 feet but not less than 15
feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he or
she can do so safely. If a driver is involved in a collision at a railroad
crossing or interferes with the movement of a train or railroad track equipment
after driving past the railroad crossbuck sign, the collision or interference
is prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way.
   (D-1)   No person shall, while driving a commercial motor vehicle, fail to
negotiate a railroad-highway grade railroad crossing because of insufficient
undercarriage clearance.
   (E)   It is unlawful to violate any part of this section.
      (1)   A violation of this section is a petty offense for which a fine of
$500 shall be imposed for a first violation, and a fine of $1,000 shall be
imposed for a second or subsequent violation. The court may impose 25 hours of
community service in place of the $500 fine for the first violation.
      (2)   For a second or subsequent violation, the Secretary of State may
suspend the driving privileges of the offender for a minimum of six months.
   (F)   Corporate authorities of municipal corporations regulating operators
of vehicles that fail to obey signals indicating the presence, approach,
passage, or departure of a train or railroad track equipment shall impose fines
as established in division (E) of this section.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1201)
§ 71.081 CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before crossing a
railroad track or tracks at grade, stop such vehicle within 50 feet but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail and, while so stopped, shall listen and
look for the approach of a train or railroad track equipment and shall not
proceed until such movement can be made with safety:
      (1)   Any second division vehicle carrying passengers for hire;
      (2)   Any bus that meets all of the special requirements for school buses
in 625 ILCS 5/12-801, 12-803, and 12-805. The driver of the bus, in addition to
complying with all other applicable requirements of this division (A), must
also (i) turn off all noise producing accessories, including heater blowers,
defroster fans, auxiliary fans, and radios, and (ii) open the service door and
driver's window, before crossing a railroad track or tracks;
   (A-1)   The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before crossing a
railroad track or tracks at grade, stop such vehicle within 50 feet but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail and, while so stopped, shall listen and
look for the approach of a train or railroad track equipment and shall not
proceed until such movement can be made with safety:
      (1)   A commercial motor vehicle, as defined in 625 ILCS 5/6-500,
carrying passengers for hire;
      (2)   Any bus that meets all of the special requirements for school buses
in 625 ILCS 5/12-801, 12-803, and 12-805 and is designed to transport 16 or
more persons, including the driver. The driver of the bus, in addition to
complying with all other applicable requirements of this division (A-1), must
also (i) turn off all noise producing accessories, including heater blowers,
defroster fans, auxiliary fans, and radios, and (ii) open the service door and
driver's window, before crossing a railroad track or tracks;
      (3)   Any other vehicle which is required by federal or state law to be
placarded when carrying as a cargo or part of a cargo hazardous material as
defined in the Illinois Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
   (A-5)   After stopping as required in this section, the driver shall proceed
only in a gear not requiring a change of gears during the crossing, and the
driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
   (B)   This section shall not apply:
      (1)   At any railroad grade crossing where traffic is controlled by a
police officer or flagperson;
      (2)   At any railroad grade crossing controlled by a functioning traffic-
control signal transmitting a green indication which, under law, permits the
vehicle to proceed across the railroad tracks without slowing or stopping,
except that division (A) of this section shall apply to any school bus;
      (3)   At any streetcar grade crossing within a business or residence
district; or
      (4)   At any abandoned, industrial or spur track railroad grade crossing
designated as exempt by the Illinois Commerce Commission and marked with an
official sign as authorized in the State Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1202)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.082 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING, PRIVATE ROAD, OR DRIVEWAY.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private
road, or driveway within an urban area shall stop the vehicle immediately prior
to driving into the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building
entrance, road, or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall
stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view
of approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrians as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.
   (B)   No driver shall enter a highway rail grade crossing unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the highway rail grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of a
train or other railroad equipment using the rails, notwithstanding any traffic-
control signal indication to proceed. Any person found in violation of this
division shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of community
service.
   (C)   Local authorities shall impose fines as established in division (B)
for persons found in violation of this section or any similar local ordinance.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.083 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk or railroad grade crossing to accommodate
the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (B)   No driver shall enter a highway rail grade crossing unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the highway rail grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of a
train or other railroad equipment using the rails, notwithstanding any traffic-
control signal indication to proceed.
   (B-5)   No driver operating a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in 625
ILCS 5/6-500, shall enter a highway rail grade crossing unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the highway rail grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of a
train or other railroad equipment using the rails, notwithstanding any traffic-
control signal indication to proceed.
   (C)   Beginning with the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 95th
General Assembly, the Secretary of State shall suspend for a period of one
month the driving privileges of any person convicted of a violation of division
(B) of this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance; the Secretary
shall suspend for a period of three months the driving privileges of any person
convicted of a second or subsequent violation of division (B) of this section
or a similar provision of a local ordinance if the second or subsequent
violation occurs within five years of a prior conviction for the same offense.
In addition to the suspensions authorized by this division, any person
convicted of violating division (B) of this section or a similar provision of a
local ordinance shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of
community service. Any person given a disposition of court supervision for
violating division (B) of this section or a similar provision of a local
ordinance shall also be subject to a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of
community service. Upon a second or subsequent violation, in addition to the
suspensions authorized by this division, the person shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of $500 and 50 hours community service. The Secretary may also
grant, for the duration of any suspension issued under this division, a
restricted driving permit granting the privilege of driving a motor vehicle
between the driver's residence and place of employment or within other proper
limits that the Secretary of State shall find necessary to avoid any undue
hardship. A restricted driving permit issued hereunder shall be subject to
cancellation, revocation and suspension by the Secretary of State in like
manner and for like cause as a driver's license may be cancelled, revoked or
suspended; except that a conviction upon one or more offenses against laws or
ordinances regulating the movement of traffic shall be deemed sufficient cause
for the revocation, suspension or cancellation of the restricted driving
permit. The Secretary of State may, as a condition to the issuance of a
restricted driving permit, require the applicant to participate in a designated
driver remedial or rehabilitative program. Any conviction for a violation of
this section shall be included as an offense for the purposes of determining
suspension action under any other provision of this traffic code, provided
however, that the penalties provided under this division shall be imposed
unless those penalties imposed under other applicable provisions are greater.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1425)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.095 BACKING.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless the movement
can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any shoulder or
roadway of any controlled-access highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.096 FOLLOWING VEHICLE TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the vehicles
and the traffic upon and conditions of the street or highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.097 OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in a position as to
interfere with the driver's or motorman's view ahead or to the sides, or to
interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle or
streetcar.
   (C)   No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position as to
interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the side or to the rear, or to
interfere with his control of the driving mechanism of the bus.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.098 OPENING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving
traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.099 COASTING.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall
not coast with the gears or transmission of the vehicle in neutral.
   (B)   The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a down grade shall
not coast with the clutch disengaged.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.100 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS; DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall
not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than
500 feet or stop the vehicle within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped in
answer to a fire alarm.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411)
   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any street, private road, or driveway to be used
at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.101 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human
power to any electric personal assistive mobility device, nor to any motorized
wheelchair. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or preempt the
authority of any home rule or non-home rule unit of local government from
regulating or prohibiting the use of electric personal assistive mobility
devices.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.102 USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, OR SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, skateboard, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play
streets when authorized by the traffic authority.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.103 PUTTING GLASS OR OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any other substance likely to injure any
person, animal, or vehicle upon the highway.
   (B)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any
highway any destructive, dangerous, hazardous, or injurious material shall
immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.
   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other debris, except any hazardous substance as defined in
section 3.215 of the Environmental Protection Act, hazardous waste as defined
in section 3.220 of the Environmental Protection Act and potentially infectious
medical waste as defined in section 3.360 of the Environmental Protection Act,
dropped upon the highway from the vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.104 OBSTRUCTING PERSON IN HIGHWAYS.
   No person shall willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct, or delay, or
willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder, or obstruct any other
person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any highway within this
city, or offer for barter or sale merchandise on the highway so as to interfere
with the effective movement of traffic.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.105 FARM TRACTOR OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a farm tractor on a highway in this city
unless the tractor is being used as an implement of husbandry in connection
with farming operations.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the use of a farm tractor as an
implement of husbandry in connection with farming operations shall be deemed to
include use of the tractor in connection with the transportation of
agricultural products and of farm machinery, equipment, and supplies, as well
as the transportation of tractors in connection with the obtaining of repairs
thereto, and the towing of a registered truck of not more than 8,000 pounds for
use as return transportation after the tractor is left at the place of work or
repair.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.106 DRIVING ON CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person may drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at entrances and exits established by public authority.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711)
Penalty, see § 70.99
PARADES
§ 71.120 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CRUISING. The repeated operation of two or more vehicles in a continuous or
nearly continuous flow through a parking lot.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the city, or CRUISING as defined above.
   PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter.
   PARKING LOT. Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not
include those operated for hire.
§ 71.121 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or persons shall engage or participate in, aid, form, or
start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Chief of
Police or other authorized city official.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions;
      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided the conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities;
      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.122 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police or other authorized city official on forms provided by such
officer.
   (A)   Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed not
less than five days or not more than 60 days before the date on which it is
proposed to conduct the parade.
   (B)   The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination
point;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles which will
constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of the
vehicles;
      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park, or other public place
proposed to be traversed;
      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
      (10)    The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any such assembly area or areas;
      (11)    The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade;
      (12)    If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file a
communication in writing from the person authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on his behalf;
      (13)    Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
   (C)   There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a parade
permit a fee in an amount as established by the Board of Trustees as set forth
in Title XVII of this code.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.123 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall issue a permit
when, from a consideration of the application and from other information
obtained, he finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
city;
   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment enroute to a fire;
   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute;
   (G)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods, or event, and is not designated to be held purely for private
profit;
   (H)   The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval in
writing of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner for the use of the
parking lot which is the site of the parade.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.124 NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall act on the
application for a parade permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excepted, after filing thereof. If he disapproves the application, he
shall mail to the applicant within the three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a notice
of his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit.
§ 71.125 APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the Board of Trustees. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days after
notice of denial. The Board of Trustees shall act on the appeal within 30 days
after its receipt.
§ 71.126 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of
the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different than that named by
the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a
written notice of his acceptance. An alternate parade permit shall conform to
the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this
subchapter.
§ 71.127 NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.
   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be sent
to the following persons:
   (A)   The President;
   (B)   The Fire Chief.
§ 71.128 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park, or other public place to
be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
   (G)   Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the enforcement
of this subchapter.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.129 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other
person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit on his
person during the conduct of the parade.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.130 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede,
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle, or
animal participating or used in a parade.
   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle except a police car or
other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising
a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
   (C)   Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police or other authorized city
official shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or other public thoroughfare or
part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. Signs shall be
posted to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave
unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for
parking on a street or other public thoroughfare unless signs have been posted
in accordance with this section.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.131 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder
on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
OPERATION OF QUALIFIED NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES ON STREETS
§ 71.140 NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES.
   As defined and qualified in this subchapter shall be allowed on city streets
under the conditions as stated herein.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21)
§ 71.141 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course as
defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-123.9 and 11-1426.l(a)(2) of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   LOW-SPEED VEHICLE. Any 4-wheeled vehicle with a maximum speed greater than
20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour that conforms with the
federal motor vehicle safety standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. Part 571.500
defined under 625 ILCS 5/1-140.7.
   RECREATIONAL OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE (ROHV)/UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE (UTV) Any
motorized off highway device designed to travel primarily off highway, 64
inches or less in width, having a manufacturer's dry weight of 2,000 pounds or
less, traveling on four or more non-highway tires, designed with a non-straddle
seat and a steering wheel for steering control, except equipment such as lawn
mowers defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-168.8 and 5/11-1426.1(a)(4) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code and go-carts.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21; Am. Ord. 4095, passed 4-11-22)
§ 71.142 VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   All vehicles allowed to operate on city streets pursuant to this subchapter,
shall be equipped with all of the safety systems and equipment as required by
the Illinois Vehicle Code including: seat belts for every passenger, horn,
brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red reflectorized
warning devices in the front and rear, a slow moving emblem on the rear of the
vehicle as required in Section 12-709 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/
12-709, a headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front, a taillamp that emits a red light visible from at least 100
feet from the rear, brake lights, turn signals, a windshield, and any and all
other safety equipment required to be installed and operational on such
vehicles as set forth in said statute.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21)
§ 71.143 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   All-terrain vehicles (ATV) as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code,
go-carts, and all other vehicles that do not meet the requirements set forth in
this subchapter are not authorized on the roadways of the City of Kewanee.
   (B)   Low-speed vehicles as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code under 625
ILCS 5/1-140.7 are prohibited from operating on any and all streets under the
jurisdiction of the city as they are not subject to inspection which could
jeopardize public safety.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21; Am. Ord. 4095, passed 4-11-22)
§ 71.144 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS/ROHV/UTV.
   (A)   Subject to the requirements of Section 11-1426.1 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1, which are hereby adopted by reference by
the City Council of the City of Kewanee, and of the provisions of this
subchapter, drivers properly licensed to operate motor vehicles on the roadways
of the city are allowed to operate golf carts and/or UTVs under this subchapter
on the roadways of the city, having a posted speed limit of 30 miles per hour
or less.
   (B)   Golf carts and/or UTVs are not allowed on the city sidewalks and city
right-of-ways. Golf carts and/or UTVs are also not allowed on private property
unless permitted by the owner of said property.
   (C)   Golf cart and/or UTVs are also not allowed to be driven on Illinois
State Route 34 (Tenney Street, 100-700 block of East 2nd Street, 200-700 block
of North East Street, Railroad Avenue), Illinois State Route 81 (West 6th
Street), and Illinois State Route 78 (North Main Street, Tenney Street) in the
city. Golf carts and/or UTVs shall be allowed to cross a state highway or
county highway if the operator of the golf cart and/or UTV makes a direct
crossing provided:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street, road or highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing.
      (2)   The golf cart and/or UTV is brought to a complete stop before
attempting a crossing.
      (3)   The operator of the golf cart and/or UTV yields to the right-of-way
to all pedestrian and vehicular traffic which constitutes a hazard.
      (4)   That when crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at
an intersection of the highway with another public street, road, or highway.
   (D)   Golf carts and/or UTVs are also not allowed to be driven on the city
streets of East Division Street, West Division Street, East South Street, West
South Street, East Street South, South East Street, and North East Street in
the city. An operator of a golf cart and/or UTV may only drive on these
specified roadways for the shortest distance to the next available intersection
to reach an approved roadway.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21)
§ 71.145 ANNUAL REGISTRATION OF GOLF CARTS/ROHV/UTV.
   No vehicle authorized under this title and subchapter, shall be operated on
any street or alley in the city unless the owner(s) thereof shall have first
registered such vehicle with the city in accordance with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Registration of such vehicles shall be administered by the Chief of
Police of the city, or his designee. An application for registration may be
made on a form prescribed by the city. Said form shall include a statement
under oath or penalties of perjury that the vehicle proposed to be registered
meets the definition of the vehicles defined by the state statute or in this
subchapter and shall be accompanied by an annual registration fee of $75, valid
driver's license for the registered owner(s), and proof of liability insurance
for said vehicle having at least the same limits of coverage as required from
time to time for motor vehicles under the mandatory insurance law of the State
of Illinois.
   (B)   Vehicles registered under this subchapter and section shall be issued
a sticker from the city which shall be affixed to the rear of the vehicle and
shall be viewable to a police officer from outside of said vehicle.
   (C)   The registration of said vehicle shall be effective for a period of
one calendar year and shall be renewed annually on May 1st of each year in the
same manner as the original registration.
   (D)   The registration of said vehicles shall not be transferrable in the
event of a change of ownership. A new registration fee will be required of the
new owner(s). No refund of the original registration fee is allowed in the
event of the change of ownership.
   (E)   The registration of said vehicles shall be subject to revocation by
the Chief of Police of the city in the event of a violation of the requirements
of Section 11-1426.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1, or any
of the provisions of this subchapter. A revocation of such registration shall
be made in writing and shall set forth the provision(s) of the state statute or
this subchapter that has been violated. No refund of the registration fee is
allowed in the event of the revocation of said permit.
   (F)   In the event that the registration of a vehicle is revoked due to a
failure to maintain the required liability insurance or the failure of the
condition of the vehicle in compliance with the state statute or this
subchapter, including, but not limited to, maintaining the required safety
systems. The Chief of Police of the city, or his/her designee, in his/her
discretion, may reinstate the registration upon documentation of reinstatement
of the required insurance coverage or of the repair or modification of the
vehicle to cure any deficiencies, as applicable, if the Chief of Police of the
city determines that the violation was not intentional and is not likely to
recur.
   (G)   If a person registers a new vehicle under this subchapter after the
month of May, the initial registration fee will be prorated by the month in
which the vehicle is registered at a cost of $6.25 per month. Renewal of
registration for a vehicle that was previously registered will not be prorated
and must pay the full registration fee of $75 no matter what month it is
renewed.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21; Am. Ord. 4095, passed 4-11-22)
§ 71.146 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   For initial inspections, vehicle owners must contact the Kewanee
Police Department to arrange the inspection of said vehicle. The Chief of
Police, or his/her designee, must conduct the inspection of said vehicle and
complete the registration checklist indicating that the vehicle meets the
requirements of the definition as set forth in the state statute or this
subchapter, particularly in connection with the provisions for maintenance in
operating condition of required safety systems and equipment.
   (B)   Properly equipped golf carts and/or UTVs registered, or proposed to be
registered, pursuant to provisions in this subchapter, shall be subject to
inspection by the Chief of Police, or his/her designees, at any time to
determine that said vehicle meets, and continues to meet, the definition
thereof as set forth in this subchapter, particularly the provisions for
maintenance in operating condition of required safety systems and equipment.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21)
§ 71.147 MANDATORY INSURANCE.
   The owner of any vehicle registered under this subchapter shall continuously
maintain liability insurance for said vehicle having at least the same limits
of coverage as required from time to time for motor vehicles under the
mandatory insurance law of the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21)
§ 71.148 OPERATION LIMITED TO LICENSED DRIVERS.
   No person who is not properly licensed to operate motor vehicles on the
roadways shall operate a golf cart and/or UTV within the city, and the
provisions of Section 6-107 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-107)
providing for graduated licenses for young drivers shall be fully applicable to
the operation of golf carts and/or UTVs.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21)
§ 71.149 OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS, AND ORDINANCES.
   Vehicles registered under this subchapter shall be operated at all times in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the rules of the
road contained therein, and any other laws, regulations, or ordinances
governing the operation of motor vehicles in the city as well as the laws,
regulations or ordinances specifically pertaining to vehicles operated under
this subchapter and the operation thereof.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21)
§ 71.150 USE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle authorized
under this subchapter on a roadway in the city while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs, is subject to the provisions of Sections 11-500 through 11-
502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-500 through 11-502. Further, a
violation of the provisions of this section shall be cause for the city to
revoke the permit of the authorized vehicle.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21)
§ 71.151 REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police may revoke any registration authorized under this
subchapter if the Chief of Police determines that permitting said vehicle to be
operated by the owner, or his or her authorized user, on any street or alley of
the city would jeopardize public safety.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may deny registration authorized under this
subchapter if the Chief of Police determines, in his or her sole judgement,
that permitting said vehicle to be operated by the owner, or his or her
authorized user, on any street or alley of the city would jeopardize public
safety.
   (C)   In the event a registration is denied under this section, then the
application fee shall be refunded to the owner. If a registration is revoked,
then the owner shall not be entitled to a refund of his or her registration fee
without approval of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21)
§ 71.152 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violated any provision of this subchapter shall be
guilty of a petty offense and shall be punished by a fine of $100 plus court
costs normally assessed by the Henry County Circuit Court.
   (B)   A second or subsequent offense by any person who violated any
provision of this subchapter shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be
punished by a fine of no less than $250 but not more than $750, plus court
costs normally assessed by the Henry County Circuit Court.
   (C)   Any second or subsequent offense shall result in the revocation of the
permit for a period of not less than one nor more than three years.
   (D)   To the extent that any violation of this subchapter also constitutes a
violation of a criminal statute of the State of Illinois, then the violator
shall also be subject to criminal prosecution.
(Ord. 4058, passed 6-14-21)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Method of Parking
   
72.01   General parking regulations
   
72.02   Unattended motor vehicles
Restrictions on Stopping, Standing, and Parking
   
72.10   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places
   
72.11   Stopping, standing, or parking outside business or residence district
   
72.12   Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for handicapped
Violations
   
72.40     Officers authorized to remove vehicles
   
72.41     Duty of lessor of vehicle on notice of violation of this chapter
 
   
72.99     Penalty
METHOD OF PARKING
§ 72.01 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand
wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as
practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
   (B)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so
stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction
of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of
the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-
hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand
curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
   (C)   No angle parking shall be permitted except as set forth in Title VII
of this code.
   (D)   No person shall park in violation of signs placed by and under the
jurisdiction of the State Department of Transportation which prohibit, limit,
or restrict the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.02 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Except for a law enforcement officer or an operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle performing his or her official duties, no person driving or
in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first
stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition,
effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any perceptible
grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. An
unattended motor vehicle shall not include an unattended locked motor vehicle
with the engine running after being started by a remote starter system.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401)
Penalty, see § 72.99
RESTRICTIONS ON STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
§ 72.10 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer, or an official
traffic-control device, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon a highway, or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad tracks. A violation of any part of this
subsection shall result in a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of community
service;
         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (j)   On any controlled-access highway;
         (k)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
         (l)   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a
current annual registration sticker or digital registration sticker or current
temporary permit pending registration.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or in any manner obscure the
location of a fire hydrant from a roadway that provides fire engine and hose
access to the hydrant.
(Ord. 2942, passed 11-28-94)
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of the entrance (when properly sign-posted);
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
prohibited area or away from a curb a distance as is unlawful.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the
purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business
street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.
(Ord. 2872, passed 12-13-93; Am. Ord. 2883, passed 4-11-94)
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any public street in the
city at any time within 12 hours after a snowfall of three inches or more has
occurred or until the street has been cleared, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 2873, passed 12-13-93)
   (F)   It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle over one-ton
capacity on any city street or on the public right-of-way, except temporarily
for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property
or passengers.
(Ord. 2951, passed 1-10-95)
   (G)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle over one-ton load capacity in
any city-owned or operated parking lot. An exception to this prohibition are
vehicles or displays that have over a one-ton load capacity that will be using
a city-owned parking lot and are associated with a carnival or similar type
event, so long as the sponsor or operator of this type of vehicle or displays
has obtained a city permit or license for the carnival or similar type event.
(Ord. 3027, passed 12-4-95)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.11 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park,
or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway
when it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave the vehicle off the roadway,
but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing
vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view
of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon the highway.
   (B)   The city, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction or for the
maintenance of which it is responsible, may place signs prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway where
in its opinion stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to those using the
highway, or where stopping, standing, or parking vehicles would unduly
interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. Any regulations adopted by
the city regarding the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles upon any
specific street, streets, or highways become effective at the time of the
erection of appropriate signs indicating the regulations. Such regulations
shall be set forth in Title VII of this code.
   (C)   This section, and §
72.10 and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304 shall not apply to the driver of any
vehicle which is disabled in such manner and to such extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in such
position.
   (D)   Any second division vehicle used exclusively for the collection of
garbage, refuse, or recyclable material may stop or stand on the road in a
business, rural, or residential district for the sole purpose of collecting
garbage, refuse, or recyclable material. The vehicle, in addition to having its
hazard lights lighted at all times that it is engaged in stopping or standing,
shall also use its amber oscillating, rotating, or flashing light or lights as
authorized under paragraph 12 of subsection (b) of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-
215, if so equipped.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.12 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING SPACES RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not
properly displaying registration plates or decals issued to a person with
disabilities, as defined by §
70.01, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2, or to
a veteran with a disability pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609, as
evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a person with disabilities or a
veteran with a disability, in any parking place, including any private or
public off-street parking facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an
official sign as designated under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301, for motor
vehicles displaying such registration plates. It shall be prohibited to park
any motor vehicle in a designated access aisle adjacent to any parking place
specifically reserved for persons with disabilities, by the posting of an
official sign as designated under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301, for motor
vehicles displaying such registration plates. When using the parking privileges
for persons with disabilities, the parking decal or device must be displayed
properly in the vehicle where it is clearly visible to law enforcement
personnel, either hanging from the rearview mirror or placed on the dashboard
of the vehicle in clear view. Disability license plates and parking decals and
devices are not transferable from person to person. Proper usage of the
disability license plate or parking decal or device requires the authorized
holder to be present and enter or exit the vehicle at the time the parking
privileges are being used. It is a violation of this section to park in a space
reserved for a person with disabilities if the authorized holder of the
disability license plate or parking decal or device does not enter or exit the
vehicle at the time the parking privileges are being used. Any motor vehicle
properly displaying a disability license plate or a parking decal or device
containing the International symbol of access issued to persons with
disabilities by any local authority, state, district, territory or foreign
country shall be recognized by state and local authorities as a valid license
plate or device and receive the same parking privileges as residents of this
state.
      (2)   An individual with a vehicle displaying disability license plates
or a parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a disability
under ILCS Ch. 625, Ch. 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11.1301.2 or to a veteran
with a disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Ch. 5, § 3-609 is a violation of this
section if:
         (a)   The person using the disability license plate or parking decal
or device is not the authorized holder of the disability license parking decal
or device or is not transporting the authorized holder of the disability
license plate or parking decal or device to or from the parking location; and
         (b)   The person uses the disability license plate or parking decal or
device to exercise any privileges granted through the disability license plate
or parking decals or devices under this code.
      (3)   A driver of a vehicle displaying disability license plates or a
parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a disability under
ILCS Ch. 625, Ch. 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11.1301.2 or to a veteran with a
disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Ch. 5, § 3-609 is a violation of this section
if:
         (a)   The person to whom the disability plate or parking decal or
device was issued is deceased;
         (b)   The driver uses the disability plate or parking decal or device
to exercise any privileges granted through a disability license plate or
parking decal or device under this code.
   (B)   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or
private off-street parking facility may, after notifying the Police Department,
remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety
any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by a person with
disabilities which does not display person with disabilities registration
plates or a special decal or device as required under this section.
   (C)   (1)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of division
(A)(1) shall be fined as set forth in §
72.99 in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal or storage
of any motor vehicle authorized under this section. It shall not be a defense
to a charge under this section that either the sign posted pursuant to this
section or the intended accessible parking place does not comply with the
technical requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301, Department
regulations, or local ordinance if a reasonable person would be made aware by
the sign or notice on or near the parking space that the place is reserved for
a person with disabilities.
      (2)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of division (A)
(2) a first time shall be fined $600. Any person found guilty of violating
division (A)(2) a second or subsequent time shall be fined $1,000. Any person
who violates division (A)(3) is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be
fined $2,500. The Circuit Clerk shall distribute 50% of the fine imposed on any
person who is found guilty of or pleads guilty to violating this section, to
the law enforcement agency that issued the citation or made the arrest. If more
than one law enforcement agency is responsible for issuing the citation or
making the arrest, the 50% of the fine imposed shall be shared equally. If an
officer of the Secretary of State Department of Police arrested a person for a
violation of this section, 50% of the fine imposed shall be deposited into the
Secretary of State Police Services Fund.
   (D)   Local authorities shall impose fines as established in division (C)
for violations of this section.
   (E)   As used in this section, AUTHORIZED HOLDER means an individual issued
a disability license plate under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616 of this Code or
an individual issued a parking decal or device under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-
1301.2 of this code or an individual issued a license plate for veterans with
disabilities under ILCS 625, Act 5, § 3-609 of this code.
   (F)   Any person who commits a violation of §
72.12(A)(2) or a similar provision of a local ordinance may have his or her
driving privileges suspended by the Secretary of State for a period of time
determined by the Secretary of State. Any person who commits a violation of §
72.12(A)(3) or a similar provision of a local ordinance shall have his or her
driving privileges revoked by the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State
may also suspend or revoke the disability license plates or parking decal or
device for a period of time determined by the Secretary of State.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3)
Penalty, see § 72.99
VIOLATIONS
§ 72.40 OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of §
72.11, the officer is authorized to move the vehicle, or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the
roadway.
   (B)   Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to a
place of safety any unattended vehicle illegally left standing upon any
highway, bridge, causeway, or in a tunnel, or in a position or under
circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic.
   (C)   Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to
the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle found upon a highway
when:
      (1)   Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken
without the consent of its owner, or
      (2)   The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are unable to
provide for its custody or removal, or
      (3)   The person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested for an
alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the person
arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay; or
      (4)   The registration of the vehicle has been suspended, cancelled or
revoked.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302)
§ 72.41 DUTY OF LESSOR OF VEHICLE ON NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and who
leases such vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a violation of
this chapter or a parking regulation of a local authority involving such
vehicle, shall upon request provide such police officers as have authority of
the offense, and the court having jurisdiction thereof, with a written
statement of the name and address of the lessee at the time of such offense and
the identifying number upon the registration plates or digital registration
plates and registration sticker or stickers or digital registration sticker or
stickers of such vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined as set forth in §
70.99(B).
   (B)   Whoever violates §
72.12, or
Ch. 78, Sch. III(B), shall be fined $350 in addition to any costs or charges
connected with the removal or storage of the motor vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 20, Act 4005, § 1) (Am. Ord. 3071, passed 7-22-96; Am. Ord. 3767,
passed 6-23-14)
CHAPTER 73: MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.01   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles
   
73.02   Riding on bicycles
   
73.03   Clinging to vehicles
   
73.04   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
73.05   Carrying articles
   
73.06   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles
   
73.07   Lamps on mopeds
   
73.08   Riding on mopeds
   
73.09   Riding on sidewalks prohibited
   
73.10   Low-speed electric scooters and gas-powered scooters
Motorcycles
   
73.20   Riding on motorcycles
   
73.21   Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles
   
73.22   Required equipment on motorcycles
   
73.23   Operating motorcycle on one wheel
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of the
rights, including, but not limited to, rights under §§
71.060 through
71.066, and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this traffic code, except as to special regulations in this traffic
code, and except as to those provisions of this traffic code which by their
nature can have no application.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.02 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped, except that an adult rider may
carry a child securely attached to his person in a back pack or sling.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.03 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.04 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a roadway
at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable and safe to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under the following situations:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedalcycle,
or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; or
      (2)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway; or
      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not
limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles,
motorized pedalcycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard
width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge.
For purposes of this subsection, a “substandard width lane” means a lane that
is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle and a vehicle to travel
safely side by side within the lane; or
      (4)   When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.
   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a one-way
highway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left-hand
curb or edge of the roadway as practicable.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505)
   (C)   Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedalcycles upon a roadway shall
not ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside
for their exclusive use. Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal
and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a
single lane subject to the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.05 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of the
bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the
handlebars at all times.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.06 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the department which shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to
600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps
on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to or
instead of the red reflector.
   (B)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a
bicycle, any siren. This division does not apply to a bicycle that is a police
vehicle or fire department vehicle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately
control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.
   (D)   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that
is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed
by the State Department of Transportation, on each pedal, visible from the
front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet.
   (E)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with side reflectors. The reflectors shall be visible from each side
of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet, and shall be essentially colorless
or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially colorless or
amber to the front of the center of the bicycle. The requirements of this
division may be met by reflective materials which shall be at least 3/16 inch
wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the
continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of the bicycle, and
which reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear
tire or rim. The reflectors shall conform to specifications prescribed by the
State Department of Transportation.
   (F)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.07 LAMPS ON MOPEDS.
   Every moped, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by
the State Department of Transportation which shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when in front of lawful, low-
powered beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the
red reflector.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.08 RIDING ON MOPEDS.
   (A)   The operator of a moped shall ride only astride the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and shall not permit two persons to ride thereon
at the same time, unless the moped is designed to carry two persons. Any moped
designed for two persons must be equipped with a passenger seat and footrests
for use of a passenger.
   (B)   Neither the operator nor any passenger on a moped shall be required to
wear any special goggles, shield, helmet, or glasses.
   (C)   The provisions of §§
73.01 through
73.07 shall be applicable to the operation of mopeds, except for those
provisions which by their nature can have no application to mopeds.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.09 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall ride any bicycle, tricycle, or other wheel or toy of a like
character on any sidewalk of the city in front of a business establishment
which is in a district zoned for business.
(Ord. 2832, passed 6-14-93)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.10 LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC SCOOTERS AND GAS-POWERED SCOOTERS.
   (A)   A low-speed electric scooter is defined as any two-wheeled device,
similar in form to an unpowered kick scooter, equipped with an electric motor
and battery, and capable of a top speed of no more than 20 miles per hour on
level ground.
   (B)   A gas-powered scooter is defined as any two-wheeled device, similar in
form to an unpowered kick scooter, equipped with a small two-cycle gasoline
engine not exceeding 49cc in displacement, with automatic transmission (no
manual shifting), and a top speed not exceeding 30 miles per hour on level
ground. This definition excludes any vehicle classified under Illinois law as a
moped, motor-driven cycle, or motorcycle.
   (C)   Subject to the restrictions of this section, a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district may authorize and regulate the
operation of low-speed electric scooters or gas-powered scooters within the
unit of local government on any or all highways under their respective
jurisdiction, sidewalks, trails, or other public right-of-way where the
operation of bicycles is permitted. The use of low-speed electric scooters or
gas-powered scooters within any park district, forest preserve district, or
conservation district is allowed only if authorized by the park district,
forest preserve district, or conservation district under this section. Any
authorization or regulation by a park district, forest preserve district, or
conservation district applies only on property owned, managed, or leased by the
park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district.
   (D)   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered
scooter on a highway with a posted speed limit in excess of 35 miles per hour.
   (E)   A person may not operate a low speed electric scooter or gas-powered
scooter unless they meet the minimum age requirement established by Illinois
law. Purusant to 625 ILCS 5/11-1518, the minimum age to operate such a scooter
is as provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (F)   A low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered scooter may be parked in
the same manner and at the same locations as a bicycle may be parked.
   (G)   Every low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered scooter when in use at
nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front that emits a white light
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red
reflector on the rear that is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600
feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle, except that a lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to or
instead of the red reflector.
   (H)   A low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered scooter shall not be
equipped with nor shall any person use upon a low-speed electric scooter or
gas-powered scooter any siren. This division does not apply to a low-speed
electric scooter or gas-powered scooter that is a police vehicle or fire
department vehicle.
   (I)   Every low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered scooter shall be
equipped with a brake that will adequately control movement of and stop and
hold the scooter.
   (J)   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered
scooter while carrying any package, bundle, or article that prevents the
operator from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
   (K)   A person may not use a low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered
scooter to carry more than one person at a time. A person operating a low-speed
electric scooter or gas-powered scooter may not attach himself or herself or
the scooter to any other vehicle being operated on the public right-of-way.
   (L)   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered
scooter upon any public highway in the state while under the influence of
alcohol or any drug.
   (M)   The use of low-speed electric scooters or gas-powered scooters is not
permitted on state highways.
   (N)   Every low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered scooter shall be well-
maintained and in good operating condition.
   (O)   No person shall ride a low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered
scooter anywhere in the Central Business District of the city. The Central
Business District is defined as that area bounded by the south boundary of the
Burlington- Northern railroad right of way, the south right of way boundary of
Central Boulevard, the west right of way boundary of Lexington Avenue and the
east right of way boundary of Burr Boulevard.
   (P)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered
scooter in a reckless manner on any public sidewalk and without exercising due
care for the safety of other persons using the sidewalk.
   (Q)   All persons operating a low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered
scooter shall obey all traffic laws.
   (R)   All persons operating a low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered
scooter shall slow to a safe speed and yield the right-of-way to all
approaching traffic before entering or crossing any public roadway. This
requirement applies when entering the roadway from any location, including but
not limited to private driveways, parking lots, sidewalks, alleys, trails,
crosswalks, and other non-roadway areas. Operators must ensure it is safe to
proceed and shall not enter the roadway in a manner that creates a hazard to
themselves or others.
   (S)   All persons operating a low-speed electric scooter or gas-powered
scooter shall operate the vehicle as near to the right-hand side of the roadway
as is safe and practicable. Where a paved shoulder is available and safe for
travel, operators may use the shoulder. This provision does not require
operators to ride in an unsafe manner when avoiding hazards, turning left, or
when the lane is too narrow to share safely with other vehicles.
   (T)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any operator of a
gas-powered scooter from compliance with applicable state laws regarding
vehicle registration, titling, insurance, or licensing. Any scooter that meets
the definition of a motor vehicle under the Illinois Vehicle Code, including
mopeds or motor-driven cycles, shall be subject to all applicable state
requirements for lawful operation.
   (U)   Any commercial establishment selling or renting low-speed electric
scooters or gas-powered scooters shall post a copy of this section in a
conspicuous place where persons buying or renting motorized scooters will see
it.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1518) (Ord. 4246, passed 8-11-25)
MOTORCYCLES
§ 73.20 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle
is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride
upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon
another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the
operator.
   (B)   A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the
seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
   (C)   No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebar grips higher
than the height of the head of the operator when the operator is seated in the
normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle occupied by
the operator.
   (D)   The operator of any motorcycle shall keep at least one hand on a
handlebar grip at all times the motorcycle is in motion.
   (E)   The operator of a motorcycle may not transport a passenger unless the
passenger is capable of resting a foot on the footrest while the motorcycle is
in motion.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.21 SPECIAL EQUIPMENT FOR PERSONS RIDING MOTORCYCLES.
   The operator and every passenger of a motorcycle shall be protected by
glasses, goggles, or a transparent shield. This equipment shall meet the
requirements based upon those set forth in Vehicle Equipment Safety Commission
Regulation VESC-8, "Minimum Requirements for Motorcyclists' Eye Protection."
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.22 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT ON MOTORCYCLES.
   Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed
cab, shall be equipped with footrests for the passenger.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.23 OPERATING MOTORCYCLE ON ONE WHEEL.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or moped on
one wheel.
   (B)   Aggravated operating a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or moped on one
wheel. A person commits aggravated operating a motorcycle, motor driven cycle,
or moped on one wheel when he or she violates division (A) of this section
while committing a violation of subsection (b) of 625 ILCS 5/11-601 or 625 ILCS
5/11-601.5. A violation of this division is a petty offense with a minimum fine
of $100, except a second conviction of a violation of this division is a Class
B misdemeanor and a third or subsequent conviction of a violation of this
division is a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 74: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Pedestrian obedience to traffic-control devices and traffic regulations
   
74.02   Pedestrians' right-of-way at crosswalks
   
74.03   Crossing at other than crosswalks
   
74.04   Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians
   
74.05   Blind, hearing impaired, or physically handicapped pedestrians' right-
of-way
   
74.06   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
   
74.07   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business
   
74.08   Pedestrians walking on highways
   
74.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks
   
74.10   Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles
   
74.11   Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs
   
74.12   Bridge and railroad signals
   
74.13   Motorized wheelchairs
§ 74.01 PEDESTRIAN OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-
control device specifically applicable to them, unless otherwise directed by a
lawful authority.
   (B)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control signals
provided in §§
70.31 and
70.32 of this traffic code; but at all other places, pedestrians shall be
accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this
chapter.
(Ord. 4212, passed 11-12-24)
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrian obedience to traffic control devices and traffic regulations, see
625 ILCS 5/11-1001
§ 74.02 PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of
the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in
danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety,
and walk or run into the path of a moving vehicle which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) shall not apply under the condition stated in §
74.03 (B).
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers
shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians as set forth in §
71.062.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.03 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to the crossing movements.
   (E)   Pedestrians with disabilities may cross a roadway at any point other
than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk where the
intersection is physically inaccessible to them but they shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.04 DRIVERS TO AVOID COLLIDING WITH PEDESTRIANS.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or any person
operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated,
or intoxicated person.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.05 BLIND, HEARING-IMPAIRED, OR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT-
OF-WAY.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian with
clearly visible disabilities.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.06 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.07 PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except within a municipality
when expressly permitted by municipal ordinance. The local municipality, city,
village, or other local governmental entity in which the solicitation takes
place shall determine by ordinance where and when solicitations may take place
based on the safety of the solicitors and the safety of motorists. The decision
shall also take into account the orderly flow of traffic and may not allow
interference with the operation of official traffic control devices. The
soliciting agency shall be:
      (1)   Registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization
as provided by the Solicitation for Charity Act;
      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fundraising activity; and
      (3)   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
      Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age or
older and shall be wearing a high-visibility vest. (Ord. 4212, passed 11-12-24)
   (D)   No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a highway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or
about to be parked on a highway.
   (E)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.08 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (E), where a sidewalk is provided and
its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (E), where a sidewalk is not available,
any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder,
as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (E), where neither a sidewalk nor a
shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall
walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of a roadway, and, if on a two-
way roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (E)   In municipalities with a population under 2,000,000 inhabitants, upon
highways where the maximum posted speed limit is 45 miles per hour or less, and
during the period from sunrise to sunset, a pedestrian who is 18 years of age
or older and wearing in-line speed skates may travel upon the roadway as near
as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway. Pedestrians wearing in-line
speed skates upon a roadway may not impede or obstruct other vehicular traffic.
Pedestrians wearing in-line speed skates shall be subject to all other rights
and duties under state law. Nothing in this code shall be construed to prevent
a pedestrian wearing in-line speed skates from using a lane designated for
bicycles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians on a
sidewalk.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.10 PEDESTRIANS YIELD TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
an audible signal and visual signals meeting the requirements of ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 12-601, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the
authorized emergency vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.11 PEDESTRIANS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree
which renders them a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway, except on a
sidewalk.
(Ord. 4212, passed 11-12-24) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs, see 625 ILCS 5/11-1010
§ 74.12 BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   No pedestrian shall enter, remain upon or traverse over a railroad
grade crossing or pedestrian walkway crossing a railroad track when an audible
bell or clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device is operational
giving warning of the presence, approach, passage or departure of a railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.13 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair upon a sidewalk or roadway
shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties
applicable to a pedestrian.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1)
CHAPTER 75: EQUIPMENT; LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
75.01   Scope and effect of equipment requirements
Loads
   
75.10   Scope and effect of size, weight, and load regulations
   
75.11   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles
   
75.12   Protruding members of vehicles
   
75.13   Spilling loads prohibited
   
75.14   Pushing of disabled vehicles
EQUIPMENT
§ 75.01 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in an unsafe condition as to endanger any
person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with the lamps and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-100 et seq., or which is
equipped in any manner in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-100 et seq.,
or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required
under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-100 et seq.
   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-100 et seq., with respect
to equipment on vehicles shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road
machinery, road rollers, or farm tractors, or to farm-wagon type trailers
having a fertilizer spreader attachment permanently mounted thereon, having a
gross weight of not to exceed 36,000 pounds and used only for the
transportation of bulk fertilizer, or to farm-wagon type tank trailers of not
to exceed 2000 gallons capacity, used during the liquid fertilizer season as
field-storage "nurse tanks," supplying the fertilizer to a field applicator and
highways only for bringing the fertilizer to a field applicator from a local
source of supply to the farm or field or from one farm or field to another.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101)
Penalty, see § 70.99
LOADS
§ 75.10 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF SIZE, WEIGHT, AND LOAD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move on, upon, or across, or
for the owner to cause to knowingly permit to be driven or moved on, upon, or
across any highway any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the
limitations stated in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq., or otherwise in
violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq.
   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq. governing
size, weight, and load do not apply to fire equipment for snow and ice removal
operations owned or operated by the city, or to implements of husbandry, as
defined in §
70.01, temporarily operated or towed in a combination upon a highway provided
such combination does not consist of more than three vehicles or, in the case
of hauling fresh, perishable fruits or vegetables from farm to the point of
first processing, not more than three wagons being towed by an implement of
husbandry, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit issued
hereunder. Except for weight limits on Class I highways under this chapter, the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq. governing size, weight and
load do not apply to fire apparatus or emergency vehicles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101)
   (C)   No person shall use the highways under the jurisdiction of the city in
violation of weight and location restrictions and commercial vehicle
restrictions set forth in Title XVII of this code.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to regulate loads, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1
§ 75.11 PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.
   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street with any load
carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of
the vehicle, nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders
on the right side thereof.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.12 PROTRUDING MEMBERS OF VEHICLES.
   No vehicle with boom, arm, drill rig, or other protruding component shall be
operated upon any highway in the city unless the protruding component is
fastened so as to prevent shifting, bouncing, or moving in any manner.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.13 SPILLING LOADS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless the vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
shifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be
dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may
be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load
unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard
to other users of the highway.
   (C)   The State Department of Transportation shall adopt those rules and
regulations it deems appropriate which require the securing of steel rolls and
other objects on flatbed trucks so as to prevent injury to users of highways
and damage to property. Any person who operates a flatbed truck on any highway
in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department
of Transportation under this division shall be punished as provided in §
70.99.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.14 PUSHING OF DISABLED VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful under any circumstances for any vehicle to push any other
vehicle on or along any highway outside an urban area in this city, except in
an extreme emergency, and then the vehicle shall not be pushed farther than is
reasonably necessary to remove it from the roadway or from the immediate hazard
that exists.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-114)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 76: MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
Section
   
76.01   Reckless driving
   
76.02   Street racing; street sideshows
   
76.03   Accidents involving death or personal injuries
   
76.04   Duty to give information and render aid
   
76.05   Accident involving damage to vehicle
   
76.06   Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property
   
76.07   Immediate notice of crash
   
76.08   False reports
§ 76.01 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   A person commits reckless driving if they: (1) Drive any vehicle with a
willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property; or (2)
knowingly drive any vehicle and use an incline in a roadway such as a railroad
crossing, bridge approach, or hill to cause the vehicle to become airborne.
(Ord. 4212, passed 11-12-24) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Reckless driving; aggravated reckless driving, see 625 ILCS 5/11-503
§ 76.02 STREET RACING; STREET SIDESHOWS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in street racing on any street or highway
within the city.
   (B)   No person shall engage in a street sideshow on any street or highway
within the city.
   (C)   No vehicle owner shall acquiesce in or permit his or her vehicle to be
used by another person for the purpose of street racing or a street sideshow.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly interfere with or cause the movement of
traffic to slow or stop for the purpose of facilitating street racing or a
street sideshow.
   (E)   Definitions for the purposes of this section:
      ACQUIESCE or PERMIT. The vehicle owner had actual knowledge that the
motor vehicle was intended to be used for street racing or a street sideshow.
      MOTOR VEHICLE STUNT. Includes, but is not limited to, actions such as
causing the vehicle to slide or spin, driving near a crowd to demonstrate the
vehicle's capabilities, or performing maneuvers intended to elicit reactions
from an audience.
      STREET RACING:
         (a)   Operating two or more vehicles side by side at accelerating
speeds competitively.
         (b)   Operating one or more vehicles on a selected course to compare
speeds or acceleration.
         (c)   Using one or more vehicles to outdistance another.
         (d)   Using one or more vehicles to block another vehicle from
passing.
         (e)   Racing to reach a destination before another vehicle.
         (f)   Testing the endurance of drivers over long distances.
      STREET SIDESHOW. Refers to events where one or more vehicles block or
impede traffic to perform unauthorized motor vehicle stunts, speed contests, or
exhibitions of speed.
(Ord. 4212, passed 11-12-24) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Street racing; aggravated street racing; street sideshows, see 625 ILCS 5/
11-506
§ 76.03 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash resulting
in personal injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such
vehicle at the scene of such crash, or as close thereto as possible and shall
then forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at the scene of the
crash until the requirements of § 76.04 have been fulfilled. Every such stop
shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
   (B)   Any person who has failed to stop or to comply with the requirements
of division (A) of this section shall, as soon as possible but in no case later
than one-half hour after such motor vehicle crash, or, if hospitalized and
incapacitated from reporting at any time during such period, as soon as
possible but in no case later than one-half hour after being discharged from
the hospital, report the place of the crash, the date, the approximate time,
the driver's name and address, the registration number of the vehicle driven,
and the names of all other occupants of such vehicle, at a police station or
sheriff's office near the place where such crash occurred. No report made as
required under this division shall be used, directly or indirectly, as a basis
for the prosecution of any violation of division (A) of this section.
   (B-1)   Any person arrested for violating this section is subject to
chemical testing of his or her blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine
for the presence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or
compounds, or any combination thereof, as provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-501.1, if
the testing occurs within 12 hours of the time of the occurrence of the crash
that led to his or her arrest. The person's driving privileges are subject to
statutory summary suspension under 625 ILCS 5/11-501.1 if he or she fails
testing or statutory summary revocation under 625 ILCS 5/11-501.1 if he or she
refuses to undergo the testing. For purposes of this section, PERSONAL INJURY
shall mean any injury requiring immediate professional treatment in a medical
facility or doctor's office.
   (C)   Any person failing to comply with division (A) of this section shall
be guilty of a Class 4 felony.
   (D)   Any person failing to comply with division (B) of this section is
guilty of a Class 2 felony if the motor vehicle crash does not result in the
death of any person. Any person failing to comply with division (B) of this
section when the crash results in the death of any person is guilty of a Class
1 felony.
   (E)   The Secretary of State shall revoke the driving privilege of any
person convicted of a violation of this section.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 76.04 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash resulting
in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or
attended by any person shall give the driver's name, address, registration
number and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating and shall upon request
and if available exhibit such driver's license to the person struck or the
driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall
render to any person injured in such crash reasonable assistance, including the
carrying or the making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a
physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is
apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by
the injured person.
   (B)   If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this
section is in condition to receive and understand such information and no
police officer is present, such driver after rendering reasonable assistance
shall forthwith report such motor vehicle crash at the nearest office of a duly
authorized police authority, disclosing the information required by this
section.
   (C)   Any person failing to comply with this section shall be guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 76.05 ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash resulting
only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such motor vehicle crash or as
close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event
shall remain at the scene of such motor vehicle crash until the requirements of
§
76.04 have been fulfilled. A driver does not violate this section if the driver
moves the vehicle as soon as possible off the highway to the nearest safe
location on an exit ramp shoulder, a frontage road, the nearest suitable cross
street, or other suitable location that does not obstruct traffic and remains
at that location until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of §
76.04. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver of the
vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved
so as not to block the traffic lanes. Any person failing to comply with this
section shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
   (B)   Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the court shall make a
finding as to whether the damage to a vehicle is in excess of $1,000, and in
such case a statement of this finding shall be reported to the Secretary of
State with the report of conviction as required by 625 ILCS 5/6-204. Upon
receipt of such report of conviction and statement of finding that the damage
to a vehicle is in excess of $1,000, the Secretary of State shall suspend the
driver's license or any nonresident's driving privilege.
   (C)   If any peace officer or highway authority official finds (i) a vehicle
standing upon a highway or toll highway in violation of a prohibition,
limitation, or restriction on stopping, standing, or parking imposed under this
traffic code or (ii) a disabled vehicle that obstructs the roadway of a highway
or toll highway, the peace officer or highway authority official is authorized
to move the vehicle or to require the operator of the vehicle to move the
vehicle to the shoulder of the road, to a position where parking is permitted,
or to public parking or storage premises. The removal may be performed by, or
under the direction of, the peace officer or highway authority official or may
be contracted for by local authorities. After the vehicle has been removed, the
peace officer or highway authority official shall follow appropriate
procedures, as provided in §
76.04.
   (D)   A towing service, its officers, and its employees are not liable for
loss of or damages to any real or personal property that occurs as the result
of the removal or towing of any vehicle under division (C) of this section, as
provided in subsection (b) of 625 ILCS 5/4-213.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 76.06 DUTY UPON DAMAGING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR OTHER PROPERTY.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in a
motor vehicle crash with any vehicle which is unattended, or other property,
resulting in any damage to such other vehicle or property shall immediately
stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of
such vehicle or other property of the driver's name, address, registration
number and owner of the vehicle the driver was operating or shall attach
securely in a conspicuous place on or in the vehicle or other property struck a
written notice giving the driver's name, address, registration number and owner
of the vehicle the driver was driving and shall without unnecessary delay
notify the nearest office of a duly authorized police authority and shall make
a written report of such crash when and as required in §
76.07. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver of the
vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved
so as not to block the traffic lanes.
   (B)   Any person failing to comply with this section shall be guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor.
   (C)   If any peace officer or highway authority official finds (i) a vehicle
standing upon a highway or toll highway in violation of a prohibition,
limitation, or restriction on stopping, standing, or parking imposed under this
traffic code or (ii) a disabled vehicle that obstructs the roadway of a highway
or toll highway, the peace officer or highway authority official is authorized
to move the vehicle or to require the operator of the vehicle to move the
vehicle to the shoulder of the road, to a position where parking is permitted,
or to public parking or storage premises. The removal may be performed by, or
under the direction of, the peace officer or highway authority official or may
be contracted for by local authorities. After the vehicle has been removed, the
peace officer or highway authority official shall follow appropriate
procedures, as provided in 625 ILCS 5/4-203.
   (D)   A towing service, its officers, and its employees are not liable for
loss of or damages to any real or personal property that occurs as the result
of the removal or towing of any vehicle under subsection (c), as provided in
subsection (b) of 625 ILCS 5/4-213.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 76.07 IMMEDIATE NOTICE OF CRASH.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a crash that requires notice
under this section shall, if no police officer is present, report the crash by
the fastest available means of communication to:
      (1)   The Kewanee Police Department, if the crash occurs within the city
limits; or
      (2)   The nearest office of the county sheriff or Illinois State Police
headquarters, if the crash occurs outside of city limits.
   (B)   Notice is required under division (A) of this section if the crash:
      (1)   Results in injury or death of any person;
      (2)   Causes property damage exceeding $1,500, or $500 if any vehicle
involved is subject to § 76.05 but lacks liability insurance in compliance with
§
76.05;
      (3)   Involves a school bus, where the crash is due to a collision or
sudden stop, resulting in any property damage, personal injury, or death; or
      (4)   Occurs within 50 feet of a school bus and results in injury or
death of any person who is boarding, preparing to board, or has just exited the
school bus.
   (C)   If the driver is physically unable to report the crash as required in
division (A) of this section, any other capable occupant in the vehicle at the
time of the crash must provide notice as outlined in division (A) of this
section.
(Ord. 4212, passed 11-12-24)
Statutory reference:
   Immediate notice of crash, see 625 ILCS 5/11-407
§ 76.08 FALSE REPORTS.
   Any person who provides information in an oral or written report required by
this traffic code with knowledge or reason to believe that such information is
false shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409)
CHAPTER 77: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Stop intersections
   
II.   Yield intersections
   
III.   One-way traffic restrictions
   
IV.   Two-way streets
   
V.   Turning restrictions on specific streets
   
VI.   Truck routes and weight restrictions
   
VII.   Specialty signs
   
VIII.   Speed limits
   
IX.   Through traffic prohibited
SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
Intersection Corner Ord. No. Date Passed
Intersection                        Corner    Ord. No.      Date Passed
Acorn and Division on Acorn         Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Acorn and Prospect on Acorn         Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Adams and Prospect on Adams         Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Alley between Main and Tremont, at  Southeast 3128          10-27-97
1st Street
Alley between Main and Tremont, at  Southeast 3128          10-27-97
2nd Street
Alley between Main and Tremont, at  Southeast 3128          10-27-97
3rd Street
Andrews and South St. on Andrews    Northwest 3024          12-4-95
Beach and Church on Church          Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Beach and College on College        Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Beach and Division on Beach         Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Beach and Division on Beach         Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Beach and Garfield on Garfield      Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Beach and McClure on McClure        Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Beach and Mill on Mill              Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Beach and Mill on Mill              Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Beach and Page on Beach             Northwest 3103          4-28-97
Beach and Page on Beach             Southeast 3186;         10-13-98; 11-12-24
                                              4211
Beach and Page on Page              Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Beach and Prospect on Beach         Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Beach and Prospect on Beach         Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Beach and Prospect on Prospect      Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Beach and Prospect on Prospect      Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Birch Place and Division on Birch   Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Place
Birch Place and Division on Birch   Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Place
Boss and Rose on Boss               Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Boss and Third on Boss              Northwest 3157          5-11-98
Boss and Third on Boss              Southeast 3157          5-11-98
Burlington and Division on Division Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Burr and 3rd on Burr                Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Burr and 3rd on Burr                Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Burr and 7th on Burr                Northwest 3035;         2-13-96;   11-12-24
                                              4211
Burr and 7th on Burr                Southeast 3035;         2-13-96;   11-12-24
                                              4211
Burr and 8th on Burr                Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Burr and 8th on Burr                Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Burr and 9th on Burr                Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Burr and 9th on Burr                Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Burr and 10th on Burr               Southeast 3275          10-23-00
Burr and First on Burr              Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Burr and First on Burr              Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Cambridge Road and Lexington Avenue Southwest 3477          9-12-05
on Cambridge Road
Central and Chestnut on Central     Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Central and Chestnut on Central     Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Central and Chestnut on Chestnut    Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Central and Chestnut on Chestnut    Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Central and Cottage on Cottage      Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Central and Cottage on Cottage      Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Central and Grove on Central        Southwest 2088;   42110-29-79;11-12-24
Central and Grove on Central        Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Central and Park on Central         Southwest 3078          8-26-96
Central and Park on Central         Northeast 3078          8-26-96
Central and Tremont on Central      Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Central and Tremont on Central      Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Central and Tremont on Tremont      Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Central and Tremont on Tremont      Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Central Boulevard and Burr on Burr  Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Central Boulevard and Burr on Burr  Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Central Boulevard and Vine on       Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Central Boulevard
Central Boulevard and Walnut on     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Walnut
Central Boulevard and Walnut on     Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Walnut
Chestnut and Division on Chestnut   Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Chestnut and First on Chestnut      Northwest 3517          10-10-06
Chestnut and First on Chestnut      Southeast 3517          10-10-06
Chestnut and First on First         Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Chestnut and First on First         Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Chestnut and Fourth on Chestnut     Northwest 3764          5-12-14
Chestnut and Prospect on Chestnut   Northwest 2088;         10-29-79; 11-12-24
                                              4211
Chestnut and Prospect on Chestnut   Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Chestnut and Second on Chestnut     Southeast 2912          8-8-94
Chestnut and Second on Chestnut     Northwest 2912          8-8-94
Chestnut and Second on Second       Southwest 2912          8-8-94
Chestnut and Second on Second       Northeast 2912          8-8-94
Church and Burlington on Church     Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Church and East on Church           Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Church and East on Church           Southwest 2088          10-29-79
College and Dwight, on Dwight       Southeast 3743          7-22-13
College and Dwight, on Dwight       Northwest 3743          7-22-13
College and East on College         Southwest 2088          10-29-79
College and East Street south on    Northeast 2295          7-6-82
College
Commercial and Cottage on Cottage   Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Commercial and Grove on Grove       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Commercial and Grove on Grove       Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Commercial and Park on Commercial   Southwest 3770          8-11-14
Cottage and First on Cottage        Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Cottage and First on Cottage        Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Cottage and Prospect on Cottage     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Cottage and Prospect on Cottage     Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Cottage and Rockwell on Cottage     Northwest 3120          8-25-97
Cottage and Rockwell on Cottage     Southeast 3120          8-25-97
Dewey and Burlington on Dewey       Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Division and East on East           Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Division and Vine on Vine           Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Dodge and Dewey on Dodge            Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Dodge and Dewey on Dodge            Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Dodge and Division on Dodge         Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Dwight and Church on Dwight         Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Dwight and Church on Dwight         Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Dwight and Division on Dwight       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Dwight and Garfield on Dwight       Southeast 2623          7-27-87
Street
Dwight and Garfield on Dwight       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Street
Dwight and McClure on Dwight        Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Dwight and McClure on Dwight        Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Dwight and South St. on Dwight      Northwest 3024          12-4-95
E. 5th and N. Grace on E. 5th       Southwest 2088          10-29-79
E. 5th and N. Grace on E. 5th.      Northeast 2103;4211     12-26-79; 11-12-24
E. Mill and East on E. Mill         Northeast 3515          7-10-06
E. Oak and Vine on E. Oak           Southwest 2088          10-29-79
East and 10th on 10th               Southwest 2088          10-29-79
East and 11th and 11th              Northeast 2088          10-29-79
East and 11th on 11th               Southwest 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
East and 7th on 7th                 Southwest 2088          10-29-79
East and 8th on 8th                 Southwest 2088          10-29-79
East and 9th on 9th                 Southwest 2088          10-29-79
East and 9th on 9th                 Northeast 2088          10-29-79
East and Division on East           Northwest 2088          10-29-79
East and Roosevelt on Roosevelt     Southwest 2088          10-29-79
East Division Street and South East Northeast 2578          6-23-86
Street on East Division
East Fourth and Lakeview on East    Southwest 4030          10-26-20
Fourth
East Third Street at Vine on East   Southwest 3232;         12-13-99; 11-12-24
Third                                         4211
East Third Street at Vine on East   Northeast 3232;         12-13-99; 11-12-24
Third                                         4211
Edwards and Church on Edwards       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Edwards and Church on Edwards       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Edwards and College on Edwards      Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Edwards and College on Edwards      Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Edwards and Division on Edwards     Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Edwards and McClure on Edwards      Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Edwards and McClure on Edwards      Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Edwards and South Street on Edwards Northwest 3024          12-4-95
Elliott and Central on Elliott      Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Elliott and Division on Elliott     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Elliott and Prospect on Elliott     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Elliott and Prospect on Elliott     Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Elm and 8th on Elm                  Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Elm and 8th on Elm                  Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Elm and 9th on Elm                  Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Elm and 9th on Elm                  Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Elm and 10th on Elm                 Northwest 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Elm and 10th on Elm                 Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Elm and Central Boulevard on Elm    Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Elm and Central Boulevard on Elm    Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Elm and First on Elm                Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Elm and First on Elm                Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Elm and Prospect on Elm             Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Fifth Avenue and Prospect on Fifth  Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Avenue
Fifth Avenue and Rose on Fifth      Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Avenue
First Street and Park Street on     Northeast 3941          9-10-18
First Street
First Street and Park Street on     Southwest 3941          9-10-18
First Street
Fisher and Lyle on Fisher           Northwest 3438          6-28-04
Fisher and Lyle on Fisher           Southeast 3438          6-28-04
Franklin and Division on Franklin   Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Franklin and Pine on Franklin       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Franklin and Pine on Franklin       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Franklin and Prospect on Franklin   Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Franklin and Prospect on Franklin   Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Garfield and East on Garfield       Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Garfield and Willard on Garfield    Southwest 3125          9-22-97
Garfield and Willard on Garfield    Northeast 3125          9-22-97
George and Division on George       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Gilbert and Division on Gilbert     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Grace and 3rd on Grace              Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Grace and 9th on Grace              Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Grace Avenue and 8th on Grace       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Avenue
Grace Avenue and 8th on Grace       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Avenue
Grove and Prospect on Grove         Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Grove and Prospect on Grove         Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Grove and Rose on Grove             Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Grove and Rose on Grove             Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Grove and Rose on Rose              Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Harbour and Lake on Harbour         Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Harrison and Lake on Harrison       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Henry and Division on Henry         Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Hepner Drive and East Street on     Southwest 3280          11-13-00
Hepner
Hollis and Church, on Church        Northeast 3749          10-15-13
Hollis and Church, on Church        Southwest 3749          10-15-13
Hollis and Garfield on Hollis       Northwest 2817          1-11-93
Hollis and Garfield on Hollis       Southeast 2817          1-11-93
Hollis and Division on Hollis       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Hollis and Mill on Mill             Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Hollis and Mill on Mill             Northeast 2088          10-29-79
June Street and Harbour Street on   Southwest 3558          10-22-07
June Street
Junior and Dewey on Junior Avenue   Northwest 2959          1-23-95
Junior and Dewey on Junior Avenue   Southeast 2959          1-23-95
Junior and Division on Junior       Northwest 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Junior and Division on Junior       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Junior and Prospect on Junior       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Knox and Burlington on Knox         Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Lake and Fischer on Fischer         Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Lake and Florence on Florence       Northwest 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Lakeview and Lake on Lakeview       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Lakeview and Third, four-way stop            2088          10-29-79
Lexington and 5th on Lexington      Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Lexington and 5th on Lexington      Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Lexington and Cambridge Road on     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Lexington
Lexington and Central on Lexington  Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Lexington and First on First        Northeast 3103          4-28-97
Lexington and First on First        Southwest 3103          4-28-97
Lexington and First on Lexington    Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Lexington and First on Lexington    Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Lexington and Second on Lexington   Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Lexington and Second on Lexington   Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Loomis and Main on Loomis           Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Loomis and Tremont on Loomis        Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Lyle and E. 3rd on E. 3rd           Southwest 3438; 4211    6-28-04; 11-12-24
Lyle and Fisher on Lyle             Northeast 3438          6-28-04
Lyle and S. Elm on S. Elm           Southeast 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Lyle and S. Elm on S. Elm           Northwest 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Maple and 3rd on Maple              Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Maple and Pleasantview on Maple     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
May and East Third on May           Northwest 3499          2-27-06
May and Lake on May                 Southeast 2088          10-29-79
May and Lake on May                 Northwest 2088          10-29-79
McClure and East on East            Northwest 2988          8-14-95
McClure and East on East            Southeast 2988          8-14-95
McClure and East on McClure         Southwest 2088          10-29-79
McClure and East Street south on    Northeast 2088          10-29-79
McClure
McClure and Hollis on Hollis        Southeast 2838          7-26-93
McClure and Hollis on Hollis        Northwest 2838          7-26-93
McClure and Hollis on McClure       Southwest 2829          5-24-93
McClure and Hollis on McClure       Northeast 2829          5-24-93
McClure and Payson on Payson        Northwest 3049          4-8-96
McClure and Payson on Payson        Southeast 3049          4-8-96
McKinley Avenue and Morton Avenue   Southeast 3841          6-27-16
on Morton Avenue
McKinley and East on McKinley       Southwest 3251          5-8-00
Midland and Beach on Midland        Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Mill and Birch Place on Birch Place Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Mill and Birch Place on Birch Place Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Mill and Burlington on Mill         Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Mill and East on Mill               Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Mill Street and Edwards Street on   Northeast 3831          6-13-16
Mill Street
Mill Street and Edwards Street on   Southwest 3831          6-13-16
Mill Street
Mission Drive and Midland Drive on  Southeast 3948; 4211    11-13-18; 11-12-24
Mission Drive
Monroe and Lake on Monroe           Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Morton and Division on Morton       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
N. Chestnut and W. 5th on Chestnut  Northwest 2088          10-29-79
N. Cottage and 5th on Cottage       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Oak and Chestnut on Oak             Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Oak and Chestnut on Oak             Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Oak and Elm on Elm                  Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Oak and Elm on Elm                  Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Oak and Tremont on Oak              Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Oak and Tremont on Oak              Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Odea and Grove on Odea              Northeast 2244          11-23-81
Odea and Park on Odea               Northeast 2108          1-28-80
Odea and Park on Odea               Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Page and Burlington on Burlington   Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Park and 4th on 4th                 Northeast 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Park and 4th on 4th                 Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Park and Central on Park            Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Park and Central on Park            Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Park and First on Park              Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Park and First on Park              Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Park and Prospect on Park           Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Park and W. 5th on Park             Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Park Avenue and Grove on Park       Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Avenue
Park Row and Grove on Park Row      Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Payson and Division on Payson       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Payson and Mill on Mill             Southwest 3589          10-27-08
Payson and Mill on Mill             Northeast 3589          10-27-08
Pleasant and East on Pleasant       Southwest 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Pleasant and East on Pleasant       Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Pleasantview and Maple on Maple     Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Poplar and Division on Poplar       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Prospect and East on Prospect       Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Prospect and East on Prospect       Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Prospect and Vine, four-way stop             2088          10-29-79
Prospect Place and Prospect on      Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Prospect Place
Rice and W. 4th on Rice             Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Rice and W. 4th on Rice             Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Ridyard and Division on Ridyard     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Ridyard and Pleasant on Ridyard     Northwest 3351          7-22-02
Ridyard and Pleasant on Ridyard     Southeast 3351          7-22-02
Ridyard and Prospect on Ridyard     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Ridyard and Prospect on Ridyard     Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Rollins and Lakeview on             Southwest 4030          10-26-20
Rollins         
Rose and Franklin on Franklin       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Rose and Franklin on Franklin       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Rose and Helmer on Helmer           Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Rose and Western Avenue on Western  Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Avenue
S. Grove and Division on Grove      Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Second and Boss on Second           Northeast 2109          5-8-78
Second and Boss on Second           Southwest 2108          1-28-80
Second and Lexington on Second      Northeast 3774          8-25-14
Second and Lexington on Second      Southwest 3774          8-25-14
Second and Park on Park             Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Second and Park on Park             Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Second and Park on Second           Northeast 3770          8-11-14
Second and Third on Third           Northwest 2088          10-29-79
See and Lake on See                 Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Smith and Division on Smith         Southeast 2088          10-29-79
South and East on East              Northwest 2988          8-14-95
South and East on East              Southeast 2988          8-14-95
South and East on South             Northeast 2988          8-14-95
South and East on South             Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Stoner Drive and East Street on     Southwest 3280          11-13-00
Stoner
Terry and 9th on Terry              Northwest 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Third and Chestnut on Third         Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Third and Second on Third           Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Tremont and 5th, four-way stop               2088          10-29-79
Tremont and Depot on Depot          Southwest 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Tremont and First on First          Northeast 3523          11-27-06
Tremont and First on First          Southwest 3523          11-27-06
Tremont and First on Tremont        Northwest 3523          11-27-06
Tremont and First on Tremont        Southeast 3523          11-27-06
Tremont and Prospect in Tremont     Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Tremont and Prospect on Tremont     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Tremont and Second on Tremont       Northwest 3537          5-29-07
Tremont and Second on Tremont       Southeast 3537          5-29-07
Tremont and Second on Second        Northeast 3537; 4211    5-29-07; 11-12-24
Tremont and Second on Second        Southwest 3537; 4211    5-29-07; 11-12-24
Tremont and Third on Third          Northeast 3523          11-27-06
Tremont and Third on Third          Southwest 3523          11-27-06
Tremont and Third on Tremont        Northwest 3523          11-27-06
Tremont and Third on Tremont        Southeast 3523          11-27-06
Union and 11th on Union             Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Union and 6th on Union              Northwest 2088; 4211  10-29-79; 11-12-24
Vine and 3rd on Vine                Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Vine and 8th on Vine                Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Vine and 8th on Vine                Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Vine and 9th on Vine                Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Vine and 9th on Vine                Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Vine and First on First             Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Vine and First on First             Southwest 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Vine and McKinley on McKinley       Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Vine and McKinley on McKinley       Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Vine and Pleasant on Pleasant       Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Vine and Roosevelt on Roosevelt     Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Vine and Roosevelt on Roosevelt     Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Vine and Second on Vine             Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Vine and Second on Vine             Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Vine and Williams on Williams       Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Vine and Williams on Williams       Northeast 2088          10-29-79
W. 5th and Grove on Grove           Southeast 2088          10-29-79
W. 5th and Grove on Grove           Northwest 2088          10-29-79
W. 4th and Tremont on W. 4th        Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Walnut and 3rd on Walnut            Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Walnut and 8th on Walnut            Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Walnut and 8th on Walnut            Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Walnut and 9th on Walnut            Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Walnut and 9th on Walnut            Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Washington and Division on          Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Washington
Washington and Division on          Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Washington
Washington and New on Washington    Northwest 2839          7-26-93
Washington and Prospect on          Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Washington
West and Division on West           Northwest 2088          10-29-79
West and Prospect on West           Southeast 2088          10-29-79
West Street South and Division on   Southeast 2088          10-29-79
West Street South
Wilbur and Lake on Wilbur           Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Willard and Church on Willard       Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Willard and Church on Willard       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Willard and Division on Willard     Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Willard and Garfield on Willard     Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Willard and Garfield on Willard     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Willard and McClure on McClure      Southwest 2244          11-23-81
Willard and McClure on McClure      Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Willard and McClure on Willard      Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Willard and McClure on Willard      Northwest 2244          11-23-81
Willard and Mill on Willard         Southeast 2821; 4211    3-22-93; 11-12-24
Willard and Mill on Willard         Northwest 2821; 4211    3-22-93; 11-12-24
Willard and South St. on Willard    Northwest 3024          12-4-95
Williams and East on Williams       Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Williams and Vine on Williams       Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Willow and East on Willow           Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Willow and East on Willow           Northeast 2088; 4211    10-29-79; 11-12-24
Willow and Otley on Otley           Southeast 2088          10-29-79
Willow and S. Grace on S. Grace     Northwest 2088          10-29-79
Willow and Vine on Willow           Northeast 2088          10-29-79
Wilsey Court and Chestnut on Wilsey Southwest 2088          10-29-79
Court
Wilson and Division on Wilson       Northwest 2088          10-29-79
                                                          
 
   (B)   Traffic control signals shall be posted at the following
intersections:
Intersection Corner Ord. No. Date Passed
Intersection           Corner      Ord. No. Date Passed
1st and Main           Southeast   2088     10-29-79
1st and Main           Northwest   2088     10-29-79
1st and Main           Southwest   2088     10-29-79
1st and Main           Northeast   2088     10-29-79
2nd and Main           Northwest   2088     10-29-79
2nd and Main           Northeast   2088     10-29-79
2nd and Main           Southwest   2088     10-29-79
2nd and Main           Southeast   2088     10-29-79
3rd and Main           Northwest   2088     10-29-79
3rd and Main           Southwest   2088     10-29-79
3rd and Main           Southeast   2088     10-29-79
3rd and Main           Northeast   2088     10-29-79
Central Blvd. and Main Northeast   2088     10-29-79
Central Blvd. and Main Northwest   2088     10-29-79
Central Blvd. and Main Southwest   2088     10-29-79
Central Blvd. and Main Southeast   2088     10-29-79
McClure and Tenney     Northeast   2088     10-29-79
McClure and Tenney     Northwest   2088     10-29-79
McClure and Tenney     Southwest   2088     10-29-79
McClure and Tenney     Southeast   2088     10-29-79
Prospect and Main      Northwest   2088     10-29-79
Prospect and Main      Southeast   2088     10-29-79
Prospect and Main      Northeast   2088     10-29-79
Prospect and Main      Southwest   2088     10-29-79
Sixth and Main         All corners 3523     11-27-06
South and Tenney       All corners 3523     11-27-06
 
('71 Code, § 10-8-7)
SCHEDULE II: YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
Intersection Corner Ord. No. Date Passed
Intersection                                     Corner    Ord. No. Date Passed
Commercial Street and Boss Street on Commercial  Northeast 2377     6-27-83
Street
East Ninth Street and Kent Street on East Ninth  Southwest 2577-A   6-23-86
Street
East 7th and See on East 7th                     Northeast 3143     1-26-98
East 7th and See on East 7th                     Southwest 3143     1-26-98
5th and Boss on 4th                              Southwest
First and East on First                          Southwest
Garfield and Payson on Payson                    Northwest
Garfield and Payson on Payson                    Southeast
Grace and 9th on Grace                           Northwest
Grace and 10th on Grace                          Northwest
Grace and 10th on Grace                          Southeast
Grace and 11th on Grace                          Southeast
Grove and 4th on 4th                             Northeast
Harrison and 7th on 7th                          Northeast
Harrison and 7th on 7th                          Southwest
Jackson Street and First Street on Jackson       Northwest 3548     8-13-07
Street
Jackson Street and First Street on Jackson       Southeast 3548     8-13-07
Street
Jackson Street and Second Street on Jackson      Northwest 3548     8-13-07
Street
Jackson Street and Second Street on Jackson      Southeast 3548     8-13-07
Street
June and Florence on June                        Southwest
June and Florence on June                        Northeast
June and Harrison on June                        Southwest
June and Harrison on June                        Northeast
June and Monroe on Monroe                        Northwest
June and Monroe on Monroe                        Southeast
Lakeview and Elmwood on Lakeview                 Northwest
Lexington and W. 4th on Lexington                Southeast
Lyle and Burr on Elm                             Northwest
Maple Avenue and Nelson Avenue on Nelson         Northeast 3299     2-26-01
Maple Avenue and Nelson Avenue on Nelson         Southwest 3299     2-26-01
Maple and Pleasant St. on Maple                  Southeast 3208     5-10-99
(northbound traffic)
Maple and Pleasant St. on Maple                  Northwest 3208     5-10-99
(southbound traffic)
May and 9th on May                               Northwest
May and East 10th on May                         Southeast 3143     1-26-98
May and East 10th on May                         Northwest 3143     1-26-98
McMullen and Harrison on McMullen                Southwest
McMullen and See on McMullen                     Southwest
McMullen and Harrison on McMullen                Northeast
Mill and West on Mill                            Southwest
Mill and West on Mill                            Northeast
Morton and Roosevelt on Morton                   Southeast 2181     4-13-81
North Elm and 6th on Elm                         Northwest
North Elm and 7th on Elm                         Northwest
North Elm and 7th on Elm                         Southeast
North Tremont and Ninth Street                   Northwest 3317     7-23-01
(north- and southbound traffic)
North Tremont and Ninth Street                   Southeast 3317     7-23-01
(north- and southbound traffic)
North West and 4th on 4th                        Northeast
Otley Avenue and Pleasant Street on Otley Avenue Northwest 3553     9-10-07
Otley Avenue and Pleasant Street on Otley Avenue Southeast 3553     9-10-07
Payson and Church on Church                      Northeast
Payson and Church on Church                      Southwest
Pine and Birch Place on Birch Place              Southeast
Pine and Elliott on Pine                         Southwest
Pine and Junior Avenue on Pine                   Northeast
Pine and West on Pine                            Southwest
Pine and West on Pine                            Northeast
Pleasantview and Lakeview on Pleasantview        Northeast
Pleasantview and Lakeview on Pleasantview        Southeast
Red Adams Road and Rose St.                      Southwest 3173     8-10-98
Reece and Kent on Reece                          Southwest
Rice Street and Second Street on Rice Street     Northwest 2391     11-28-83
Ridyard and McKinley on Ridyard                  Southeast
Ridyard and McKinley on Ridyard                  Northwest
Ridyard and Roosevelt on Ridyard                 Northwest
Ridyard and Roosevelt on Ridyard                 Southeast
Ridyard and Williams on Ridyard                  Northwest
Ridyard and Williams on Ridyard                  Southeast 2019     5-8-78
Rockwell and Acorn on Acorn                      Northwest
Rockwell and Acorn on Acorn                      Southeast
Rockwell and Franklin on Franklin                Southeast
Rockwell and Franklin on Franklin                Northwest
Rockwell and West on West                        Southeast
Rockwell and Weston West                         Northwest
Rollins and Lakeview on Rollins                  Southwest
Seventh Street and Harbour Street on Seventh     Northeast 3685     9-12-11
Street
Seventh Street and Harbour Street on Seventh     Southwest 3685     9-12-11
Street
South Cottage Street and alley in 500 block of   Northeast
South Collage Street on said alley
South Cottage Street and alley in 500 block of   Southwest 2689     12-12-88
South Cottage Street on said alley
South and Willard on Willard                     Northwest
10th and Kent on 10th                            Northeast
10th and Kent on 10th                            Southwest 2019     5-8-78
10th and Simpson Avenue on Simpson               Southeast
10th and Simpson Avenue on Simpson               Northwest
Terry and 10th on Terry                          Northeast
Terry and 10th on Terry                          Southwest
Third and Elm on Elm                             Northwest
Third and Elm on Elm                             Southeast
Vine and 10th on Vine                            Northwest
Vine and 10th on Vine                            Southeast
Vine and 9th on Vine                             Northwest
Vine and 9th on Vine                             Southeast
W. 4th and Boss on W. 4th                        Northeast
W. 4th and Ross on Ross                          Northwest
W. 8th and Chestnut on 8th                       Northeast
W. 9th and Chestnut on 9th                       Northeast
Walnut and 7th on Walnut                         Northwest
Walnut and 7th on Walnut                         Southeast
Washington and Roseview on Washington            Southeast
Washington and Roseview on Washington            Northwest
Whitney and Church on Whitney                    Northwest
Whitney and Church on Whitney                    Southeast
Wilbur and 10th on Wilbur                        Northwest
Wilbur and 10th on Wilbur                        Southeast
Wilbur and 9th on Wilbur                         Northwest
Willard Street and College Street on Willard     Northwest
Street
Willard Street and College Street on Willard     Southeast 2413     2-27-84
Street
 
(‘71 Code, § 10-8-5) (Am. Ord. 3831, passed 6-13-16; Am. Ord. 4211, passed 11-
12-24)
SCHEDULE III. ONE-WAY TRAFFIC RESTRICTIONS.
   The following streets and/or alleys are hereby designated as being one-way:
Street, Alley or Description Location Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Street, Alley or Location                     Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Description
                 Running East-West in Block
                 17 of the Original Town,
Alley            bound by Tremont St., Second West      3343     5-28-02
                 St., Chestnut St., and Third
                 St.
                 Running North-South in Block
                 10 of Tenney's Addition,
Alley            bound by Main St., Central   North     3343     5-28-02
                 Blvd., Tremont St., and
                 First St.
                 Running North-South in Block
                 16 of the Original Town,
Alley            bound by Main St., Second    North     3343     5-28-02
                 St., Tremont St., and Third
                 St.
                 Running North-South in Block
                 21 of the Original Town,
Alley            bound by Tremont St., First  North     3343     5-28-02
                 St., Chestnut St., and
                 Second St.
                 Running North-South in Block
                 22 of the Original Town,
Alley            bound by Main St., First     North     3343     5-28-02
                 St., Tremont St., and Second
                 St.
                 Running North-South in Block
                 23 of the Original Town,
Alley            bound by Burr St., First     North     3343     5-28-02
                 St., Main St., and Second
                 St.
Beach Ave.       From Rose St. to Prospect    South     2089     11-12-79
                 St.
                 Off the North Side of the
Parking Lot      200 Block of West 2nd.       South     3008     10-23-95
                 Street
Prospect Place   From E. Oak Street           North     3635     5-24-10
South West St.   From Prospect to Rose St.    North     2325     10-25-82
                                                              
('71 Code, § 10-8-3(B),(C))
SCHEDULE IV. TWO-WAY STREETS
   The following streets shall be designated as being two-way:
 
Street   Description                                       Ord. No. Date Passed
         Between Central Boulevard and Second Street shall
         be designated a three-lane highway with two lanes
         of traffic on the eastern portion of said roadway
         with traffic flowing in a northerly direction in
Main St. said two lanes and with one lane of traffic on    2093     11-26-79
         said stretch of roadway flowing in a southerly
         direction and located on the west side of Main
         Street between Central Boulevard and Second
         Street.
                                                                  
('71 Code, § 10-8-8)
SCHEDULE V. TURNING RESTRICTIONS ON SPECIFIC STREETS.
   Turning restrictions shall be for the following streets:
 
Intersection             Description               Ord. No.   Date Passed
Central Blvd. and Main   No turn on red during
St.                      school hours when         3425       2-23-04
                         children are present.
McClure St. and Tenney   No turn on red during
St.                      school hours when         3032       1-22-96
                         children are present
Prospect St. and Main    No right turn on red      3856       11-14-16
St. at southwest corner
                         For a distance of 100
                         feet south thereof
                         wherein northbound
                         traffic will be traveling
                         on Main Street in a
                         northerly direction the
                         eastern most or right
                         hand lane of the two
                         northbound lanes shall be
Second St. and Main St.  designated as a lane for  2093, 2850 11-26-79, 9-27-93
                         traffic to proceed
                         straight ahead or to turn
                         right at said
                         intersection and the
                         westerly of said two
                         north bound lanes shall
                         be designated as a left
                         turn lane only for north
                         bound traffic.
                         Northbound traffic on
Seventh St. and East St. East St. shall not make a 2969       5-8-95
                         left turn to go westbound
                         on Seventh St.
                                                            
('71 Code, § 10-4-29)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE VI. TRUCK ROUTES AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Operation of trucks on certain streets prohibited. No person shall
operate, or cause to be operated, a motor vehicle having a gross weight
including vehicle and maximum load of 12,000 pounds or more, or motorized
equipment having a gross weight of 12,000 pounds or more, on any street of this
city unless such street has been designated as a truck route under division (B)
of this section, or a local delivery route under division (C) of this section,
except as provided in division (D) of this section.
   (B)   Designation of truck routes.
      (1)   All major arterial streets, or portions thereof, as defined in the
current city comprehensive plan shall be designated as truck routes. (Main
Street, Tenney Street, Division Street from Main Street to Tenney Street)
      (2)   The following listed minor arterial streets, or portions thereof,
shall be designated as truck routes.
         (a)   Railroad Avenue
         (b)   East Street from Second Street to Railroad Avenue
         (c)   Second Street from Main Street to East Street
         (d)   W. Sixth Street
         (e)   W. South Street
   (C)   Designation of local delivery truck routes.
      (1)   Local delivery truck route. A street allowed to be used by local
delivery truck traffic. Local delivery truck traffic is defined as vehicles
involving local destination or origination, if necessary, for the conduct of
business or service of an occupant at a destination point, or from an
origination point, which is not adjacent to a truck route.
      (2)   The following listed streets shall be designated as local delivery
truck routes.
         (a)   West Street from Sixth Street to Fourth Street; Fourth Street
from West Street to Washington Street; Washington Street from Fourth Street to
Rose Street.
         (b)   Rose Street from West Street to Boss Street; Boss Street from
Rose Street to Commercial Street; Commercial Street from Boss Street to Park
Street; Second Street from Park Street to Lexington Avenue; Third Street from
Lexington Avenue to Main Street.
         (c)   Division Street from Burlington Avenue to Tenney Street.
         (d)   Burlington Avenue from South Street to Page; Burlington Avenue
from Page Street to Dodge Street.
         (e)   South Street from Tenney Street to Andrews Avenue.
         (f)   Ninth Street from Main Street to Kent Street.
         (g)   East Street from Railroad Avenue to the northern city limits.
         (h)   Kentville Road.
         (i)   Lake Street from East Street to Fischer Avenue.
         (j)   Fischer Avenue from Lake Street to the Transfer Station.
      (3)   Other streets may be designated as truck or local delivery routes
by ordinance.
   (D)   Exceptions and scope of application.
      (1)   The prohibitions of division (A) of this section shall not apply
to:
         (a)   Emergency vehicles;
         (b)   Public utility vehicles owned or operated by the city, other
public bodies, public utility companies, or any contractor or material man
thereof, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets or
utility facilities within the city, or while traveling to or from such street
repairs of public or private utility facilities, where the only access to such
repairs or utility facilities is over residential streets;
         (c)   Vehicles involving local destination or origination, if
necessary for the conduct of business or service of an occupant at a
destination point, or from an origination point which may only be accessed by
traveling from a designated truck or local delivery route over residential
streets, as verified by a bill of lading;
         (d)   Detoured vehicles upon residential streets which are officially
established as a detour for a truck route;
         (e)   Sanitation vehicles in the process of collecting refuse and
recyclables; and
         (f)   Buses in the operation of picking up or dropping off passengers.
   (E)   Appropriate posting of signs. The posting of appropriate signage, as
recommended by the Illinois Department of Transportation's specifications, and
determined by the City Engineer, designating truck routes, local delivery
routes, and related information shall be posted at community entrances and
within the community at locations determined appropriate by the City Engineer.
   (F)   Violations punishable by fines. Any persons, firm, or corporation
violating any provisions of this section shall upon conviction be fined any sum
not less than $50 nor greater than $500.
   (G)   Class III truck routes.
      (1)   The portion of South Street beginning at the intersection of
Burlington Avenue and extending east for .32 miles is designated as a Class III
truck route.
      (2)   The portion of Burlington Avenue beginning at the intersection of
South Street and extending north for .51 miles is designated as a Class III
truck route.
(Ord. 3172, passed 8-10-98; Am. Ord. 3401, passed 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 4045,
passed 2-22-21)
SCHEDULE VII. SPECIALTY SIGNS.
   (A)   The following criteria outlines the standard practice for the
placement of "Deaf Child in Area", "Blind Child in Area", and "Child with
Autism in Area" traffic signs in Kewanee.
   (B)   A written request shall be submitted to the City Clerk by a parent or
legal guardian of the child along with:
   (C)   A doctor's statement that the child is severely blind, deaf or
autistic.
   (D)   Proof of the child's date of birth.
   (E)   Proof of residency.
   (F)   The child must be under the age of 18 years.
   (G)   An agreement shall be executed by the parent or guardian attesting to
their agreement with the following provisions:
      (1)   They certify that a child (person under 18 years of age) with a
qualifying impairment resides at the address listed on the application, and
that if this condition changes, they will notify the City Clerk.
      (2)   They agree to accept the sign format, design, structure, and
location determined by the city in compliance with all pertinent state signing
standards.
      (3)   They will hold the city harmless in the event the signs are placed
and an injury occurs to the qualifying child while the signs are in place.
      (4)   They will hold the city harmless in the event the signs are not
placed or are removed and injury occurs to the qualifying child.
      (5)   They accept the terms and conditions and agree to fully comply with
the terms of this Schedule VII and that the city may remove any sign for
failure to comply with these terms.
      (6)   They shall reimburse the city for the cost of the sign(s), poles
and mounting hardware.
   (H)   The signs shall only be placed on low volume, low speed local streets.
   (I)   Parent or legal guardian must notify the City Clerk if their residence
changes or when the child turns 18 years of age. Failure by the child to
maintain residence in the area, or attaining the age of 18 years will cause the
sign to be removed.
   (J)   Signs shall be located and erected according to the standards of the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (K)   Installation of sign(s) covered by this Schedule VII shall not be
installed until and unless the provisions above have been complied with and an
ordinance has been adopted to provide for placement of said sign(s).
   (L)
 
Street                Direction of Travel Sign Type            Ordinance Number
900 block N. Chestnut North-bound         Child with Autism in 3792
Street                                    Area
1000 block N.         South-bound         Child with Autism in 3792
Chestnut Street                           Area
 
(Ord. 3792, passed 4-13-15)
SCHEDULE VIII. SPEED LIMITS.
   Speed limits shall be posted on the following streets.:
 
Street        Location           Speed Limit (Mph) Ord. No.   Date Passed
Beach Ave.    Between Prospect   20                2089       11-12-79
              St. and Rose St.
Cambridge Rd. From Irwin Ave.    20                3049       4-8-96
              north to 11th St.
              Between North
Odea St.      Grove and North    15                3842; 4211 6-27-16; 11-12-24
              Park Street
              Between Burlington
              Ave. and a point
South St.     250 feet west of   40                3423       1-12-04
              the west right-of-
              way line on Beach
              Street.
              Between Chestnut
Third St.     St. and Tremont    20                3278       11-13-00
              St.
                                                           
('71 Code, § 10-8-3(B))
SCHEDULE IX. THROUGH TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Closures and restrictions.
 
Street or Alley Description                                Ord. No. Date Passed
Alley, sometimes known as Kinser Court, that runs east and 3042     3-25-96
west between Beach Street South and Birch
Alley, running north to south in Block 16 of the original
town, said Block 16 being bounded by Main Street, Second
Street, Tremont Street and Third Street. Said alley is     3368     11-12-02
open only to those vehicles making pick-ups or deliveries
of passengers or goods, or providing services, to
properties abutting said alley
 
   (B)   Temporary closures.
 
Street or Alley    Location            Conditions          Ord. No. Date Passed
                                       Monday through
                                       Friday when
                                       children are
Alley running      The 64-foot long    present, the
north and south in section of alley    temporary closure
Block 3 of Blish's adjacent to Lots 3  being designated by 3484     11-14-05
Addition           and 8 of Block 3 of the placement of
                   Blish's Addition    signs or range
                                       cones across the
                                       width of the alley
                                       at both ends
                                       Monday through
                                       Friday during the
                                       school year, and
                                       when children are
                                       present, between
                                       the hours of 7:30
                   Between Central     a.m. to 8:15 a.m.
Elm Street         Blvd. and Lyle      and at 2:30 p.m. to 3364     10-15-02
                   Street              3:15 p.m. as
                                       designated by the
                                       placement of signs
                                       or orange cones
                                       across the width of
                                       the street at
                                       either end
                                       Monday through
                                       Friday during the
                                       school year, and
                                       when school
                                       children are
                                       present, between
                                       hours of 10:05 a.m.
                   Between Central     to 10:40 a.m. and
Lexington Avenue   Blvd. and First     at 11:40 a.m. to    3369     11-12-02
                   Street              12:40 p.m. and at
                                       1:50 p.m. to 2:20
                                       p.m. as designated
                                       by the placement of
                                       signs or orange
                                       cones across the
                                       width of the street
                                       at either end
 
CHAPTER 78: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Parking restrictions in specified places
   
II.   Parking in downtown area
   
III.   Handicapped parking spaces
   
IV.   Parallel parking
   
V.   Loading and unloading zones
SCHEDULE I. PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   There shall be no parking and no parking signs shall be erected in the
following specified places:
Street Location Side Ord. No. Date Passed
Street     Location                                                  Side  Ord. No.   Date
                                                                                      Passed
Beach      From Pine to Prospect                                     East             
Boss       From the railroad to Second                               East             
Cambridge  At its intersection with the Kewanee Park District        Both             
Road       entrance to the 19th Hole restaurant
Cambridge  900 block adjacent to the storage shed near the 9th hole                   3-28-
Road       of Baker Park Golf Course approximately 770 feet north of East  3826       16
           Irwin
Central    For a distance of 68 feet west from Elm Street            North            
Boulevard
Chestnut   From Division to Central Boulevard                        West             
Chestnut   From 9th to 6th                                           Both             
Commercial From Boss to Grove                                        South            
Cottage    Between Park Avenue and Prospect Street                   West  3184       10-13-
                                                                                      98
Cottage    From Pine Street north to the intersecting alley north of Both  3049       4-8-96
           Rockwell
Division   From Chestnut to South Grove                              North            
East       From 9th to 8th                                           West             
East       Beginning at the intersection of East Second and East                      5-24-
Second     Street, and extending east to the alley running north     South 3432       04
Street     from East Second Street
East 5th   From Main to Burr and on the north side of East 5th       South 2023       6-12-
Street     Street for a distance of 60 feet east from Main                            78
East 5th   From the entrance of the Pines Trailer Corporation on
Street     North Grace Avenue to North East Street, between the      Both             
           hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
East Third Beginning at the intersection of Grace Avenue, extending  North 3461       1-10-
Street     west to the intersection of North Elm Street                               05
East Third Beginning at the intersection North Elm Street, extending                  1-10-
Street     west to North Burr Boulevard, between the hours of 8:00   North 3461       05
           a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
East Third From Lakeview Avenue to May Street                        South 2682       9-12-
Street                                                                                88
East       From the southeast intersection of Burr and Seventh                        2-13-
Seventh    Street east 20 feet. ("No Parking from Here to Corner"    North 3035       96
Street     sign.)
East       From Prospect Place to Main Street                        Both             
Prospect
East       From Prospect Place to East Street                        South            
Prospect
Eleventh   Beginning at the intersection of North Vine and Eleventh  North 3310       6-11-
Street     Street North to the entrance of Northeast Park                             01
Elliott    From Division to Prospect                                 East             
Elliott    From W. Central Blvd. to W. Prospect Street               West  4088       1-10-
Street                                                                                22
Elm        From Lyle to E. Oak                                       West             
Elm        From 1st Street to Central Blvd. from six o'clock (6:00)  East  3024       12-4-
           a.m. to six o'clock (6:00) p.m.                                            95
Elm        From 10th Street north to the entrance of Northeast Park  West  2678       7-25-
                                                                                      88
Fifth      From Prospect to Rose                                     West  3126       10-14-
Avenue                                                                                97
First      From Park to Lexington                                    South            
First      From Commercial and First                                 North            
                                                                           3104       4-28-
Franklin   From Division to Pine                                     Both  4017    97 8-
                                                                                      24-20
Franklin   From Pine to Prospect                                     Both  3104       4-28-
                                                                                      97
Franklin   From Western to Rose                                      East             
                                                                                      9-27-
Franklin   From Rose to Boiler Corporation                           Both  3656       10
                                                                           3955       2-25-
                                                                                      19
Fullerton                                                           Both             
Court
           From Tenney Street to Willard Street, between the hours   North
Garfield   of eight o'clock (8:00) p.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m.  and   2063       7-23-
Street     except during school activities conducted by the          South            79
           Wethersfield Community Unit School District No. 230
George     From E. Division Street to Roosevelt Avenue               East  4088       1-10-
Street                                                                                22
Gilbert    From E. Division Street to Roosevelt Avenue               East  4088       1-10-
Street                                                                                22
Grace      From 8th to 9th                                           East             
Avenue
Grace      From First St. to Willow St.                              West  2938       11-7-
Avenue                                                                                94
Grove      From Park Avenue to Commercial Street                     East             
Grove      From West Prospect St. to Park Row                        East  3029       1-8-96
Helmer     South of Rose Street and ending at Columbus Street        East  3168       7-27-
Street                                                                                98
Henry      From Roosevelt to Division                                West             
Junior                                                               East             4-13-
Avenue     South of Dewey and ending at Kewanee Care Entrance        and   3148       98
                                                                     West
Kentville  From US Route 34 to the city's eastern terminus on        North 2933       10-19-
Road       Kentville Road                                                             94
Lake       Beginning at the intersection of Lake Street and Ladd     North            5-12-
Street     Avenue and extending east to the city limits              and   3396       03
                                                                     South
Lexington  From First to Central Boulevard                           West             
Loomis     From Tremont to Main                                      South            
Madison    From 6th to 500 feet north                                Both             
Avenue
Maple      From Pleasant View Ave.to 50 feet north of Pleasant View  East  4205       10-15-
Street     Ave.                                                                       24
                                                                     East             6-25-
May Street Between Third Street and                                  and   2435       85
                                                                     West
McKinley   From East to Main                                         North            
McKinley   From Main to first alley to the East                      South 2988       8-14-
                                                                                      95
Mill       From Miner to Burlington Avenue next to Knox Homes        North            
Miner      From Mill to Dewey                                        East  2019       5-8-78
Morton     Division Street to McKinley Avenue                        East  3530       3-12-
Avenue                                                                                07
Nelson     East Street to Goodrich Street                            Both  3972A      7-22-
Street                                                                                19
Ninth      From East to Main                                         Both             
North Burr From the northeast intersection of Burr and Seventh                        2-13-
Street     Street to 15 feet north of the hydrant on the east side   East  3035       96
           of Burr Street. ("No Parking From Here to Corner" sign.)
North East                                                           East             8-24-
Street     From 10th Street north to 11th Street                     and   3174       98
                                                                     West
North      From its intersection with south line of East 4th Street
Grace      to its intersection with the north line of East 6th       Both             
Street     Street between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) a.m. and
           six o'clock (6:00) p.m.
North                                                                                 2-28-
Lakeview   From Pleasant View Avenue to Second Street                Both  2350       83
Avenue
North      Beginning at the intersection of Lakeview and Rollins and                  5-24-
Lakeview   extending south to the intersection of Lakeview and Third West  3432       04
Street     Street
           Beginning at a point 530 feet north of the intersection
North Main from the centerline of Main Street and the north right-                    11-28-
Street     of-way line of the BNSF railroad, thence going north to a East  3485       05
           point located 40 feet north of the north line of Seventh
           Street
           Beginning at the intersection of the north right-of-way
North Main line for the BNSF railroad and the centerline of Main                      11-28-
Street     Street, thence north to a point 440 feet north of the     Both  3485       05
           intersection of the centerline of Main Street and the
           railroad right-of-way
North Main Beginning at the north right-of-way line for the BNSF                      11-28-
Street     railroad, thence going north to a point 40 feet north of  Both  3485       05
           the north right-of-way line of Seventh Street, extended
North Main Beginning at the south side of the exit from Northeast                     6-26-
Street     park (adjacent to northern most boundary of park) and     East  3257       00
           thence 90 feet south (post "No Parking Between Signs")
Oak        From Main to Tremont                                      South            
Oak        From Tremont to Elliott                                   North 3029       1-8-96
Page       From Burlington Avenue to Beach Street with the limits of Both             
Street     the intersection
           From an extension of the north line of Oak Street to
Park       Prospect Street, and on the east side of Park Street from Both             
Street     an extension of the north line of Oak Street to Central
           Boulevard
Payson     From W. Division Street to W. McClure Street              East  4088       1-10-
Street                                                                                22
Pine       From Elliott to Beach                                     South            
Pine       From Elliott to a point 115 feet west of the west right-  North 3578       6-9-08
           of-way line of Elliott
Prairie    From 5th Ave. West to the alley running north-south       North 2938       11-7-
Avenue                                                                                94
Rockwell   From Acorn to Beach                                       South 4012       7-13-
Street                                                                                20
Rockwell   From Elliott Street to Beach Street                       South 4088       1-10-
Street                                                                                22
Rockwell   From Junior Avenue to Acorn                               South 3126       10-14-
                                                                                      97
           Beginning at the intersection of Rollins and East Street  North            5-24-
Rollins    extending east to the alley running north and south from  and   3432       04
           Rollins                                                   South
Roosevelt  From East to Main                                         North            
Avenue
Roosevelt  From Main to first alley to the East                      South 2988       8-14-
Avenue                                                                                95
Rose       From Grove to mid-block between Franklin and West Street  North            
Second     Beginning at the intersection of East Street to the       North 3313       6-25-
Street     intersection of Lakeview Avenue                                            01
Second
Street and
East       From Elm Street to N. East Street                         Both  2720       2-26-
Street                                                                                90
(U.S.
Route 34)
Smith      From Division to Mill                                     West  3104       4-28-
                                                                                      97
South      From Tenney St. to Edwards St.                            Both  3024       12-4-
                                                                                      95
South      From Tenney St. to Hollis St.                             Both  3034       2-13-
                                                                                      96
S. Elm     Midblock, between the entrances to the school’s parking East  3870       1-23-
Street     lot                                                                        17
S. Grove   From the intersection of Division Street North to the     East  3341       5-13-
Street     entrance of the Kewanee Hospital Parking lot                               02
S.                                                                                    10-13-
Lakeview   Between Pleasant View and Elmwood Ave.                    West  3184       98
Street
S. Vine    From Oak Street to East First Street                      East  3049       4-8-96
Street
Tenney     From Division Street south to the city limits             Both  2963       2-7-95
Third      From North Chestnut to West Second                        Both  2847       9-13-
                                                                                      93
Three and
One-Half   From Rice to Perkins                                      Both             
Street
Tremont    From Division to Central Boulevard                        West             
Vine       First Street to a point located 100 feet south of the                      12-26-
Street     south right-of-way line on Second Street at its           East  3564       07
           intersection with Vine Street
Vine       McKinley Avenue to Prospect Street                        Both  3733       4-22-
Street                                                                                13
Vine       Seventy-five feet south of Central Boulevard              West  3967       6-10-
Street                                                                                19
West 8th   From Tremont to Main                                      South            
West
Division   From Tenney St. to Burlington Ave.                        Both             
Street
W. Kellogg From Tenny Street to Hollis Street                        North 4088       1-10-
Avenue                                                                                22
West       From Elliott Street to Junior Ave.                        South 2680       8-8-88
Prospect
West       From Elliott Street to Junior Ave.                        North            
Prospect
West       Beginning at the western most edge of the right-of-way of                  7-14-
Prospect   Chestnut Street and extending west along Prospect for 43  South 3404       03
           feet.
West       Beginning at a point 200 feet west of the western most                     7-14-
Prospect   edge of the right-of-way of Chestnut Street and ending    South 3404       03
           350 feet from that same point of origin.
Whitney    From W. Mill Street to W. McClure Street                  East  4088       1-10-
Avenue                                                                                22
Williard   No parking mid-block south to McClure                     West             
Williams   From Ridyard Avenue to S. East Street                     South 4088       1-10-
Street                                                                                22
William    Between Vine and Ridyard                                  South 3184       10-13-
St.                                                                                   98
Willow     Between East Street and Maple Street                      South 2412       2-27-
Street                                                                                84
Wilsey     From Elliott to Chestnut                                  Both             
Court
   (B)   There shall be no parking, except for a licensed taxi cab, and a
licensed taxi parking only sign shall be erected in the following specified
place:
 
Street       Location                               Side Ord. No. Date Passed
Chestnut St. The south end parking spot in front of West 2907     7-11-94
             113 N. Chestnut Street
(‘71 Code, § 10-6-14) (Ord. 4097, passed 4-25-22; Am. Ord. 4225, passed 11-12-
24)
Penalty, see § 72.99
   (C)   On Monday through Wednesday and on Friday from the hour of 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m. there shall be no parking, except for patients of Dr. Nicholson,
and a sign so stating shall be erected in the following specified place:
 
Street       Location                               Side Ord. No. Date Passed
Chestnut St. The south end parking spot in front of East 3013     11-3-95
             118 N. Chestnut Street
Penalty, see § 72.99
   (D)   Beginning Monday and ending Friday, from the hour of 6:00 a.m. until
6:00 p.m. there shall be no parking permitted as described below, and a sign so
stating shall be erected indicating the same:
 
Street            Location                            Side Ord. No. Date Passed
Burlington Avenue Between Page Street and Knox Street East 3139     12-22-97
   (E)   Parking along the south side of Central Boulevard from Grove Street to
Cottage Street and from Burr Boulevard to Elm Street, excluding any handicapped
spaces, shall be restricted to one hour during school hours, and signs shall be
erected indicating the same.
(Am. Ord. 3869, passed 1-23-17)
SCHEDULE II. PARKING IN DOWNTOWN AREA.
   (A)   Parking on off-street parking lots owned by the city shall be free;
provided, however, that no vehicle shall be parked in such parking lots for
more than 24 consecutive hours.
   (B)   Parking for on-street public parking spaces shall be free; provided,
however, that no vehicle shall be parked in such public parking spot for more
than 24 consecutive hours.
   (C)   If it is deemed by city officials that an individual is abusing the
language of this section to negatively affect downtown businesses, consumers,
or residents, that individual could be subject to the penalties associated with
violating this section.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this schedule may settle and
compromise the claim against him for such illegal parking by paying to the city
the sum of $5 within seven days of the time such alleged offense was committed
and thereafter the sum of $10 if paid prior to the issuance of a warrant for
the offense. Such payment may be made at the police station, office of the City
Clerk or may be mailed (by placing a stamp on reverse side) to the address on
the reverse side of the illegal parking ticket, or by depositing the payment in
one of the courtesy boxes provided for such purposes, and such money shall be
promptly turned over to the City Treasurer to be credited to the Parking Ticket
Fund. A separate violation shall occur every two hours from the time of the
first violation as shown on the illegal parking ticket. (Ord. 26456, passed 12-
14-87; Am. Ord. 2942, passed 11-28-94)
(‘71 Code, § 10-6-15) (Ord. 4128, passed 3-13-23)
SCHEDULE III. HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   The following parking spaces or stalls shall be designated for
permanently physically handicapped or disabled persons on the public streets of
the city:
Description Ord. No. Date Passed
Description                                          Ord. No.   Date Passed
The parallel parking stall or space on the west side
of Tremont Street being the first parking space on
said west side south of the intersection of Tremont
and Third Streets in the city. The first parking     2231       9-29-81
stall or space east of the library's loading zone on
the south side of West First Street between Tremont
Street and Main Street.
The first parking space on the south side of the 100
block of West Second Street immediately east of the  2698       4-10-89
north-south alleyway in front of the business at 111
West Second Street.
The first parallel parking space on the west side of
the 100 block of North Chestnut Street being the
first parking space south of the West Second Street
and North Chestnut Street intersection. Two parallel 2655       12-14-87
parking spaces on the east side of the 300 block of
North Main Street beginning immediately north of the
Eagles Club entrance at 314 North Main Street.
One space on the north side of the 100 block of East
First Street immediately south of the residence at   2692       2-13-89
100 North Burr Street.
The first space on the south side of West Second
Street immediately east of the intersection of       3075       8-12-96
Second Street and Chestnut Street.
The first space on the north side of West Second
Street immediately west of the intersection of       3075; 3223 8-12-96; 8-9-99
Tremont Street and Second Street.
The first space on the north side of West Second
Street immediately west of the intersection of Main  3075; 3223 8-12-96; 8-9-99
Street and Second Street.
The first space on the west side of Tremont Street
immediately south of the intersection of Tremont     3075; 3223 8-12-96; 8-9-99
Street and Second Street.
The first two spaces along the south side of the
lot, and the first two spaces located along the
north side of the lot, adjacent to the sidewalk, in  3218       6-28-99
the city parking lot located on the west side of N.
Main Street in the 300 block.
The first two spaces along the north side of Cental
Boulevard immediately west of the intersection of    3247       5-8-00
Central Boulevard and Tremont Street.
The first two spaces along the north side of Central
Boulevard immediately west of the intersection of    3281       11-13-00
Central Boulevard and Chestnut Street.
Two parallel parking spaces on the east side of the
100 block of South Park Street approximately 160
feet north of Central Blvd. and directly north and   3437       6-14-04
south of an existing curb cut and handicap
accessible entrance along the west side of St.
Mary's Church building.
The first two spaces along the north side of
Garfield Street immediately west of the intersection 3577       6-9-08
of Garfield Street and Willard Street.
The first two spaces along the south side of McClure
Street immediately west of the intersection of       3577       6-9-08
McClure Street and Willard Street.
The first space south of the accessible parallel
curb ramp along the west side of Willard Street      3583       7-28-08
immediately south of the intersection of McClure
Street and Willard
The first space south of the accessible parallel
curb ramp along the west side of Willard Street      3617       8-10-09
immediately north of the intersection of Garfield
Street and Willard Street.
The first space along the east side of Lakeview
Avenue immediately north of the intersection of      3811A      11-9-15
Lakeview Avenue and East Third Street.
The first space along the east side of Lakeview
Avenue immediately south of the intersection of      3811A      11-9-15
Lakeview Avenue and Hope Way.
The first space along the north side of East Third
Street immediately to the west of the intersection   3811A      11-9-15
of East Third Street and Freedom Lane.
Three spaces located along the south side of Central
Boulevard starting approximately 45 feet west of Elm 3868       1-23-17
Street.
Two spaces located along the south side of Central
Boulevard starting approximately 50 feet east of     3868       1-23-17
Grove Street.
                                                               
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing
registration plates or decals issued to a person with disabilities, as defined
by §
70.01 pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616 or 11-1301.2, or to a disabled
veteran pursuant to ILCS 625, Act 5, § 3-609, as evidence that the vehicle is
operated by or for a person with disabilities or disabled veteran.
(Ord. 2491, passed 1-14-85; Am. Ord. 3071, passed 7-22-96)
SCHEDULE IV. PARALLEL PARKING.
   Angle parking shall be prohibited in the following locations designated for
parallel parking:
 
Street         Location                             Side  Ord. No. Date Passed
               Between Central Blvd. and Second St.
               and shall be parallel to the right-
Main St.       of-way lane of two lanes on the east East  2093     11-26-79
               side of Main St. and Illinois Route
               78.
West First St. Between Main St. and Tremont St.     North 2741     9-24-90
SCHEDULE V. LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.
   There shall be no parking and signs shall be posted stating the periods of
no parking in the following specified places.
 
Location                             Periods of No Parking Ord. No. Date Passed
From the SW corner of the
intersection of Central Blvd. and
Elm Street south along the west side 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.      3268     8-28-00
of Elm St. to a point 20 feet south
of the most southerly exit from
Central School lot
The south side of Third Street from
the intersection of Chestnut         6 a.m. to 6 p.m.      3278     11-13-00
eastward a distance of 100 feet.
(Am. Ord. 3547, passed 7-9-07)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES AND PROPERTY
   
91.   ANIMALS
   
92.   CEMETERIES
   
93.   FAIR HOUSING
   
94.   FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS; OUTDOOR BURNING
   
95.   HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION
   
96.   PARKS AND RECREATION
   
97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
   
98.   MUNICIPAL TREE ORDINANCE
   
99.   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED VEHICLES AND PROPERTY
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Abandonment of vehicles prohibited
   
90.03   Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicle on street
   
90.04   Time limit; exceptions
   
90.05   Impoundment
   
90.06   Storage charges on impounded vehicles
   
90.07   Storage and parking of vehicles and other personal property
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle
incapable of being driven in its condition or any vehicle that has not been
moved or used for seven consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted
(625 ILCS 5/1-101.5).
   PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is not a street or
highway.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides, and
transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
('71 Code, § 7-6-1) (Ord. 1513, passed 11-14-66; Am. Ord. 4207, passed 10-28-
24)
§ 90.02 ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle within the city
or to leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under
such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been
abandoned.
('71 Code, § 7-6-2) (Ord. 1513, passed 11-14-66)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.03 LEAVING OF WRECKED, NONOPERATING VEHICLE ON STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any partially dismantled,
nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the
city.
('71 Code, § 7-6-3) (Ord. 1513, passed 11-14-66)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.04 TIME LIMIT; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property
within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, to
allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded
vehicle to remain on such property within the city for longer time than 72
hours; and to leave any such vehicle on any property longer than 72 hours;
except that this chapter shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an
enclosed building; or a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such
business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate stage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city.
('71 Code, § 7-6-4) (Ord. 1513, passed 11-14-66)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.05 IMPOUNDMENT.
   The Chief of Police or any member of his Department designated by him is
hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place
within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or
lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-201 et seq.
('71 Code, § 7-6-5) (Ord. 1513, passed 11-14-66)
§ 90.06 STORAGE CHARGES ON IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   The Chief of Police or any member of his Department designated by him is
hereby authorized to assess a charge for certain vehicles held by the
Department. The charge shall apply to vehicles held by the Police Department
for purposes of investigation pursuant to requests of local police, the State's
Attorney, a court of law or other authority, or held pursuant to request of any
person having an interest in said vehicle. At the time of impoundment a charge
of $25 dollars shall be assessed and shall cover administrative costs, as well
as the first day or any portion thereof of storage. For each day, or portion of
such, the vehicle remains impounded an additional fee of $15 shall be assessed.
Said fees shall commence immediately upon the lawful impoundment and notice
shall be provided to the owner, lien holder or other party having any interest
in said vehicle. If said vehicle is not claimed and the storage charges paid
within 15 days after mailing of notice, the vehicle may be sold in accordance
with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 4-208 - 4-211, including the
notice provisions thereof, or the provisions of any legislation which replaces
said sections. For the purposes of this section a day shall constitute a 24-
hour period at 12:00 a.m.
('71 Code, § 7-6-6) (Ord. 2663, passed 2-22-88; Am. Ord. 3479, passed 9-26-05)
§ 90.07 STORAGE AND PARKING OF VEHICLES AND OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven days the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels, or other parts have  been altered, damaged, or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own power or is incapable of being moved by another vehicle designed to move
it, this includes vehicles that are propped up such that the wheels cannot be
used to move the vehicle. An INOPERABLE VEHICLE also means a motor vehicle
which is not permitted to be operated on a public road because of an expired
state license plate. However, nothing in this section shall apply to any motor
vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use, to operable historic
vehicles over 25 years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place
of business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles as permitted
to do so under the zoning ordinances.
      (2)   OPEN PRIVATE LAND. Refers to an area of land not enclosed by an
accessory building, such as a garage, or other completely enclosed building
authorized to be used for such storage purposes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and considered to be establishing or maintaining
a nuisance to park or store upon open private or public land any inoperable,
stripped, or junked vehicle, or relic, vintage, or antique vehicle which is not
regularly used for transportation, or vehicle not registered to a resident to
the land where the vehicle is stored, or any other machinery, trailers, boats,
implements, or equipment which is inoperable, stripped, or junked, except as is
permitted by the city, as in the case of a licensed junkyard.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and considered to be establishing or maintaining
a nuisance to allow the attached parts, apparatus, tools, material, fuel,
containers, or refuse from the items specified in division (B) to remain upon
or to be strewn upon open private land.
   (D)   The Chief of Police shall cause the owners of inoperable vehicles,
whether on public or private property, and in view of the general public for
seven days to be given a notice stating that such person is to dispose of the
inoperable motor vehicle within seven days. Failure to comply with such notice
will subject the owner of the inoperable motor vehicle to the penalties of this
chapter. In addition, any such vehicle not removed seven days after the
issuance of the municipal notice will be removed by the city or an agency or
business hired by the city to remove such a vehicle.
('71 Code, § 8-1-20(A)-(C)) (Ord. 2514, passed 5-27-85; Am. Ord. 2733, passed
7-23-90; Am. Ord. 2837, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 4207, passed 10-28-24)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this chapter shall be
fined in a sum not to exceed $500 or the city may be ordered to correct the
violation, or all of the foregoing for any one offense. The minimum fine to be
levied against a person convicted of a violation of any section of this chapter
shall be $50 for the first offense and for subsequent offenses of this chapter
the minimum fine shall be $100. Should the city be ordered to correct the
existing violation, the person convicted shall pay for the city's correction of
said violation, and the city may impose a lien upon the premises until the cost
of said correction shall be fully paid. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day, during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2837, passed 7-12-93)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
Article I. General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Cruelty to animals
   
91.03   Animals for use in entertainment
   
91.04   Shooting or molesting birds
   
91.05   Livestock and domestic fowl prohibited in city; running at large;
nuisance
   
91.06   (Reserved)
   
91.07   (Reserved)
   
91.08   Wild animals
   
91.09   Nonresident not to have animals in the city; exceptions
   
91.10   Animal bites and attacks
   
91.11   Face bite procedure
   
91.12   Control of animal wastes
   
91.13   Liberation of confined animals prohibited
   
91.14   Dead animals
   
91.15   Animal trapping
   
91.16   Animal cages, runs, pens, etc.
   
91.17   Stray animals
   
91.18   Penalty for violation of chapter
Article II. Dogs and Cats
Division 1. In General
   
91.19   Rabies control
   
91.20   Dogs and cats running at large; impoundment
   
91.21   Removal of collars, tags and leashes from dogs or cats prohibited;
exceptions
   
91.22   Excessive barking, howling or yelping
   
91.23   Taking up and treating injured dogs and cats
   
91.24   Female dogs or cats in heat
   
91.25   (Reserved)
   
91.26   Use or possession of dogs in conjunction with criminal activity
Division 2. Dangerous and Vicious Dogs
   
91.27   Keeping of vicious dogs
   
91.28   Keeping of dangerous dogs
   
91.29   Impoundment and disposition of dangerous animals
Article III. Impoundment
   
91.30   Grounds for impoundment
   
91.31   Notice of impoundment to owner or keeper
   
91.32   Redemption; fees
Article IV. Kennels and Pet Shops
   
91.33   License required
   
91.34   License application
   
91.35   License fee
   
91.36   Investigation of premises
   
91.37   Posting license on premises
   
91.38   Information on dogs and cats for sale
   
91.39   Sale or gift of reptiles and other animals
   
91.40   Enforcement
   
91.41   License suspension/revocation
   
91.42   Penalty
   
91.43   This article declared supplemental to state law
Article V. Enforcement
   
91.44   In general
   
91.45   Impoundment of animals; records
   
91.46   Hindering community service officer duties
   
91.47   Dogs prohibited in public areas on certain days
Article VI. Bee Keeping
   
91.50   Special use permit required
   
91.51   Location, construction and maintenance of apiaries
   
91.52   Violations prohibited
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any animal, poultry, bird, reptile or or any other non- human living
creature.
   ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY ( CITY POUND). Any facility operated by or under
contract for the State of Illinois, Henry County, or the City of Kewanee,
Illinois for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, or
abandoned dogs, cats and other animals, and also means any veterinary hospital
or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians licensed under the
Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 1994, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 115, §§
1 et seq., and amendments thereto which operates for the above mentioned
purpose in addition to its customary purposes.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility operated, owned or maintained by a duly
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other non-profit
organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of animals. ANIMAL SHELTER also means any
veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians
licensed under the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 1994, ILCS
Ch. 225, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq., and amendments thereto which operates for the
above- mentioned purpose in addition to its customary purposes.
   APIARY. A place where bee colonies are kept.
   BEE. Any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis Mellifera Species.
   CAT. Except where specifically distinguished, includes all animals of the
feline species of the age of four months or older.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of the City of Kewanee Police Department or his
or her designee.
   CITY. The City of Kewanee, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
   CITY CODE.  The City of Kewanee Code of Ordinances.
   COLONY. A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb,
honey, pollen, and brood.
   COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER. Any employee of the Community Service Section of
the City of Kewanee Police Department having custody and control of the city's
animal control facility and of animals therein, and shall include his or her
designees.
   COMMUNITY SERVICE SECTION.  The Community Service Section of the City of
Kewanee Police Department.
   CONFINE, CONFINED OR CONFINEMENT. The restriction of an animal at all times
by such animal's owner or keeper to an escape-proof building or other enclosure
separate from other animals and the public.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal, as defined above, of any species considered to
be ferocious, mischievous or intractable at common law. This includes, but is
not limited to, lions, tigers, other wild cats, bears, elephants, wolves,
foxes, raccoons, monkeys, apes, venomous or constrictor snakes or lizards. It
also includes any animal of any other species, excluding dogs, that the owner
knows or has reason to know is dangerous.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed or
unattended by its owner or keeper, or a member of the owner or keeper's family,
in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches, in an apparent attitude of
attack, any person upon a street, sidewalk or any public grounds or places, or
any property other than the property of the animal's owner or keeper.
   DEPARTMENT. The City of Kewanee Police Department.
   DOG. Except where specifically distinguished, includes all animals of the
canine species of the age of four months or older.
   ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or
causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering, and which shall be securely
enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be
designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. ENCLOSURE does
not include an invisible fence.
   FOUND TO BE A DANGEROUS DOG. That the Chief of Police has, after notice and
an opportunity to be heard by the dog's owner or keeper, determined that the
dog is a DANGEROUS DOG as defined in this section and has entered a written
order based on that determination.
   GUARD OR SENTRY DOG.  A dog specifically trained and used primarily to
perform guard, sentry or other security duty including, without limitation,
defending, patrolling, or protecting property, life or safety, at a commercial
establishment; however, this definition does not include personally owned pets
kept on private residential property that also provide security.
   GUIDE OR SUPPORT DOG. A dog specifically trained and used to perform
services for the sight or hearing impaired or to provide support services for a
disabled person.
   HAS BEEN BITTEN. That a person or animal has been seized with the teeth or
jaws of another animal so that the person or animal seized has been nipped,
gripped, wounded or pierced and further means and includes any contact of
animal saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin of the person or animal.
   HIVE. A structure intended for the housing of a bee colony.
   IMPOUND, IMPOUNDED OR IMPOUNDMENT.  Confinement at the City of Kewanee
Animal Control Facility or at a licensed veterinarian's place of business.
   INOCULATION. The injection, subcutaneously or in such other manner as may be
approved by the Illinois Department of Agriculture of an antirabies vaccine
meeting standards approved by the Illinois Department of Agriculture or by the
United States Department of Agriculture. For purposes of this chapter,
vaccination is the same as inoculation.
   KENNEL OPERATOR. Any person who operates an establishment, other than an
animal control facility, veterinary hospital, or animal shelter, where dogs or
dogs and cats are maintained for boarding, training or similar purposes for a
fee or compensation; or who sells, offers to sell, exchange, or offers for
adoption with or without charge dogs or dogs and cats which he has produced and
raised. A person who owns, has possession of, or harbors four or less females
capable of reproduction, shall not be considered a kennel operator.
   LEASH. A cord, rope, strap or chain, or similar tether, made of appropriate
materials, no longer than six feet in length which shall be securely fastened
to the collar or harness of an animal and shall be of sufficient strength to
keep the animal under control.
   LICENSED VETERINARIAN. A veterinarian duly licensed as such under the laws
of the State of Illinois or of any other state which, by law, provides for the
licensing of veterinarians.
   MUZZLED. The practice of preventing an animal from opening its mouth fully
by means of any commercially manufactured muzzle or other humane device
approved by a community service officer.
   OWNER OR KEEPER.  Includes any person, including any individual,
partnership, society, association, corporation, firm or other legal entity, or
any public or private institution, who:
      (1)   Has a right of property in an animal;
      (2)   Harbors or keeps an animal, including the feeding of stray animals;
      (3)   Has an animal in the person's care;
      (4)   Acts as custodian of an animal; or
      (5)   Knowingly suffers or permits any dog or cat to remain on or about
any premises within the city under said person's charge or control.
   PEACE OFFICER. Any City of Kewanee police officer or any other law
enforcement officer with authority to act within the jurisdiction of the city.
   PET SHOP OPERATOR. Any person who sells, offers to sell, exchange, or offers
for adoption with or without charge or donation dogs, cats, birds, fish,
reptiles, or other animals customarily obtained as pets in the State of
Illinois. However, a person who sells only such animals that he has produced
and raised shall not be considered a pet shop operator under this chapter and a
veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians
licensed under the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 1994, ILCS
Ch. 225, Act 115, §§ et seq., and amendments thereto shall not be considered a
pet shop operator under this chapter.
   RUN LINE. The system of tying a dog in place with either rope or chain
having a tensile strength of at least 300 pounds and which allows the dog
freedom of movement only on the property of the dog's owner or keeper.
   RUNNING AT LARGE or AT LARGE. Any time an animal is:
      (1)   Off its owner’s or keeper’s property, not confined within a vehicle
being driven or parked on the street, and not controlled by a leash held by a
competent person to whose command the animal is obedient; or
      (2)   On its owner or keeper's property without being contained on the
property by means of:
         (a)   A fence, chain, leash, or other visible, physical restraint
sufficient to protect persons or animals not on that property;
         (b)   An electronic training device such as a pet containment system
utilizing an in-ground electrical wire, or a wireless system, to transmit
signals to a collar wore by the animal providing electrical stimulation that
properly trains the animal, to remain on the owner's or keeper's property;
         (c)   An electronic training device such as a training collar or
remote training collar which upon transmission of a signal from a hand-held
device operated by a competent person provides electrical stimulation to the
animal and properly trains the animal to remain on the owner's or keeper's
property;
         (d)   Voice control of a competent person to whom the animal will
immediately respond in an obedient manner so as to remain on the owner's or
keeper's property, regardless of source of agitation or provocation to leave
the owner's or keeper's property.
   VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   (a)   Any individual dog that when unprovoked bites or attacks a
human being or other animal either on public or private property;
         (b)   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of humans or domestic animals;
         (c)   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic and a
generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks
upon humans or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner or with
special equipment;
         (d)   Any individual dog that attacks a human being or domestic animal
without provocation; or
         (e)   Any individual dog which has been found to be a dangerous dog
upon three separate occasions by a court or an administrative hearing unit of
competent jurisdiction as set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   However, no dog shall be deemed vicious if it bites, attacks, or
menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner or keeper, or harms or
menaces anyone who has tormented or abused it, or is a professionally trained
dog for law enforcement duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a
manner that is specific as to breed.
   WILD ANIMAL.  Any animal ferae naturae or naturally wild.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4013, passed 7-27-20; Am. Ord. 4227,
passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.02 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall commit cruelty to any animal. A person commits cruelty
to animals by knowingly:
      (1)   Overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing,
tormenting, mutilating, starving, or killing in a cruel manner any animal, or
causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done;
      (2)   Failing to provide any animal in a person's charge or custody, as
owner or keeper or otherwise, with a sufficient quantity of good-quality,
wholesome food to maintain proper body weight and good general health, kept in
a suitable container within viewable range and in an area to prevent tampering,
contamination or spillage;
      (3)   Failing to provide any animal in a person's charge or custody, as
owner or keeper or otherwise, with a sufficient quantity of good-quality,
wholesome water kept in an area to prevent contamination and spillage, and
replaced with fresh water at least once per day;
      (4)   Failing to provide any animal in a person's charge or custody, as
owner or keeper or otherwise, with shelter constructed in a manner to ensure
protection from the elements;
      (5)   Failing to provide veterinary care when necessary to prevent
suffering;
      (6)   Leaving one's animal at an animal control facility, animal shelter,
veterinary clinic with the intent, or effect of abandoning the animal, or on
the premises of another or any place where an animal may become a public charge
or may suffer hunger, injury, or exposure;
      (7)   Failing to provide humane care and treatment, including keeping the
animal in a clean, sanitary and healthy manner;
      (8)   Selling, offering for sale, bartering, or giving away as a pet or
novelty any rabbit, baby chick, duckling, or any other animal which has been
dyed, colored, or otherwise treated to impart an artificial color thereto;
      (9)   Poisoning or causing to be poisoned any dog or other domestic
animal except when performed by a licensed veterinarian or at humane shelter or
pound;
      (10)   Confining an animal in such a manner that it is forced to stand,
lie or sit in its own excrement;
      (11)   Failing to provide living quarters, in addition to the shelter
required by §
91.16, that are large enough for the animal to exercise and move about;
      (12)   Tethering an animal using a leash, weight, or other means in such
a manner that prevents the animal from moving freely without entanglement;
      (13)   Killing or injuring, or attempting to kill or injure, any domestic
animal;
      (14)   Confining or allowing any animal to remain in a motor vehicle in
such a manner as to place it in a life or health threatening situation by
exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper
ventilation or other protection. If a community service officer or peace
officer has probable cause to believe that an animal has been subjected to
cruelty as defined in this division, and that the animal's life, safety or
health is in danger, the community service officer or peace officer shall have
authority to enter the motor vehicle containing the animal by any reasonable
means under the circumstances after making a reasonable attempt to locate the
person confining or allowing the animal to remain in the vehicle;
      (15)   Performing surgeries or surgical procedures, such as cropping ears
or docking tails, unless performed by a licensed veterinarian; or
      (16)   Instigating, causing, procuring or assisting in any indecent or
immoral show or exhibition of any animal.
   (B)   Any person who causes, instigates, permits, facilitates, aids, abets,
or encourages any violation of this section shall be guilty of cruelty to
animals and shall also be responsible for any costs incurred by the city due to
such violation, including but not limited to boarding, inoculation, rent, food,
disposal, or care.
   (C)   If a community service officer or peace officer has probable cause to
believe that an animal has been subjected to cruelty as defined in division (A)
above, and that the animal's life, safety or health is in danger, the community
service officer or peace officer may seize and impound the animal, may give the
animal veterinary or other care at the owner or keeper's expense, and may
euthanize the animal at the owner or keeper's expense when, in the judgment of
a licensed veterinarian, euthanization is necessary to prevent additional
suffering and alternative avenues of alleviating suffering have been exhausted
or eliminated as futile. Once an animal subjected to cruelty but not subject to
euthanization as stated above has been impounded, the redemption procedures set
forth in §§
91.30 through
91.32 shall apply.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.03 ANIMALS FOR USE IN ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   No person may own, capture, breed, train, or lease any animal which
he or she knows or should know is intended for use in any show, exhibition,
program, or other activity featuring or otherwise involving a fight between
such animal and any other animal or human, or the intentional killing of any
animal for the purpose of sport, wagering, or entertainment.
      (2)   No person shall promote, conduct, carry on, advertise, collect
money for or in any other manner assist or aid in the presentation for purposes
of sport, wagering, or entertainment, any show, exhibition, program, or other
activity involving a fight between two or more animals or any animal and human,
or the intentional killing of any animal.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer for sale, ship, transport, or
otherwise move, or deliver or receive any animal which he or she knows or
should know has been captured, bred, or trained, or will be used, to fight
another animal or human or be intentionally killed, for the purpose of sport,
wagering, or entertainment.
      (4)   No person shall manufacture for sale, shipment, transportation or
delivery any device or equipment which the person knows or should know is
intended for use in any show, exhibition, program, or other activity featuring
or otherwise involving a fight between two or more animals, or any human and
animal, or the intentional killing of any animal for purposes of sport,
wagering or entertainment.
      (5)   No person shall own, possess, sell or offer for sale, ship,
transport, or otherwise move any equipment or device which such person knows or
should know is intended for use in connection with any show, exhibition,
program, or activity featuring or otherwise involving a fight between two or
more animals, or any animal and human, or the intentional killing of any animal
for purposes of sport, wagering or entertainment.
      (6)   No person shall make available any site, structure, or facility,
whether enclosed or not, which he or she knows or should know is intended to be
used for the purpose of conducting any show, exhibition, program, or other
activity involving a fight between two or more animals, or any animal and
human, or the intentional killing of any animal.
      (7)   No person shall attend or otherwise patronize any show, exhibition,
program, or other activity featuring or otherwise involving a fight between two
or more animals, or any animal and human, or the intentional killing of any
animal for the purposes of sport, wagering or entertainment.
      (8)   No person shall tie or attach or fasten any live or dead animal to
any machine or device propelled by any power for the purpose of causing such
animal to be pursued by a dog or dogs.
   (B)   Seizure and disposition of animals and other items illegally used in
entertainment.
      (1)   The Department may seize and impound any and all animals and seize
any equipment, money or other proceeds utilized in or directly related to any
violation of this section. Animals and other items impounded or seized shall be
held for evidence and for final disposition by the court or an administrative
hearing unit of appropriate jurisdiction.
      (2)   The Department shall give notice to the person from whom the
animals, equipment, money or other proceeds were seized pursuant to division
(B)(1) above, or to the person in possession as owner, or lessee of the
premises where said items were found, or if the names of any of these persons
are unknown to the Department upon reasonable inquiry, by posting notice upon
the outer door of the premises. The notice shall be directed to any person
claiming an interest in the property or money, to come before the court on a
specified date, not less than three days from the date of the notice, and to
show cause, if any, why the items should not be sold at public auction as
contraband, or otherwise be forfeited as contraband to the city for disposition
as authorized by this section.
      (3)   If in the court's or hearing unit's opinion, after hearing, or upon
the default of those notified to appear, it appears to the court or hearing
unit that the items seized are in fact contraband, the court or hearing unit
shall order disposition of said items in one or more of the following ways:
         (a)   Any animals forfeited under this section shall be either
humanely euthanized, offered for adoption, or otherwise disposed of in
accordance with any controlling provision of the city code or state law.
         (b)   Any money forfeited under this section shall be forfeited to the
city treasury.
         (c)   Any other items forfeited under this section shall be sold at
public auction to the highest bidder for cash, and the proceeds paid into the
city treasury.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.04 SHOOTING OR MOLESTING BIRDS.
   (A)   No person shall shoot or in any manner molest any bird. No person
shall rob any bird's nest of its contents unless done in furtherance of
removing a nest from a house or other structure on private property when such
nest has become a nuisance.
   (B)   Removal of nuisance nests. The removal of any bird’s nest deemed a
nuisance must comply with federal and state regulations, including the
Migratory Bird Treaty Act and applicable Illinois laws. Before removing a
bird’s nest, individuals are strongly encouraged to consult with local wildlife
authorities or the Illinois Department of Natural Resources to ensure
compliance. Permits may be required for certain species. Failure to adhere to
these regulations may result in penalties under state or federal law.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.05 LIVESTOCK AND DOMESTIC FOWL PROHIBITED IN CITY; RUNNING AT LARGE;
NUISANCE.
   (A)   No person shall keep any cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules, swine,
or other similar beasts of burden, or domestic fowl of the species such as
geese, ducks, turkeys, guinea hens, or chickens at any place or upon any
premises in the city. However, horses shall be permitted to be kept upon
premises that have been granted a special use by the City Council to permit a
riding stable provided any and all conditions of such special use are fully
complied with at all times. No person shall permit any of the above enumerated
animals to run at large in the city. Any animals found within the city in
violation of this section are subject to impoundment by the Department and
disposal as provided in §§
91.30 through
91.32.
   (B)   In addition to all other legal or equitable remedies, the animals and
fowl prohibited from being kept in the city or running at large in the city by
division (A), are hereby declared to be nuisances, and may be abated pursuant
to the provisions of
Chapter 95 of this code and amendments thereto.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Premises owned and operated by any duly licensed animal control
facility, animal shelter, or licensed veterinarian;
      (2)   Any existing education programs related to animal husbandry on a
school grounds upon the date of passage of this chapter on school grounds as of
the date of passage of this chapter; or
      (3)   Any lawful, nonconforming agricultural uses of land per the city’s
zoning regulations.
   (D)   Horses, mules, or other beasts of burden, are permitted to be ridden
on roads and streets, but not on sidewalks from sunrise to sunset daily. They
shall not be allowed to defecate on said roads and streets, shall be equipped
with a manure catcher, shall not be ridden in a reckless manner, and shall obey
the rules of the road for bicycles while being ridden on the road or street.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.06 (RESERVED).
§ 91.07 (RESERVED).
§ 91.08 WILD ANIMALS.
   No person shall keep, harbor, possess, act as custodian or have a right of
property in a wild animal. Appropriately licensed zoos, circuses, veterinary
hospitals or clinics, animal control facilities, animal shelters, and persons
licensed as wild animal rehabilitators are exempt from this prohibition. Wild
animals found within the city in violation of this section are subject to
impound by the Department and disposal as provided in §§
91.30 through
91.32.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.09 NONRESIDENT NOT TO HAVE ANIMALS IN THE CITY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Persons who are not residents of the city shall not keep any animal in
the city; however, this prohibition shall not apply to persons remaining in the
city for 30 days or less or who are passing through the city, but shall apply
to any nonresident who on more than one occasion allows an animal to run at
large within the city. Any animals found within the city in violation of this
section are subject to impoundment by the Department and disposal as provided
in §§
91.30 through
91.32.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) shall not apply to appropriately
licensed veterinary hospitals or animal control facilities, animal shelters,
clinics, and licensed animal kennels and pet shops.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.10 ANIMAL BITES AND ATTACKS.
   (A)   Any person owning or keeping a dog, cat, or other animal, which bites,
attacks, or approaches a person on a street, sidewalk or public place in an
apparent attitude of attack shall immediately report the incident in writing to
the Police Department.
   (B)   Any person who has been bitten, attacked, or approached by a dog, cat
or other animal shall file a written report of the incident with the Police
Department within 24 hours of the incident.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of an animal involved
in a biting incident to euthanize, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of such
animal until a full release on the incident has been issued by the Chief of
Police. Animals, other than dogs and cats, must be examined by a veterinarian
on the first and tenth day following a bite.
   (D)   Vaccinated animal procedures.
      (1)   The owner or harborer of a properly vaccinated biting animal shall
have the dog or cat examined by a licensed veterinarian who shall submit a
report to the Chief of Police within 24 hours of the incident.
      (2)   The biting animal may be confined on the premises by its owner or
harborer. Confined shall mean within a structure or secure enclosure or on a
leash on the premises of the owner or harborer. The period of confinement shall
be ten days.
      (3)   The owner or harborer of a properly vaccinated biting animal shall
have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian again on the tenth day of
confinement. A written report by the veterinarian that the biting animal is not
affected by rabies, filed with the Chief of Police, shall terminate the
confinement.
   (E)   Unvaccinated animal procedures.
      (1)   The owner or harborer of a biting animal which has not been
vaccinated shall have it examined immediately by a licensed veterinarian who
shall submit a report to the Chief of Police within 24 hours of the incident.
      (2)   The owner or harborer shall then confine the biting animal in a
licensed animal hospital or with a licensed veterinarian for the required ten-
day confinement period. If said animal tests negative for rabies, the animal
shall not be released from confinement until the animal has been vaccinated.
   (F)   The owner or harborer of any dog or cat requiring veterinary care,
impounding, licensing, destruction or disposition services as a result of any
violations of this chapter shall be responsible for all such expenses. Failure
to assume such expenses shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and an act
of disclaiming and the dog or cat involved shall be considered a stray animal.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.11 FACE BITE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Impoundment. Regardless of the animal’s age or license status, the
owner or harborer of an animal that inflicts a face bite shall have the animal
impounded within 24 hours with a licensed veterinarian, if applicable for the
species, or with a humane organization that has appropriate facilities. Such
impoundment shall be for a period of ten days.
   (B)   Impoundment exception. When the bitten person is a member of the same
household as the owner or harborer of the animal that inflicts the face bite,
such impoundment may occur on the owner’s premises. Impoundment shall mean
Confinement within a structure, secure enclosure, or on a leash solely on the
owner’s premises. The animal that inflicts the face bite shall be humanely
muzzled during impoundment. The animal shall also be examined by a licensed
veterinarian on the first and tenth day of such confinement.
   (C)   Reporting. All incidents of a face bite shall be reported immediately
to the Chief of Police, who shall report all such incidents to the County
Animal Control Department using the forms and timeline specified by that
agency.
   (D)   Disposition of animal. It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer
of an animal that has inflicted a face bite to dispose of such animal by sale,
exchange, barter, or gift without full disclosure of the animal's history.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.12 CONTROL OF ANIMAL WASTES.
   (A)   Animal waste on public property. No person owning, harboring, keeping
or controlling any dog or cat or other domestic animal or pet shall cause,
suffer or allow such animal to soil, defile, defecate on or cause a nuisance on
any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park, or any
place where people congregate or walk or upon any public property whatsoever,
or upon any private property without permission from the property owner. The
restriction in this section shall not apply to public property when the owner
or person in control of such animal complies with the following conditions:
      (1)   The person immediately removes all feces deposited by such animal
using a sanitary method.
      (2)   The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas is
disposed of by the person in accordance with the provisions of this section in
a sanitary manner approved by the city .
   (B)   Animal waste on private property.
      (1)   The accumulation of animal feces in or on any private property is
hereby declared a nuisance.
      (2)   Every person who is the owner or occupant of private property or
the agent in charge of such property must keep such property free of any
accumulation of animal feces.
      (3)   ACCUMULATION for purposes of this division (B) shall mean:
         (a)   Any quantity which results in the presence of feces odor at the
property line; or
         (b)   Any quantity that interferes with the use or enjoyment of any
neighboring property due to odors, visual blight, or attraction of insects,
rodents or other pests; or
         (c)   Any quantity that otherwise constitutes a hazard to the health,
safety or convenience of persons residing both on and off of the property.
      (4)   Notice to remove.
         (a)   Each owner, occupant or agent having charge of such property who
is notified in accordance with the provisions set forth herein by a community
service officer, a peace officer or any other duly authorized agent of the
city, including without limitation, any and all city personnel in the city's
code compliance division, to remove an accumulation of feces, shall be required
to remove such feces and satisfactorily disposing of the same within 24 hours
of the effective date and hour of the notice.
         (b)   The notice shall set forth in writing the dates of inspection,
the address of the property found to have an accumulation of animal feces, the
fact that such an accumulation was observed, and the owner, occupant or agent
must remove the accumulation within 24 hours of the notice's effective date and
hour.
         (c)   If the property where an accumulation of feces is found contains
only a single-family dwelling, then the notice shall be directed to the
occupant of such property whether such occupant be the property's owner or
lessee. If the property where the accumulation of feces is found contains more
than one dwelling unit, then notice shall be directed to the record owner of
such property or the agent in charge of such property.
      (5)   The notice's effective date and hour shall be determined in
accordance with the manner in which the notice was served:
         (a)   If a copy of the notice is delivered to an owner of record
personally or to any adult occupant of the property personally or to the agent
in charge of such property personally, the notice's effective date and hour
shall be the date and hour so personally served.
         (b)   If a copy of the notice is delivered to the usual place of abode
of an owner of record or to the occupant at the property and left with a person
who is a family member 13 years of age or older and of suitable discretion, who
shall be informed of the contents thereof, and concurrently, a copy of the
notice is sent by first class mail addressed to the usual place of abode of
such owner and the occupant at the property, said notice shall become effective
on the date and hour of personal service upon such family member.
         (c)   If a copy of the notice is sent by certified or registered mail
addressed to an owner of record at their last known address or the occupant at
the property and receipt thereof is returned with the signature of such owner
or occupant, then the effective date and hour of said notice shall be midnight
of the date following the date signed for as evidenced by the return of mail
received. If the notice is returned to the city undelivered, then a copy of the
notice shall be posted conspicuously on the property, and the notice's
effective date and hour shall be the date and hour the notice was so posted.
      (6)   No owner, occupant or agent in charge of such property shall fail
to satisfactorily remove and dispose of such accumulation of feces within 24
hours of the effective date and hour of the notice to remove the same. A
violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100
plus court costs and not more than $750 plus court costs. A second violation of
this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $200 plus court
costs and not more than $750 plus court costs. Three or more violations of this
section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $400 plus court costs
and not more than $750 plus court costs, and impoundment and disposition per §§
91.30 through
91.32.
      (7)   Fourth or subsequent violations. After an owner, occupant or agent
having charge of property is thrice notified of a violation of this section,
and regardless of whether that person complies with any prior notice, a fourth
or subsequent instance of an accumulation in violation of this section shall
constitute a violation subjecting that person to a fine of not less than $500
plus court costs and not more than $750 plus court costs, and in order to abate
such a nuisance, the court may, in addition to ordering any other legal or
equitable relief, order that the owner or keeper may no longer own, harbor or
maintain the dog or cat, or any other animal, causing the nuisance on any
property within the city.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.13 LIBERATION OF CONFINED ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall remove from restraint, or release from confinement or
enclosure, an animal belonging to or kept by any other person, unless in an
emergency situation when such removal or release is necessary to protect the
confined or enclosed animal from being physically harmed, or unless the
animal's owner or keeper consents to the removal or release.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.14 DEAD ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person within the city shall mutilate any dead animal, or permit
another to do so, within the view of any public place or within the view of any
private property other than the private property owned or controlled by that
individual. For purposes of this division, cleaning and dressing of fish or
game caught in compliance with Illinois Department of Natural Resources
regulations shall not be considered mutilation.
   (B)   No person shall allow the body, or any part thereof, of any dead
animal to decompose and petrify on the person's property.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.15 ANIMAL TRAPPING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use any type of leg-hold animal trap within
the city. It shall be unlawful to use any other animal trap that could cause
cruelty to animals within the city except where an infestation of property
results in a determination that such infestation is either a public nuisance or
creates a safety hazard to the public, as determined by the community service
section. In the case of such exception, appropriate means to control the
situation shall be used by the community service section.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall impose any duty upon the city to remedy,
abate or eliminate such nuisance or hazard and no liability on the part of the
city is created hereby.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.16 ANIMAL CAGES, RUNS, PENS, ETC.
   (A)   Placement requirements. Each cage, enclosure, house, hutch, pen, run,
shed or other structure used to harbor an animal when erected, repaired or
reconstructed shall be placed not less than five feet from all property lines,
not less than ten feet from municipal right-of-ways including sidewalks, and
not less than 20 feet from any neighboring building or structure designed for
or permitting human habitation. The location requirements contained herein are
meant to supplement to any location and/or minimum setbacks required by the
city zoning regulations, land use covenants or deed restrictions. The
regulation, covenant or restriction that is the most restrictive regarding
location shall be complied with.
   (B)   Construction requirements. Each cage, enclosure, pen, run, shed or
other structure used to harbor an animal when erected, repaired or
reconstructed shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Outdoor dog runs. Each outdoor cage, enclosure, pen, run or shed
housing one dog shall have an aggregate base floor, and shall be of sufficient
size to accommodate the size of the dog kept in such cage, enclosure, pen, run
or shed. Each outdoor cage, enclosure, pen, run or shed housing two or more
dogs shall be of sufficient size to accommodate both the number and size of the
dogs kept in such cage, enclosure, pen, run or shed.
      (2)   Outdoor houses.  The owner or keeper of each dog kept or maintained
outdoors or outside an occupied residential structure must provide said dog
with a doghouse or other shelter constructed in a manner to assure the
protection of the dog from the elements, including a floor at least two inches
off the ground, weatherproof solid sides and roof, and large enough for the dog
to have freedom to enter, turn around, sit, stand, and lie in comfort. If the
house or shelter is not radiantly heated, it shall have a sufficient quantity
of suitable bedding material to provide insulation and protection against cold
and dampness for comfort. The house or shelter shall be placed in such location
or protected to prevent the elements from injuring the dog's health.
      (3)   Outdoor rabbit cages.  The owner or keeper of rabbits over six
weeks old shall provide a cage, enclosure, hutch, pen or other structure no
smaller than eight cubic feet for each rabbit, and located not less than three
feet off the ground. The cage, enclosure, hutch, pen or other structure shall
be constructed in a manner to assure the protection of the rabbit from the
elements, including weatherproof sides and roof, shall have a sufficient
quantity of suitable bedding material to provide insulation and protection
against cold and dampness for comfort, and shall be placed in such location or
protected to prevent the elements from injuring the rabbit's health.
      (4)   Outdoor bird cages. The owner or keeper of pigeons and other
outdoor birds shall provide a cage, enclosure, pen or other structure located
at least three feet off the ground, and which shall be constructed in a manner
to assure the protection of the birds from the elements, including weatherproof
sides and roof, and shall be placed in such location or protected to prevent
the elements from injuring the birds' health.
   (C)   Maintenance requirements. Each cage, enclosure, house, pen, run, shed
or other structure used to harbor an animal shall be cleaned and maintained in
a manner to assure the best possible sanitary conditions. Each person cleaning
dog and rabbit cages, enclosures, houses, hutches, pens, runs, sheds or other
structures, shall do so in a manner which prevents animal waste runoff onto
public right-of-way and which complies with the provisions set forth in §
51.002 Depositing Objectionable Waste Prohibited, and §
51.003 Discharge of Untreated Sewage or Other Polluted Waters to Natural
Outlets of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.17 STRAY ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any person who picks up any stray animal shall promptly notify the
community service section or the Department.
   (B)   No person shall harbor or hold for reward an animal that has strayed
onto the person's property or that has been picked up on a public street,
highway or other public place unaccompanied by its owner or keeper or person or
that has been stolen from its owner or keeper.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.18 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.
   Unless the section specifically provides otherwise, any person violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall on conviction be fined not less than
$25 plus court costs and not more than $750 plus court costs.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08)
ARTICLE II. DOGS AND CATS
Division 1. In General
§ 91.19 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner of a dog harbored in the city to
have such dog inoculated against rabies as required by the statutes of the
State of Illinois. It shall be the duty of every owner of a cat or ferret
harbored in the city to have such cat or ferret inoculated against rabies in a
manner consistent with veterinary best practices. The owner or harborer of such
dog, cat, or ferret shall at all times keep in their possession evidence of
rabies inoculation consisting of a certificate signed by the licensed
veterinarian administering the vaccine.
   (B)   A licensed veterinarian who inoculates an animal against rabies shall
provide serially numbered rabies inoculation tags, to be issued with each
inoculation certificate. Such tag shall at all times be attached to a collar or
harness worn by the animal for which the certificate and tag have been issued.
The original copy of the inoculation certificate shall be submitted to the
County Rabies Administrator, and one copy shall be kept by the licensed
veterinarian.
   (C)   The owner or harborer of any animal which exhibits symptoms of rabies,
or the owner of any animal in direct contact with such animal, whether or not
such animal has been vaccinated shall immediately notify the Henry County
Rabies Administrator, or Police Department, and shall promptly confine such
animal, or have it confined under suitable observation, for a period of at
least ten days, unless officially authorized by the Henry County Rabies
Administrator, in writing, to release it sooner.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.20 DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   No person shall permit any dog or cat to run at large or be at large
within the city. Persons found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to fines as stated in the table below in addition to any other remedies
possible.
 
Running at Large Minimum Fines
First Conviction Second Conviction Third Conviction Greater than 3 Convictions
$100             $200              $400             $750
 
Any dog or cat found running at large within the city is subject to capture,
impoundment,and disposal as provided in §§
91.30 through
91.32.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, PERMIT means any of the following:
      (1)   To affirmatively permit or allow;
      (2)   Failure to act by one who knew or should have known the dog or cat
was at large and failed to end the "at large" behavior;
      (3)   Inaction which caused said dog or cat to run at large, including
but not limited to failing to properly secure said animal while an individual
is or is not present;
      (4)   Placement of the dog or cat in a physical location or a set of
circumstances such that it is unreasonable to assume the animal will not run at
large or be at large.
   (C)   Voice control, electronic training devices, and other methods of
control referenced in divisions (2) (b), (c) and (d) of the definition of
RUNNING AT LARGE or AT LARGE set forth in §
91.01 shall not be a lawful means of restraint or control unless said animal is
located on the owner's or keeper's property, nor shall said controls be a
permissible defense in the event said dog or cat has left the property of the
owner or keeper.
   (D)   In the event that a specific dog or cat has been found to be RUNNING
AT LARGE or AT LARGE  as defined in §
91.01 on more than two occasions, said dog or cat shall, from that point on, be
confined on the owner's or keeper's property in a manner complying with
division (2)(a) of the definition of RUNNING AT LARGE or AT LARGE set forth in
§
91.01.
   (E)   Premises with an electronic training device such as a pet containment
system utilizing an in-ground electrical wire, a wireless system, a training
collar or remote training collar shall be registered with the city and have a
sign visible from the right-of- way on the property indicating the presence of
the containment system.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 3773, passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 4227,
passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.21 REMOVAL OF COLLARS, TAGS AND LEASHES FROM DOGS OR CATS PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   No person other than a Community Service Officer, a Peace Officer, an owner
or keeper, or a person with the consent of the dog's or cat's owner or keeper,
shall remove the collar, inoculation tag, license tag or leash from any dog or
cat within the city.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.22 EXCESSIVE BARKING, HOWLING OR YELPING.
   (A)   Offense. No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat, or any
other animal, that frequently or excessively barks, howls, or yelps in a manner
that unduly disturbs the quiet of any neighborhood in the city. However, this
division shall not apply to the business property of a licensed kennel, pet
shop or veterinarian, or to the property of any licensed or city-owned animal
shelter or animal control facility. If the Department finds that a dog or cat
has been left outdoors and unattended for longer than one hour at any time, and
the Department has probable cause to believe that a violation of this section
has occurred, and if the dog's or cat's owner or keeper is not home or refuses
to take said dog or cat indoors, then, upon obtaining a signed statement from a
complainant, the Department may impound the dog or cat, which may be disposed
of as provided in §§
91.30 through
91.32.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person convicted of violating division (A) above as a
first offenseis subject to a fine of at least $50 and no more than $750, plus
court costs. Any person convicted of violating division (A) above as a second
offense is subject to a fine of at least $100 and no more than $750, plus court
costs. Any person convicted of violating division (A) above as a third or
subsequent offense is subject to a fine of at least $200 and no more than $750,
plus court costs.
   (C)   Nuisance. Any dog or cat, or any other animal, described in division
(A) above is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the city may, in addition to
seeking any other appropriate legal remedy, pursue equitable remedies to abate
said nuisance in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 95 of this code. Upon finding a nuisance exists, and in order to abate
such a nuisance, the court may, in addition to ordering any other legal or
equitable relief, order that the owner or keeper may no longer own, harbor or
maintain any animal causing the nuisance within city limits.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.23 TAKING UP AND TREATING INJURED DOGS AND CATS.
   A Community Service Officer or any Peace Officer may remove from any street
or public place within the city any injured or ill dog or cat not being
attended to and properly cared for by its owner or keeper and shall impound the
dog or cat, or place the dog or cat in the possession of a licensed
veterinarian and the dog or cat may be disposed of as provided in §§
91.30 through
91.32. If a veterinarian renders needed or warranted veterinary treatment to an
injured or ill dog or cat placed in his or her possession pursuant to this
section, the veterinarian shall advise the community service section of the
cost of the treatment, and in the event the owner or keeper of the dog or cat
redeems the dog or cat, the owner or keeper shall, in addition to paying
impound redemption fees as otherwise set forth in this chapter, pay the full
amount of the veterinarian's charges. If the dog or cat is not redeemed, it
shall be disposed of in the manner provided in §§
91.30 through
91.32.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.24 FEMALE DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT.
   During periods of estrus ("heat"), owners and keepers of any female dog or
cat shall keep the animal in an enclosed structure or enclosure. Any such
female dog or cat found outside an enclosed structure or enclosure, whether on
the property of the owner or keeper or not, may be impounded by the Department
and disposed of in accordance with §§
91.30 through
91.32.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.25 (RESERVED).
§ 91.26 USE OR POSSESSION OF DOGS IN CONJUNCTION WITH CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.
   (A)   No person who owns, keeps, harbors, possesses or controls any dog
shall use the dog in the course of committing or in furtherance of any criminal
or quasi-criminal act, nor suffer or permit such dog to be so used. If a dog,
in any manner, impedes a Community Service Officer’s or Peace Officer’s efforts
to investigate or stop criminal or quasi-criminal behavior, to make any stop or
arrest, or to serve any process or warrant or execute any search or seizure,
the dog shall be irrebuttably presumed to have been so used.
   (B)   No person shall be in possession of any dog while said person is
manufacturing, delivering, or possessing with the intent to manufacture or
deliver any controlled substance or cannabis in violation of the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et seq., or the
Cannabis Control Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq., or any amendments
thereto. No person shall possess a dog in any dwelling unit or in or on the
property of any single-family dwelling while any person in said dwelling unit
or in or on the property of said single-family dwelling is manufacturing,
delivering, or possessing with the intent to manufacture or deliver any
controlled substance or cannabis in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et seq., or the Cannabis Control
Act, ILCS Ch. 720,Act 550, §§ 1 et seq., or any amendments thereto. For the
purpose of this section, any person present in said dwelling unit or in or on
the property of said single-family dwelling during the violation of the
Controlled Substances Act or the Cannabis Control Act shall be irrebuttably
presumed to be in possession of any dog found in said dwelling unit or in or on
the property of said single-family dwelling at that time.
   (C)   Any dog found in violation of this section is subject to impoundment
by the department and disposal as provided in §§
91.30 through
91.32.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.18
Division 2. Dangerous and Vicious Dogs
§ 91.27 KEEPING OF VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal
which has been found to be a vicious animal, unless such animal is at all times
kept in an enclosure. The only times that a vicious animal may be allowed out
of the enclosure is if it is necessary for the owner or harborer to obtain
veterinary care for the vicious animal or to comply with the order of a court
of competent jurisdiction, provided that said vicious animal is securely
muzzled and restrained by a leash with a tensile strength of at least 500
pounds and no longer than three feet, and shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the owner or harborer of the vicious animal.
   (B)   Any animal which has been found to be a vicious animal and which is
not confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by an the Department and shall
be turned over to a licensed veterinarian for destruction by lethal injection.
   (C)   Any animal which has been found to be a vicious animal shall be spayed
or neutered within 14 days of the date of the written notice of determination,
and the owner or keeper must provide written proof of spaying or neutering to
the community service section.
   (D)   No owner or harborer of a vicious animal shall sell or give away any
vicious animal.
   (E)   Work dogs are exempt from this section, provided, that the attack or
any injury caused occurs during the performance of expected duties. To qualify
for exemption under this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated
against rabies.
   (F)   The City Attorney may file a complaint to enjoin all persons from
maintaining or keeping a dangerous or vicious animal, to abate the same, and to
enjoin the owner of such animal from permitting such animal to leave their
premises when not under control by leash per this section. Upon the filing of a
complaint in the circuit court, the court, if satisfied that this nuisance may
exist, shall grant a preliminary injunction with bond in such amount as the
court may determine enjoining the defendant from maintaining such nuisance. If
the existence of the nuisance is established, the owner of such animal shall be
in violation of this section, and in addition, the court shall enter an order
restraining the owner from maintaining such nuisance and may order that such
animal be euthanized.
   (G)   Penalty. The fines for violating this §
91.27 are as shown in the table below.
 
Vicious Dog Regulations Minimum Fines
First Conviction Second Conviction Third Conviction Greater than 3 Convictions
$100             $200              $400             $750
 
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 3773, passed 8-25-14; Am. Ord. 4227,
passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.28 KEEPING OF DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog found to be a dangerous
dog within the city. A dog found to be a dangerous dog and kept in a manner
that violates this section is hereby declared a nuisance and is subject to
impoundment by the Department and disposal as provided in §§
91.30 through
91.32.
   (B)   A dog found to be a dangerous dog must be muzzled and controlled by a
leash of no more than three feet in length and of appropriate strength whenever
the dog is not contained within the owner's or keeper's residence or an
enclosure located on the owner's or keeper's property from which the dog cannot
escape. A dog found to be a dangerous dog must be spayed or neutered within 14
days of the date of the written notice of determination, and the owner or
keeper must provide written proof of such spaying or neutering to the
Department.
   (C)   No person shall transfer, sell or give away to any person within the
city any dog that has been found to be a dangerous dog, unless the transferor,
prior to the transfer, informs the receiving party of the finding and notifies
the Department of the pertinent details of the transfer, including without
limitation, the address where the dog will be located after the transfer.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.18
§ 91.29 IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Dangerous animals not in compliance with this chapter are subject to
impound by the Department and disposal as provided in §§
91.30 through
91.32. If such animal cannot be safely taken up and impounded, the animal may
be slain or dispatched by any peace officer.
   (B)   In all cases where an animal slain or dispatched pursuant to this
section has bitten any person or animal, it shall be the duty of the community
service officer or peace officer to treat the carcass and head as it would any
animal displaying symptoms of rabies. No peace officer shall shoot an animal in
the head if said animal is displaying symptoms of rabies.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08)
ARTICLE III. IMPOUNDMENT
§ 91.30 GROUNDS FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
   An animal is subject to impoundment for violations as stated in this
chapter.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08)
§ 91.31 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT TO OWNER OR KEEPER.
   (A)   When any dog or cat displaying an inoculation tag is impounded by the
Department subject to this chapter or state law, a Community Service Officer or
Peace Officer shall search city records or contact the veterinarian who issued
the inoculation tag to determine the identity of the dog's or cat's owner or
keeper, and shall immediately provide the apparent owner, if any, with written
notice of the impoundment. Said notice may be provided by posting of the notice
at the owner's property.
   (B)   When any dog or cat not displaying an inoculation tag or any other
animal is impounded by the Department subject to this chapter or state law, a
Community Service Office or Peace Officer shall make a reasonable attempt to
discover the identity of the animal's owner or keeper, and if such an identity
is discovered, the Community Service Officer or Peace Officer shall immediately
provide such person with written notice of the impoundment. Said notice may be
provided by posting of the notice at the owner's property.
   (C)   The owner of an impounded dog shall have seven days from the time of
impoundment in which to claim the dog. Failure by the owner to obtain release
of the impounded animal within this time period shall be deemed an act of
disclaiming and the animal will be destroyed or retained for an additional
seven days, at the discretion of the pound operator, for adoption, or otherwise
disposed of by a veterinarian.
   (D)   The owner of an impounded cat or any animal other than a dog shall
have seven days from the time of impoundment in which to claim the animal.
Failure by the owner to obtain release of the impounded animal within this time
period shall be deemed an act of disclaiming and the animal will be destroyed
or retained for an additional seven days, at the discretion of the pound
operator, for adoption, or otherwise disposed of by a veterinarian.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.32 REDEMPTION; FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Any animal impounded under the provisions of §§
91.05,
91.09,
91.20,
91.22,
91.23,
91.24,
91.26,
91.28, or
91.29 may be redeemed by its owner or keeper or authorized representative
within seven days from the date of impoundment upon payment by such person to
the city the following fees:
         (a)   A redemption fee of $25 for any animal impounded on not more
than one occasion in the last 12 months, or $50 for any animal impounded on not
more than two occasions in the last 12 months, or $100 for any animal impounded
on three or more occasions in the last 12 months. The redemption fees shown
above are for altered animals, that have been spayed or neutered so that they
can no longer reproduce. Redemption fees for unaltered animals shall be two
times the amounts indicated for altered animals. The owner of any animal that
pays the required animal redemption fee, and subsequently has installed in the
animal, within 30 days of payment of the redemption fee, an electronic
identification device, shall upon submission of proof of the installation, and
approval by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, be given a $25 rebate
of the redemption fee previously paid. The owner of an unaltered animal that
pays the required animal redemption fee, and subsequently has the animal spayed
or neutered, within 30 days of payment of the redemption fee, shall upon
submission of proof of the alteration, and approval by the Chief of Police, or
his or her designee, be given a $50 rebate of the redemption fee previously
paid. The aggregate rebate paid shall not exceed the redemption fee collected
for any given impounding.
 
            Not More than Not More than More than Two
Animal Type One Offense   Two Offenses  Offenses in   Electronic ID Spay/Neuter
            in Preceding  in Preceding  Preceding 12  Rebate        Rebate
            12 Months     12 Months     Months
Altered     $25           $50           $100          $25           NA
Unaltered   $50           $100          $200          $25           $50
 
         (b)   The amount of the veterinarian's current inoculation fee unless
current inoculation is proven.
         (c)   Eleven dollars for each day a cat has been impounded. Thirteen
dollars for each day that a dog is impounded. Fifteen dollars for each day that
any animal not mentioned above is impounded.
         (d)   Any other costs as provided in this chapter.
      (2)   No animal will be released pursuant to this section, unless payment
of fees is received or proof established excusing payment.
   (B)   If any animal subject to redemption under division (A) above is not
redeemed within five days after impoundment, the department may cause the
animal to be euthanized by approved methods or disposed of by adoption.
   (C)   An animal owner or harborer that abandons or refuses to claim an
animal registered to them is in violation of this chapter and shall in addition
to the other fees contained in this section, be subject to a fine of $200 for
the first abandoned or unclaimed registered animal, or a fine of $400 for the
second or subsequent occurrence of abandoning or not claiming a registered
animal.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 3587, passed 10-14-08; Am. Ord. 3660,
passed 11-8-10; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
ARTICLE IV. KENNELS AND PET SHOPS
§ 91.33 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in business as a pet shop operator, kennel
operator, animal shelter or any combination thereof, or otherwise engage in the
business of buying, selling or dealing in animals, without first obtaining a
license from the city issued to such person by the City Manager or their
designee.
   (B)   Only a person who complies with all of this article's requirements
shall be entitled to receive or retain such a license. Licenses are not
transferable from one person to another or from one premises to another. A
valid license shall be posted in every licensed place of business and shall
expire on April 30 of each year and shall be renewed before May 1 of each year.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.42
§ 91.34 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a license required by §§
91.33 through
91.43 shall make written application therefor to the City Manager, or their
designee on forms provided by the city, stating the name and residence of the
applicant and the place at which the applicant intends or desires to carry on
the business, giving the street location as well as a description of the
premises.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
91.42
§ 91.35 LICENSE FEE.
   Any person desiring a license required by §§
91.33 through
91.43 shall pay a license fee of $50 annually, except for any animal shelter
located on land owned by the City of Kewanee, in which case said fee shall be
waived. Any person failing to obtain a license prior to engaging in business as
a pet shop operator, kennel operator, animal shelter or any combination
thereof, or otherwise engaging in the business of buying, selling or dealing in
animals, shall be assessed two times the applicable fee in addition to any
other fine, penalty or cost assessed for violating §§
91.33 through
91.43.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
91.42
§ 91.36 INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES.
   Upon the filing of an application for a license required by §§
91.33 through
91.43, the City Manager, or their designee, shall forward copies of the
application to the Department and the Health, Building and Zoning Officer, or
their designee for inspection of the premises for compliance with all relevant
state and city health regulations and all city ordinances for compliance with
§§
91.33 through
91.43 and the city's zoning ordinances. Upon receipt of compliance reports with
said regulations and ordinances from the appropriate city officials, and upon
receipt of the license fee, the City Manager, or their designee, shall issue a
license to the applicant.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.37 POSTING LICENSE ON PREMISES.
   Any person receiving a license under the provisions of §§
91.33 through
91.43 shall display said license conspicuously in the licensed premises.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08) Penalty, see §
91.42
§ 91.38 INFORMATION ON DOGS AND CATS FOR SALE.
   Every pet shop operator, kennel operator, animal shelter or any combination
thereof, or any person otherwise engaged in the business of buying, selling or
dealing in animals shall provide the following information for every dog or cat
available for sale or offered as a gift or promotional consideration:
   (A)   The age, sex, and weight of the dog or cat;
   (B)   The dog or cat's breed;
   (C)   A record of the dog or cat's vaccinations and veterinary care and
treatment;
   (D)   A record of the dog or cat's surgical sterilization or lack of
surgical sterilization, and if the dog or cat has not undergone surgical
sterilization, information concerning the benefits to the dog or cat of such
sterilization;
   (E)   The name and address of the dog's or cat's breeder;
   (F)   The name and address of any other person who owned or harbored the dog
or cat between its birth and the point of sale.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08) Penalty, see §
91.42
§ 91.39 SALE OR GIFT OF REPTILES AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   (A)   Every pet shop operator, kennel operator, animal shelter or any
combination thereof, or any person otherwise engaged in the business of buying,
selling or dealing in animals shall provide the information set forth in
division (B) below for every reptile for sale, or offered as a gift or
promotional consideration, by conspicuously and prominently posting a notice
containing such information regarding safe reptile-handling practices on the
premises where reptiles are displayed, housed, or held and by distributing such
information in written form to the reptile's purchaser or recipient.
   (B)   The following information must be posted on the premises and provided
to the purchaser or recipient as set forth in division (A) above:
      (1)   "As with many other animals, reptiles carry salmonella bacteria,
which can make people sick. Safe reptile-handling steps should be taken to
reduce the chance of infection."
      (2)   "Always wash your hands thoroughly after you handle your pet
reptile, its food, and anything it has touched."
      (3)   "Keep your pet reptile and its equipment out of the kitchen or any
area where food is prepared. Kitchen sinks should not be used to bathe reptiles
or wash their dishes, cages, or aquariums. If a bathtub is used for these
purposes, it should be cleaned thoroughly and disinfected with bleach."
      (4)   "Do not nuzzle or kiss your pet reptile."
      (5)   "Keep reptiles out of homes where there are children under five
years of age or people with weakened immune systems. Children under five years
of age or people with weakened immune systems should avoid contact with
reptiles."
      (6)   "Pet reptiles should not be allowed in child care centers."
      (7)   "Pet reptiles should not be allowed to roam freely throughout the
home or living area."
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08) Penalty, see §
91.42
§ 91.40 ENFORCEMENT.
   All licensee or licensee's agent shall permit a community service officer,
peace officer or other city official free and unrestricted access to the
licensed premises for inspection. Inspections shall be performed as often as
deemed necessary by the community service officer or any peace officer or other
city official for the enforcement of this article, but not less than one time
annually prior to license issuance or renewal. This section does not provide an
exclusive enforcement scheme, and any and all other enforcement provisions set
forth in this chapter may be utilized to enforce this subchapter's provisions.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.41 LICENSE SUSPENSION/REVOCATION.
   (A)   In general. The Department may suspend or revoke any license granted
under this subchapter if the operation of the licensed premises is found to be
detrimental to the health or safety of the animals in the licensed premises or
the public at large, is found to be noncompliant with state law or city
ordinances, or if the licensee is convicted of violating any city ordinance or
state law relating to its operation. Suspension or revocation shall occur after
notice and an opportunity for hearing, as provided in this section.
   (B)   License suspension. Licenses may be suspended temporarily by the
Department by notifying the licensee in writing that the license is, upon
service of a notice, immediately suspended or that the suspension shall be
effective on a specific future date, and that an opportunity for a hearing
before the Chief of Police will be provided if a written request for a hearing
is filed with the Department.
   (C)   Emergency license suspension. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this subchapter, if the Department finds unsanitary or other conditions which,
in the judgment of the department, constitutes a substantial hazard to the
health and safety of animals on the licensed premises or to the public health
and safety, the license may be immediately suspended without warning, notice,
or hearing, but with written notice from the department following the immediate
suspension as soon as is practicable, specifying the corrective action to be
taken, and specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken.
The licensee shall cease operating the licensed business immediately upon
suspension, but upon written application to the Department, the license holder
shall be afforded a hearing before the Chief of Police as soon as practicable.
   (D)   Reinstatement of suspended license. Any person whose license has been
suspended may, at any time, make application for a re-inspection for the
purpose of license reinstatement. This application shall include a statement
signed by the applicant that, in the applicant's opinion, the conditions
causing the license suspension have been corrected. The application shall also
contain any necessary documentation required by the department to assure the
licensee's compliance with state law or city ordinances.
   (E)   License revocation. For serious or repeated violations of any
applicable state law or city ordinances, or for interference with a community
service officer or peace officer or any other city official in the performance
of any duties with respect to this subchapter or any other provision of this
chapter or other city ordinances, the license may be permanently revoked after
an opportunity for a hearing before the Chief of Police has been provided to
the licensee. Prior to revoking a license, the community service officer, peace
officer or other city official shall notify the license holder in writing
stating the reasons for which the license is subject to revocation and advising
that the license shall be permanently revoked at the end of five calendar days
following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with
the health authority by the license holder within such five calendar day
period. A license may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a
hearing relative to license revocation.
   (F)   Notice. A notice provided for in this article is properly served when
it is delivered to the license holder or an agent of the license holder at the
license holder's premises, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the license holder.
   (G)   Hearings. Hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted at
a place and time designated by the Chief of Police or his or her designee and
shall be open to the public and recorded by a tape recorder, stenographer or
other reliable means. The Chief of Police may admit into evidence all relevant
evidence, including incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, and live
testimony. Based upon the record of the hearing, the Chief of Police shall make
written findings and shall sustain, modify or rescind any license suspension or
revocation notice or order considered in the hearing.
   (H)   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Chief of Police may
appeal to the Circuit Court under the provisions of the Illinois Administrative
Review Law, ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq., and amendments thereto.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.42 PENALTY.
   (A)   Fines. In addition to the license suspension and revocation procedures
set forth in §§
91.33 through
91.43 , any person violating the provisions of §§
91.33 through
91.43 shall be fined not less than $100 plus court costs, and not more than
$750 plus court costs.
   (B)   Nuisance. Any person engaging in business as a pet shop operator,
kennel operator, animal shelter or any combination thereof, or otherwise
engaging in the business of buying, selling or dealing in animals, contrary to
the provisions of §§
91.33 through
91.43 or contrary to any applicable state law or city ordinances shall be
guilty of creating a public nuisance, which, in addition to any other remedy
available at law or in equity, may be abated by the city pursuant to the
provisions set forth in
Chapter 95 of this code.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08)
§ 91.43 THIS ARTICLE DECLARED SUPPLEMENTAL TO STATE LAW.
   The provisions of this subchapter are in addition to, and not in replacement
of, any law of the state of Illinois.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08)
ARTICLE V. ENFORCEMENT
§ 91.44 IN GENERAL.
   The community service section or the police department is responsible for
enforcing this chapter and state laws and regulations pertaining to animals,
their care, treatment, and the operations of the city's animal control
facility. A community service officer or police officer shall have authority to
issue summons, and to take other actions necessary to enforce this chapter as
well as applicable state law and regulations concerning animals.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.45 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS; RECORDS.
   Community service officers and peace officers are hereby authorized to
impound animals pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, department
procedures and other applicable state laws and regulations.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08)
§ 91.46 HINDERING COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER DUTIES.
   No person shall hinder, delay, impede, interfere with or obstruct any
community service officer, peace officer or other department personnel in the
performance of their duties under this chapter, or engaged in capturing,
impounding or taking to the city's animal control facility any animal subject
to impoundment.
(Ord. 3584, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.47 DOGS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC AREAS ON CERTAIN DAYS.
   No person shall permit or allow any dog owned by them, or under their
maintenance and control, to be present at any public event involving large
numbers of people, including but not limited to Hog Days, when, in the
discretion of the Chief of Police, the presence of dogs at such an event
constitutes a danger or threat to the safety of the public, and the Chief of
Police has caused signs to be posted at the event informing the public that
dogs are not permitted, unless the pet is entered in a sanctioned event. This
section shall not apply to dogs trained to assist physically impaired
individuals, nor to certified police dogs. Violations shall be subject to the
fine provisions of §
91.18.
(Ord. 3769, passed 7-14-14; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25) Penalty, see §
91.18
ARTICLE VI: BEE KEEPING
§ 91.50 SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall keep bees within the city without first having
obtained a special use permit from the city. Application procedures for
beekeeping shall be the same as for a special use permit as provided for in §§
155.155 through
155.157, Special Uses, of the City Code. The special use permit shall be
subject to the terms and conditions of this section and any additional
conditions deemed necessary by the Plan Commission and City Council to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (B)   Special use permit application. Any person desiring to keep bees
within the city shall submit a written special use permit application on a form
provided by the city. Such application shall include the applicant's name,
address, telephone number and email address (if applicable), the number of
hives to be kept on the property, and the applicant's signature certifying the
validity of the information provided in the application and agreement to keep
bees in compliance with the provisions of this section and all related city
ordinances.
      (1)   The applicant shall also submit the following with the application
form:
         (a)   Special use permit application fee;
         (b)   A scaled site plan of the proposed apiary showing placement of
the apiary and compliance with all applicable requirements outlined in this
section; and
         (c)   Any other required information for the special use permit
process.
      (2)   Prior to placing the special use permit application before the Plan
Commission, all judgments owed to the city by the property owner must be
resolved in full, and in the event the applicant is a tenant or leaseholder of
the premises, the applicant must similarly resolve all outstanding judgments
owed to the city.
      (3)   No special use permit granted for beekeeping pursuant to this
section shall be transferable betwen persons or properties.
      (4)   Non-commercial use only. Issuance of a special use permit for
beekeeping shall not allow the permit holder to engage in sales, display, or
other related beekeeping activities for commercial purposes.
      (5)   All beekeeping activities within the city shall provide proof of
colony registration and remain in good standing with all requirements of the
State of Illinois Department of Agriculture.
      (6)   Special use permits for beekeeping must remain in compliance with
this chapter. Any violations of this chapter shall be reported to the Plan
Commission for hearing and potential revocation.
(Ord. 4013, passed 7-27-20; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 91.51 LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF APIARIES.
   (A)   The keeping of bees shall be restricted to premises that are zoned as
one-family detached dwellings (single family residences) as defined by
Chapter 155 of the City Code or used as one-family dwellings.
   (B)   Apiaries shall be located only in a rear or side yard.
   (C)   The minimum setback for placement of apiaries shall be ten feet from
the property lines of the premises.
   (D)   Apiaries may consist of not more than five hives on a premises
consisting of no more than six boxes per hive.
   (E)   All bee colonies must be kept in inspectable type hives with removable
combs, which must be kept in sound and usable condition.
   (F)   Fencing of flyways. In each instance in which any colony is situated
within 25 feet of a public or private property line of the tract upon which the
apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the
property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at
least six feet in height consisting of fencing in compliance with Chapter 158
of the City Code, dense vegetation or combination thereof that is parallel to
the property line and extending ten feet beyond the colony in each direction so
that all honey bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet
above ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the apiary.
   (G)   Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water within
ten feet of the apiary is available at all times to the bees so that the bees
will not congregate at swimming pools, bibcocks, pet water bowls, birdbaths or
other water sources where they may cause human, bird, or domestic pet contact.
The water shall be maintained so as not to become stagnant.
   (H)   Adequate techniques in handling bees and adequate space in the hive
shall be maintained to prevent unprovoked stinging.
   (I)   Queens. In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually
aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due
provocation, or exhibits an unusual disposition towards swarming, it shall be
the duty of the beekeeper to re-queen the colony. Queens shall be selected from
stock bred for gentleness and non-swarming characteristics.
   (J)   Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other materials that
might encourage robbing are left upon the grounds of the apiary site. Upon
their removal from the hive, all such materials shall promptly be disposed of
in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.
(Ord. 4013, passed 7-27-20)
§ 91.52 VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The keeping by any person of bee colonies in the city not in
compliance with this subchapter is prohibited. Any bee colony not residing in a
hive structure intended for beekeeping, or any swarm of bees, or any colony
residing in a standard or homemade hive which, by virtue of its condition, has
obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper, is unlawful.
   (B)   Any person not in strict compliance with this subchapter, Bee Keeping,
shall be fined not less than $100 plus court costs and not more than $750 plus
court costs for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each and every day such violation continues. Additionally, any city
beekeeping special use permit may be revoked and no new beekeeping special use
permit shall be issued to that person, or to any person living on the property
where the apiary from which the violation(s) arose was located, for a minimum
of one year.
(Ord. 4013, passed 7-27-20)
CHAPTER 92: CEMETERIES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Location of city cemeteries
   
92.02   Location prohibited in corporate limits
   
92.03   Plats recorded
   
92.04   Deeds; form
   
92.05   [Reserved]
   
92.06   Rates and charges
   
92.07   Fees paid to City Clerk
   
92.08   Placement of headstones; permit required
   
92.09   Monuments; corner stone specifications
   
92.10   Cemetery rules and bylaws
   
92.11   Funds
Prohibited Acts
   
92.25   Shooting in cemeteries forbidden
   
92.26   Loitering in cemetery at night
   
92.27   Animals in cemeteries prohibited
   
92.28   Mausoleum prohibitions
Cross-reference:
   Burial or removal permits, see § 95.18
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 LOCATION OF CITY CEMETERIES.
   The land in the southeast corner of Bish's Addition to the Town, now city,
of Kewanee, marked on the plat of said Addition, “Cemetery,” heretofore known
as “Kewanee Cemetery,” and the 25 acres of the south end of the northwest
quarter of section number 34, in township number 15, north, range number five,
east of the Fourth Principal Meridian, heretofore deeded to the President and
Trustees of the Town of Kewanee, by John Zang, and known as “Pleasant View
Cemetery,” and the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 34, in
Township 15, north, Range five, east of the Fourth Principal Meridian,
heretofore deeded to the city by Mary Otley Bunton, and known as “South
Pleasant View Cemetery,” and lots number 95, 96, 97 and 98 and any additions
thereto of the original Town of Wethersfield now a part of the city and known
as Wethersfield Cemetery, and hereby declared under the respective names
aforesaid, to be the public burial grounds of the city.
('71 Code, § 9-4-1) (Am. Ord. 2260, passed 2-22-82)
§ 92.02 LOCATION PROHIBITED IN CORPORATE LIMITS.
   No cemetery or burying ground shall hereafter be established within the
corporate limits of the city, nor shall any cemetery or burying ground
heretofore established within said city be extended or enlarged or used for
burial purposes, except by consent of the Council, under a penalty as provided
in this code.
('71 Code, § 9-4-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.03 PLATS RECORDED.
   Tracts of land, and any other that hereafter may be purchased for cemetery
purposes or as an addition to said grounds, shall, as the City Council may
determine, be laid off into lots of appropriate size, and surveys and plats of
said lots shall be made under the direction of the Council, which surveys and
plats shall designate the lots by numbers, and be filed and recorded in the
County Recorder's office, which lots shall be sold at such prices as the
Council may from time to time direct; provided, that no part of said lands
shall be sold or used for any other than burial purposes, and the same shall be
taken subject to such regulations as the Council may from time to time
establish touching the management of said cemetery.
('71 Code, § 9-4-2)
§ 92.04 DEEDS; FORM.
   Any person desiring to purchase any lot shall pay the price thereof to the
City Clerk, and it shall then be the duty of said Clerk to prepare a deed for
such lot, which shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by said Clerk,
and shall be executed under the seal of the city. All deeds to cemetery lots
may be in the following form:
“KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That the City of Kewanee, Illinois, in the
County of Henry, and State of Illinois, for and in consideration of
             dollars, to it in hand paid the receipt whereof is hereby
acknowledged, does hereby SELL AND CONVEY to               of the County of
                    and State of             the following lot or parcel of
ground situated in             Cemetery in the City of Kewanee, in the County
of Henry and State of Illinois, to wit:
in said Cemetery, according to the survey and plat thereof, to have and to hold
the same forever, for burial purposes only, subject, however, at all times, to
the laws of the State of Illinois and the bylaws, rules and regulations of said
City of Kewanee, Illinois, including but not limited to Article I of the bylaws
of the City of Kewanee cemeteries, which are as follows:
   Every grantee in such deeds shall have the full legal ownership of his or
her lot for the sole purpose of sepulture and interment under and in conformity
with the laws of the State of Illinois and the bylaws, rules and regulations
heretofore made or hereafter to be made by the City of Kewanee.
   Lots cannot be conveyed or transferred except with the consent and approval
of and in the manner provided by the City of Kewanee and no use, division,
improvement or adamant can be made which the City by regulation prohibits or
deems improper or unsuitable. The owner of any lot may dispose of it, or the
use thereof, by all and if the owner dies intestate, the lot and all the rights
therein shall descend to his or her heirs in common in equal undivided shares.
The heirs or devises of such descendant owners shall furnish and file for
record in the office of the City Clerk full and suitable proof of their
ownership and right to use such lot before such ownership and right shall
accrue or be enforceable and the ownership of and the right to use any such
lots, however acquired, shall be subject to the foregoing regulations and
conditions.
   The City of Kewanee, Illinois, aforesaid, hereby acknowledges that the said
consideration includes the amount required for the perpetual care of said lot,
which sum is to be held by the Cemetery Board of Managers, of Kewanee,
Illinois, in perpetuity, for the perpetual and permanent maintenance, care and
preservation of said lot, and in consideration thereof the said Cemetery Board
of Managers, of Kewanee, Illinois, hereby agrees to and with the said grantee,
            heirs, executors, administrators, assigns, to invest said sum of
money in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois, and the rules and
regulations of said Board and to use the income thereof in such manner at the
City shall deem most expedient for the proper care of said lot and said
cemetery.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the said City of Kewanee, Illinois, has caused these
presents to be signed by its Mayor and attested by its Clerk and its corporate
shall hereunto financed at Kewanee, Illinois, on this              day of
             , A.D.       .
                              CITY OF KEWANEE,
ATTEST:                           KEWANEE, ILLINOIS
                                                         
City Clerk                           Mayor
STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF HENRY   )
   I,                , a Notary Public in and for said County and the State
aforesaid DO HEREBY CERTIFY that                   and                     ,
personally known to me by the same persons whose names are subscribed to the
foregoing instrument appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged
that the signed and delivered said instrument as their free and voluntary act
for the uses and purposes therein set forth, including the release and waiver
of the right of homestead.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this       day of             , A.D.,
      .
                                                            
                              NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires:                 ”
('71 Code, § 9-4-3) (Ord. 2561, passed 2-24-86)
§ 92.05 [RESERVED]
§ 92.06 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The following fees shall be paid for the sale of lots, mausoleum
spaces, and the servicing of graves, cremations, crypts, and related
activities.
      (1)   Spaces sold on or after October 1, 2020: 10% rounded to the nearest
$5 of the total lot sale price will be applied to the Perpetual Care Fund.
      (2)   Spaces sold prior to October 1, 2020: 50% of the total lot sale
price will be applied to the Perpetual Care Fund.
Cemetery Fee and Price Schedule:
BURIAL SPACE AND MAUSOLEUM PRICES WITH PERPETUAL CARE FEES
BURIAL SPACE AND MAUSOLEUM PRICES WITH PERPETUAL CARE FEES
            Lot Price                     Perpetual Care     Total
Ground      Flush                         Flush              Flush
Burial      Stone    Monument Area        Stone     Monument Stone    Monument
            Area and                      Area and  Area     Area and Area
            Block 31                      Block 31           Block 31
1/2 space
(cremations
and infant
burials     $325     —                  $35       —      $360     —
only in
designated
sections)
Indigent    $385     —                  $45       —      $430     —
space
One space   $650     $985                 $70       $110     $720     $1,095
Mausoleum   Space Price                   Perpetual Care     Total
Niche       $540                          $110               $1,080
Crypt (any  $1,115                        $125               $1,240
level)
                                          Cremation
                                          Burial
            Regular  Small Vault Burial/  (Maximum                    Mausoleum
           Vault    Cremation (Maximum   container Mausoleum Crypt   Niche
            Burial   2 by 3)              cross-
                                          section
                                          8 by 8 )
Weekdays
Funerals
arriving    $685     $515                 $350      $950              $420
prior to 2:
00 p.m.
Funerals
arriving at $805     $630                 $445      $1,065            $540
2:00 p.m.
or later
Saturdays
Funerals
arriving    $945     $805                 $475      $1,320            $565
prior to
noon
Funerals
arriving at $1,050   $875                 $575      $1,425            $655
noon or
after
Sundays and Holidays
All         $1,145   $960                 $680      $1,540            $755
Funerals
Miscellaneous
Opening or preparing graves, crypts and
niches at times other than during normal  $320
working hours.
All disinterments or unentombing of any
nature. This fee is in addition to any    $1,065
other fees that may apply such as opening
a new grave or crypt.
Transfer of ownership of spaces.          $35
Administrative fee for placement of a
second person’s cremated remains in a
grave, crypt, or niche of the first       $170
person, at the time of the first person’s
burial or entombment.
                                          Regular vault      Small vault ground
Frozen ground fee.                        ground burial $300 burial and all
                                                             cremations $150
 
   (B)   When the ground is frozen, and non-standard digging methods and/or
equipment are required, an additional charge shall be collected as specified in
the table above.
   (C)   If a burial space or spaces are conveyed or transferred from one party
to another, a $20 transfer fee for each quit claim deed that is processed must
be paid to the City Clerk. In addition, if a perpetual care fee has not been
paid for any burial space, crypt, or niche that is transferred, such fee must
be paid before the City will approve the transfer.
   (D)   Price of filling lots. The charge to be made for filling of lots shall
be the prevailing cost of material and labor. An itemized bill will be
provided.
   (E)   The fees for burials and entombments, shown in the table above, are
based on the work required to be performed in advance of the burial or
entombment, (that is digging the grave or opening the crypt or niche), being
carried out during normal working hours. If scheduling of the funeral is such
that it compels the advance work to be done at a time other than during normal
working hours for the cemetery employees, then the fee shown under the
Miscellaneous heading for preparatory work being done outside of normal working
hours shall apply in addition to any other fees incurred.
   (F)   The fees for disinterments or unentombings shown in the table above
cover only the work performed to carry out the disinterment or unentombing. Any
burial or entombing of the moved body or remains in another location in
Kewanee's Cemeteries will result in the payment of the fees associated with
said burial or entombing in addition to the disinterment fees shown under
Miscellaneous in the table above.
   (G)   Perpetual Care funds shall be turned over to the Cemetery Board of
Managers to be invested by them according to law.
   (H)   Monuments are allowed only in the following locations:
      Kewanee Cemetery
      Pleasant View Cemetery blocks One through Nine
      South Pleasant View Cemetery blocks Ten through Twenty-five, and block
Thirty-one
      Russian Cemetery
      Wethersfield Cemetery.
('71 Code, § 9-4-6) (Ord. 2561, passed 2-24-86; Am. Ord. 2729, passed 5-29-90;
Am. Ord. 2793, passed 8-24-92; Am. Ord. 2917, passed 8-22-94; Am. Ord. 3019,
passed 11-20-95; Am. Ord. 3239, passed 12-27-99; Am. Ord. 3379, passed 1-27-03;
Am. Ord. 3498, passed 2-13-06; Am. Ord. 3592, passed 11-24-08; Am. Ord. 3693,
passed 12-12-11; Am. Ord. 3886, passed 7-24-17; Am. Ord. 3923, passed 3-26-18;
Am. Ord. 3997, passed 2-10-20; Am. Ord. 4019, passed 9-14- 20)
§ 92.07 FEES PAID TO CITY CLERK.
   Any person desiring to have a lot in the cemeteries of the city cared for or
filled in, shall pay the price therefor to the City Clerk and it shall then be
the duty of the Clerk to issue to such person a receipt therefor, and said
Clerk shall notify the Sexton of Cemeteries of the work or services required to
be performed, together with the number of the lot and the name of the person
requiring such services, and said Clerk shall keep a record of such services
and incorporate a record thereof in his reports to the Council.
('71 Code, § 9-4-7)
§ 92.08 PLACEMENT OF HEADSTONES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   CORNERSTONE. Any stone placed at the corners of the boundary of a lot or
space(s).  Stones so located, must be set flush with the ground. No flanges are
required for cornerstones.
   DOUBLE HEADSTONE. Any approved type stone in which the highest point is no
more than eight inches above ground level, the length is not more than 84
inches, and the width is not more than 24 inches at its widest point. [8" by
84" by 24"]
   FLUSH HEADSTONE or FLUSH DOUBLE HEADSTONE. Any approved type stone that
meets the width and length requirement for a single or double headstone, but is
set flush with the ground. These types of stones do not project above ground
level.
   HEADSTONE. Any approved type stone in which the highest point is no more
than 8 inches above ground level, the length is not more than 36 inches, and
the width is not more than 24 inches at its widest point. [8" by 36" by 24"]
   MARKER. A bronze or other similar type of metal plaque that is set in
concrete at ground level. No portion of a marker projects above ground level.
   MONUMENT. Any approved type stone that exceeds the size limits of a double
headstone.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to erect or place any markers,
monuments, headstones, or cornerstones without first obtaining a permit from
the City Clerk for the placing or erection of same. The application for a
permit shall be on forms provided by the city. The application shall state the
size and type of the stone, the cemetery, block number, lot number and space(s)
number, upon which it is to be placed and the relative location thereof, names
of the owner(s) of the lot or space, name(s) to be shown on the stone, and name
of the person responsible for the work. The permit must be approved by the
Sexton of Cemeteries and all markers, monuments, headstones and cornerstones
shall be placed under the direction of the Sexton of Cemeteries of the city.
The City Clerk shall collect a fee for the granting of permits as follows:
      Headstones, Monuments and the Like         Fee
      For the placing of corner posts            $10 each
      For a single headstone                  45
      For a double headstone               65
      For a monument                  75
      Marker or stone provided by United States
      Veteran's Administration               No Fee
   (C)   No mausoleums shall be permitted to be established on any of the City
of Kewanee cemeteries after January 1, 1996. Existing mausoleums are exempt
from this prohibition.
   (D)   No permit for a monument, headstone or corner post shall be issued
until perpetual care for said lot or space shall have been paid to the city;
however, an exemption to this requirement shall be provided for a lot or space
found to have been occupied prior to February 24, 1986.
('71 Code, § 9-4-9) (Ord. 1530, passed 11-27-67; Am. Ord. 2793, passed 8-24-92;
Am. Ord. 3019, passed 11-20-95; Am. Ord. 3118, passed 8-11-97; Am. Ord. 3119,
passed 8-25-97; Am. Ord. 3886, passed 7-24-17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.09 MONUMENTS; CORNER STONE SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Foundations for monuments. The foundations for all monuments and
markers or headstones placed in the cemeteries of the city shall be at least
five feet below the surface of the ground and shall be of a proportion so as to
have a six inch flange surrounding the stone, marker or monument at ground
level.
(Ord. 1530, passed 11-27-67)
   (B)   Corner stones set in concrete. All corner stones placed in the
cemeteries of the city shall be set in at least three feet of concrete
thoroughly mixed before placed in the earth.
   (C)   Foundations of cement.
      (1)   All foundations provided for herein shall be made of crushed stones
and cement, which shall be thoroughly mixed and watered before placed in the
earth.
      (2)   All foundations provided for herein shall be constructed of
concrete of a mixture of one part cement to six parts gravel.
('71 Code, § 9-4-8)
§ 92.10 CEMETERY RULES AND BYLAWS.
   The following rules and bylaws shall be enforced by the Sexton of
Cemeteries, or superintendent if there be no Sexton, and shall be applicable to
all Kewanee and Wethersfield cemeteries.
   (A)   Prices. All prices are subject to change upon order of the City
Council.
   (B)   Permits. Undertakers are required to present the regulation burial
permit for interment of all bodies.
   (C)   Interments. All graves shall be opened and closed by the employees of
the cemetery under the direction of the Sexton.
   (D)   Containers for flowers. Glass and all breakable containers are
forbidden on lots. If placed there, they will be removed.
   (E)   Plants in pots. Lot owners must place all growing plants in pots. Do
not set plants in the ground. Pots can be moved when the lot is mowed and
replaced. The city cannot clip the length of the graves, and plants placed in
the ground make this necessary more than two pots for each grave are not
permitted.
   (F)   Perpetual care. All lots, spaces crypts, and niches are now sold only
with perpetual care. The city urges all lot owners to arrange for this kind of
care for their lots, spaces, crypts, and niches. The city calls the attention
of lot owners who contemplate the erection of monuments and markers to Bylaw
IX, governing the same.
   (G)   Records. The city is using the greatest care to make its burial
records complete in the old part of the cemeteries there are many unmarked
graves. Any information relating to these will be greatly appreciated and will
aid the city in its work.
   (H)   Fees and costs. In the event the city incurs fees for an attorney to
prepare or serve any notice, or to take any action or proceeding in law or in
equity to enforce the rules, regulations, bylaws, or ordinances relating to the
city cemeteries, the lot owner shall at once be liable to the city for
reasonable attorney's fees and costs advanced.
   (I)   Bylaws.
   “BYLAWS FOR THE CITY OF KEWANEE CEMETERIES
   KEWANEE, ILLINOIS
   Article I - Ownership
Every grantee in such deeds shall have the full legal ownership of his or her
lot for the sole purpose of sepulture and interment under and in conformity
with the laws of the State of Illinois, and the bylaws, rules and regulations
heretofore made or hereafter to be made by the City.
Lots cannot be conveyed or transferred except with the consent and approval of
and in the manner provided by the City, and no use, division, improvement, or
adornment can be made which the City, by regulation, prohibits or deems
improper or unsuitable. The owner of any lot may dispose of it or the use
thereof by Will, and if the owner dies intestate, the lot and all the rights
therein shall descend to his or her heirs in common in equal undivided shares.
The heirs or devises of such descendant owners shall furnish and file for the
record in the office of the City Clerk, full and suitable proof of their
ownership and right to use such lot before such ownership and right shall
accrue or be enforceable, and the ownership of and the right to use any such
lots however acquired, shall be subject to the foregoing regulations and
conditions.
   Article II - Perpetual Care
All lots shall be sold with perpetual care. This shall include any lot to be
resold if perpetual care has not previously been paid on said lot.
   Article III - Conveyances
All conveyances of burial lots shall be executed in the name of the City,
Kewanee, Illinois, and signed by the Mayor and attested by its City Clerk, with
the corporate seal attached.
   Article IV - Abandonment of Lots
Any lot or part of a lot for which perpetual care has not been provided and
which has been abandoned and left uncared for and for which no annual charge
for care and maintenance has been paid for a period of five (5) years, shall
revert to the City, and the unoccupied portions of said lot or parts of lots
may be re- sold by the City and conveyed in the same manner as herein provided
for the sale of lots.
   Article V - Burials
No burial will be permitted upon any lot or part of a lot against which there
remains an unpaid claim for cost of said lot or care of same or labor performed
by the cemetery employees, or for any expense incurred by said City for the
care thereof that is unpaid for more than sixty (60) days.
All burials must be placed into a concrete vault consisting of concrete on four
sides, top and bottom. Domes will not be permitted. All cremation ashes must be
buried in concrete. Scattering ashes on, over, or under any land located in
Kewanee's Cemeteries is prohibited.
   Article VI - Lot Improvement
The superintendent shall have the charge of and direct all improvements in the
cemetery, such as grading, trimming of trees and shrubs, and keeping the
grounds in proper order.
All flowers, wreaths, memorials, etc. (either live or artificial) must be
placed next to the headstone or monument so as not to interfere with mowing of
the lot.
Flag Poles. Flag poles for display of the United States Flag shall be permitted
on burial spaces if installed and operated in full compliance with the
following regulations:
   A flag pole shall be allowed only on spaces in which there is an existing
burial.
   The flag pole shall be located on the burial space on the north or south
side of any existing marker, monument, headstone, and the like, so as not to
create an obstacle for mowing or trimming of graves. The flag pole shall have a
minimum six-inch concrete flange around it.
   The flag pole shall be located on a burial space and shall not be located in
an aisle-way, road, or other areas not specifically dedicated for burials.
   Flag pole shall be made of non-ferrous metal.
   Height of the top of the flag pole or any decorative end cap shall not
exceed eight feet above ground level immediately adjacent to said pole.
   The hardware for any flag lighting installed shall be mounted on the flag
pole so as to not project over any other burial spaces, aisle-way or road, and
so as to not interfere with mowing, trimming or grounds maintenance.
   Only the flag of the United States shall be permitted to be flown on a flag
pole erected in compliance with these bylaws.
   The size of the United States Flag displayed on the pole shall not exceed
three feet by five feet in dimension.
   The flag pole shall be installed in such a manner as to allow its removal by
cemetery staff to facilitate equipment access for burials, tree/brush removal,
or other similar need.
   The individual installing the flag pole shall be responsible for its
maintenance and maintenance of the United States Flag displayed on said pole.
   The sexton is hereby authorized to remove from display any United Stated
Flag on a private burial space flag pole when said flag is tattered, faded, or
otherwise damaged to the point where it can no longer be properly displayed.
   Flag poles upon which no United State Flag has been displayed for over one
year shall be removed by the sexton from the burial space and retained in
storage for a period of one year from date of removal. Should the owner of the
pole not claim said pole within one year of its removal, it shall be discarded.
   Permission to install a flag pole shall be obtained from the city via a
properly issued flag pole permit prior to installation of said flag pole. A
permit for a flag pole for a United States Flag shall be processed in a like
manner as that used for issuing stone permits as provided in §
92.08, with the exception that no fees shall be charged for the flag pole
permit, and the flag pole shall be installed in compliance with this Article
VI.
   The owner of the flag pole shall be responsible for any damage to owners of
other improvements on burial spaces or the city arising from the installation
of said flag pole and flag.
No raised mounds will be permitted above the lot line.
No lot shall be filled above the established grade.
No fence, coping, nor enclosure of any kind will be permitted on burial lots.
All preparation of flower beds, planting and trimming of flowers and plants
must be submitted to the superintendent for his approval; and all growing
flowers and plants must be in pots. Boxes, shells, and similar articles
scattered upon the grave and lawn are inconsistent with the proper keeping of
the grounds and will not be permitted.
To prevent injury to monuments and adjoining lots, and to preserve the beauty
of the grounds, no trees shall be planted upon the lots. Neither can any trees
or shrubs be cut down, removed, or trimmed without the permission of the
superintendent. Such work must be done by the employees of the cemetery.
The City reserves the right to remove any trees, shrubs, or plants now growing
on lots.
The City has no wish to unnecessarily interfere with the taste or ideas of
individuals in regard to the style of their improvements, but in justice to the
interests of the cemetery they reserve to themselves the right given them by
law of preventing or removing any structure or object which they deem injurious
to the general appearance of the grounds.
   Article VII - Transfers
No transfer is valid until entered on the cemetery records and no transfer of a
lot, by sale or otherwise, by a lot holder, without the formal approval of the
City will be recognized.
   Article VIII - Additional Grave Digging Charges
These charges are contained in §
92.06 (B) of this chapter.
   Article IX - Stones and Monuments
Monuments and headstones may be erected subject to the rules of the cemetery.
They must be of granite with a granite base and of good material. Concord and
New Weatherly, etc., are not permitted. Neither monuments or markers set in
sockets will be allowed.
No headstone, double headstone, monument, marker or cornerstone shall be set
until perpetual care has been paid in full on said lot or space.
No monument, stone, marker or corner stone shall be set until a permit for
setting same has been issued by the City of Kewanee. Application for all stone
setting permits shall be on forms provided by the City of Kewanee. The Sexton
or his designee shall approve the stone setting permit when the application
filed shows the work proposed conforms to the City Code. No stone setting
permit shall be issued until the fee established for the work proposed on the
permit has been paid to the City Clerk. The person or persons signing the
application will be held responsible.
In blocks one through nine of Pleasantview Cemetery, blocks ten through twenty-
five of South Pleasantview Cemetery, Kewanee Cemetery, Russian Cemetery, and
Wethersfield Cemetery monuments, headstones, and double headstones as defined
in §
92.08 may be placed above ground level. In block thirty-one of South
Pleasantview Cemetery, monuments only, are allowed to be placed above ground
level. In blocks twenty-six through thirty, and blocks thirty-two through
thirty-seven of South Pleasantview Cemetery, all stones and markers shall be
set flush with ground level.
Monuments shall be placed on the East side of the lot. Headstones shall be
placed on the West side of the lot, with the exception that markers and flush
headstones may be placed on the east side of the lot in connection with an
infant burial or remains that are interred on the east side of a lot.
   Article X - Waiver of Liability and Reservation of Rights
The City and cemetery employees reserve the right to correct interment errors
and the same shall include, but shall not be limited to, the right to remove
and reenter the remains in another lot. Lot owners, their heirs, personal
representatives, successors and assigns waive all liability on the part of the
City and the cemetery employees for such errors.
   Article XI - Parties
These bylaws, rules, regulations and ordinances shall be binding upon the lot
owner, and his or her heirs, personal representatives, successors and assigns.
   Article XII - Rules and Amendments
The City reserves the right to establish such rules and regulations as are
necessary to give full force and effect to the ordinances and bylaws relating
to the City cemeteries and further reserves the right to amend the bylaws,
rules, regulations and ordinances as it shall deem necessary.”
('71 Code, § 9-4-10) (Ord. 2561, passed 2-24-86; Am. Ord. 2796, passed 9-28-92;
Am. Ord. 2917, passed 8-22-94; Am. Ord. 3019, passed 11-20-95; Am. Ord. 3239,
passed 12-27-99; Am. Ord. 3738, passed 5-28-13)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.11 FUNDS.
   (A)   Cemetery Fund. The purpose of this fund is to account to the citizens
for the income and expenses associated with the cemeteries.
      (1)   The City Manager shall cause the establishment of the Cemetery
Fund, which will be distinct and separate from any other fund.
      (2)   This fund will show all receipts of funds for fees, permits, land
sales, services, or materials associated with the city's cemeteries. Also this
fund will show money transferred to it from the General Fund in order that the
operating losses can be identified.
      (3)   This fund will show all expenses incurred by the operation of the
city's cemeteries.
   (B)   Cemetery Perpetual Care Transfer Fund. The purpose of this fund is to
account to the Cemetery Board of Managers the money received by the city in
payment for perpetual care per the prior provisions of this chapter.
      (1)   The City Manager shall cause the establishment of the Cemetery
Perpetual Care Transfer Fund, which will be distinct and separate from any
other fund.
      (2)   This fund will show all receipts by the city designated by this
chapter for perpetual care.
      (3)   This fund will show all expenses associated with moneys turned over
to the Cemetery Board of Managers for investment purposes.
      (4)   At each meeting of the Cemetery Board of Managers, the City Clerk
will provide to the Board the balance and receipts of this fund from the last
Board meeting.
      (5)   Within 30 days of each Cemetery Board of Managers meeting, the
Board Treasurer will, in cooperation with the City Clerk, withdraw money from
this fund and invest such money per this code and the statutes of the State of
Illinois.
   (C)   The proceeds from the sale of crypts purchased by the city in the
mausoleum, together with all fees and assessments received in the sale, resale,
transfer or use of said crypts, shall be placed in the Cemetery Perpetual Care
Transfer Fund by the City Clerk for eventual investment by the Cemetery Board
of Managers as specified in this code.
('71 Code, § 9-4-11) (Ord. 1271, passed 2-6-50; Am. Ord. 2793, passed 8-24-92)
PROHIBITED ACTS
§ 92.25 SHOOTING IN CEMETERIES FORBIDDEN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, within the City cemeteries or in any
other cemetery or burying ground, to discharge any firearm, or be found hunting
or trespassing, or to trespass upon any grave, or refuse to obey any lawful
order of the City Sexton or any person having charge of any cemetery or burying
ground.
('71 Code, § 9-4-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.26 LOITERING IN CEMETERY AT NIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to go or remain upon the grounds of the
city cemeteries or any burying ground within the city before sunrise in the
morning or after sunset in the evening without permission of the City Sexton or
other person in charge of such cemetery or burying ground.
('71 Code, § 9-4-13)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.27 ANIMALS IN CEMETERIES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog or
other animal to cause or permit such dog or other animal upon the grounds of
any cemetery or burying ground within the city.
('71 Code, § 9-4-14) (Ord. 1997, passed 11-14-77)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.28 MAUSOLEUM PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to have any item in the mausoleum which produces or
causes an open flame, including but not limited to candles and smoking
materials.
(Ord. 3379, passed 1-27-03)
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Declaration of policy
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Unfair real estate practice
   
93.04   Licensing of real estate brokers
Administration and Enforcement
   
93.15   Commission on human relations; duties
   
93.16   Enforcement procedure
Residential Anti-Displacement and Relocation Assistance Plan
   
93.25   City to replace dwellings
   
93.26   Required information for replacement
   
93.27   Relocation assistance
   
93.28   Minimal displacement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city, in order to
promote the general welfare of the community, to assure full and equal
opportunity to all residents of the city in the obtaining of fair and adequate
housing for themselves and their families without discrimination against them
solely because of their race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry.
   (B)   It is further declared to be the policy of this city that, in a spirit
of harmony, the City Council and its Commission on Human Relations shall
endeavor to work with and cooperate with the home owner and realtors of the
city to the end that the declared purpose of this chapter can be accomplished
in an orderly, lawful and proper fashion.
   (C)   It is further declared to be in the best interests of these aims that
real estate brokers, real estate salespersons and agents be licensed and
regulated to the end to prohibit such discrimination in housing by any said
agents.
('71 Code, § 7-7-1) (Ord. 1540, passed 5-13-68)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The City Commission on Human Relations.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. any difference in terms of the sale, lease,
rental or financing of any real property offered to a person applying for such
sale, rental, lease or financing, because of the race, color, religion,
ancestry or national origin of such person.
   OWNER. The person holding title or having legal ownership or legally
representing the person who holds title to property or has legal ownership.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any natural person, partnership, association or
corporation or agent thereof; who for a fee or other valuable consideration
offers, sells, purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates, for the sale,
purchase, exchange, or rental of the real property of another or holds himself
out as engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging or renting
the real property of another, or collects rental for the use of the real
property of another.
   UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICE. The commission of any act prohibited by §
93.03.
('71 Code, § 7-7-2) (Ord. 1540, passed 5-13-68)
§ 93.03 UNFAIR REAL ESTATE PRACTICE.
   (A)   It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any owner,
lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent or other person or his agent:
      (1)   To withhold listings or refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign, or
sublease any real property or part, portion or interest therein to any person
solely because of his race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry.
      (2)   To discriminate against any person solely because of his race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property
or any part, portion of interest therein.
      (3)   To discriminate or participate in discrimination in connection with
borrowing or lending money guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages, or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repairs or maintenance of any real property
because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry.
      (4)   To directly or indirectly advertize or in any other manner indicate
or publicize that the purchase, rental, lease assignment or sublease of any
real property or any part, portion or interest therein, by persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, is unwelcome,
objectionable, not acceptable or not solicited.
      (5)   To solicit for sale, lease or listing for sale or lease any real
property on the ground of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry
into the neighborhood of any person of any particular race, color, religion or
national origin.
      (6)   To make, distribute, or cause to be made or distributed any written
material or statements designed to induce any owner of real estate to sell or
lease his property because of any present or prospective change in the race,
color, religion, or national origin of the proposed buyer or tenant.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the rental of a room
or rooms in a single family dwelling and the rental of an apartment in an owner
occupied two-family building.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the manager, director,
supervisor, boards or any other person or persons in charge of public housing
within the city.
('71 Code, § 7-7-3) (Ord. 1540, passed 5-13-68; Am. Ord. 1724, passed 5-8-72)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.04 LICENSING OF REAL ESTATE BROKERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as the real estate broker,
real estate salesperson or agent within the city without obtaining a license to
do so.
   (B)   Application for the issuance of a real estate broker's license, or a
renewal thereof, shall be filed with the City Clerk upon forms supplied by the
Clerk and shall contain the name, residence address, business address, date of
birth, length of experience in dealing with real estate, the date and number of
applicant's current certificate of registration from the Department of
Registration and Education of the state and such other pertinent information as
the City Council shall require to carry out the intent and purpose of this
chapter. In the event that the applicant is not registered with the Department
of Registration and Education of the State of Illinois the application shall be
accompanied by a statement of the applicant, under oath, that the applicant is
not required to be registered by the state. The annual fee for such license or
renewal thereof shall be $5, which fee shall be paid to the Clerk upon the
filing of the application.
   (C)   The license herein called for shall be issued for a term of one year
and shall commence on May 1 and shall terminate on April 30.
('71 Code, § 7-7-4) (Ord. 1540, passed 5-13-68; Am. Ord. 1566, passed 5-12-69)
Penalty, see § 93.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 93.15 COMMISSION ON HUMAN RELATIONS; DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Commission on Human Relations to:
   (A)   Receive or initiate, record and investigate complaints charging any
unlawful housing practice.
   (B)   Seek conciliation of parties involved in such complaints by
conciliation, conferences, hold hearings where necessary, make findings of
fact, and recommendations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 7-7-5) (Ord. 1540, passed 5-13-68)
§ 93.16 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Commission on Human Relations shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved in any manner by any violation of any provision
of this chapter may file a written complaint setting forth his grievance with
the Chairperson of the Commission on Human Relations who shall mark the date of
filing thereon. Said complaint shall be filed within 120 days after the
violation alleged in the complaint Said complaint shall state name and address
of the complaint and of the persons against whom the complaint is brought and
shall also state the alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this
chapter.
   (C)   Said Commission is hereby fully authorized immediately to investigate
any such complaint filed. If the Commission determines that the respondent has
not engaged in any unlawful practice, it shall state its findings of fact in
writing and dismiss the complaint. If the Commission determines, after such
investigation that probable cause exists for the allegation made in the
complaint, the Commission shall set a date for a conciliation conference. At
such conference the Commission or a sub-committee of the Commission shall
interview the complainant and the person against whom the complaint has been
directed and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by all proper methods of
conciliation and persuasion. If such attempts at conciliation are not
successful within 60 days after the filing of the complaint, the Commission
shall then proceed promptly with full hearing of the complaint.
   (D)   Such hearing shall be conducted by the Commission, or a sub-committee
thereof, upon due and reasonable notice to all parties. The Commission shall
have full power to subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents and to take sworn
testimony. Any party alleged to have violated this chapter shall be entitled to
be represented by counsel and shall have the right to call witnesses on his own
behalf and to cross examine witnesses. At the conclusion of the hearings, the
Commission shall make a written report and recommendations which shall be
served by mail upon the complainant and respondent. No report shall be delayed
more than 60 days after date of the issuance of notice for commencement of the
first conciliation conference.
   (E)   A copy of said written report and recommendations shall be delivered
by the City Council and if any act of discrimination has been determined, the
report shall include a recommendation to the Council that the City Attorney
prosecute any such person who has violated any of the provisions hereof.
('71 Code, § 7-7-6) (Ord. 1540, passed 5-13-68)
RESIDENTIAL ANTI-DISPLACEMENT AND RELOCATION ASSISTANCE PLAN
§ 93.25 CITY TO REPLACE DWELLINGS.
   The city will replace all occupied and vacant occupiable low to moderate-
income dwelling units demolished or converted to a use other than as low to
moderate-income as a direct result of activities assisted with funds provided
under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, as
described in 24 CFR 570.606(b)(1).
(Res. 3741, passed 6-27-94; Am. Res. 3781, passed 5-8-95)
§ 93.26 REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR REPLACEMENT.
   All replacement housing will be provided within three years of the
commencement of the demolition or rehabilitation relating to conversion. Before
obligating or expending funds that will directly result in such demolition or
conversion, the city will make public and submit to the Department of Commerce
and Community Affairs (DCCA) the following information in writing:
   (A)   A description of the proposed assisted activity;
   (B)   The general location on a map and approximate number of dwelling units
by size (number of bedrooms) that will be demolished or converted to a use
other than as low to moderate-income dwelling units as a direct result of the
assisted activity;
   (C)   A time schedule for the commencement and completion of the demolition
or conversion;
   (D)   The general location on a map and approximate number of dwelling units
by size (number of bedrooms) that will be provided as replacement dwelling
units;
   (E)   The source of funding and a time schedule for the provision of
replacement dwelling units; and
   (F)   The basis for concluding that each replacement dwelling unit will
remain a low to moderate- income dwelling unit for at least 10 years from the
date of initial occupancy.
(Res. 3741, passed 6-27-94; Am. Res. 3781, passed 5-8-95)
§ 93.27 RELOCATION ASSISTANCE.
   The city will provide relocation assistance as described in CFR 570.606(b)
(2), to each low to moderate-income household displaced by the demolition of
housing or by the conversion of a low to moderate-income dwelling to another
use as a direct result of assisted activities.
(Res. 3741, passed 6-27-94; Am. Res. 3781, passed 5-8-95)
§ 93.28 MINIMAL DISPLACEMENT.
   Consistent with the goals and objectives of activities assisted under the
Act, the city will take the following steps to minimize the displacement of
persons from their homes:
   (A)   Will minimize or eliminate any activities such as acquisition or
demolition which could be expected to result in the displacement of low to
moderate-income persons; and
   (B)   Will advocate and seek funds for housing rehabilitation, as opposed to
demolition, especially for occupied housing.
(Res. 3741, passed 6-27-94; Am. Res. 3781, passed 5-8-95)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. If any person licensed as a real estate broker under
this chapter shall be convicted more than once of violating any provision
hereof, the penalty shall be the suspension from practice of the licensee for a
period of 30 days for the second conviction, and the permanent revocation of
the real estate broker's license issued under this chapter for the third
conviction.
('71 Code, § 7-7-7) (Ord. 1540, passed 5-13-68)
CHAPTER 94: FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS
Section
Outdoor Burning
   
94.00   Purpose; applicability; severability
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   General prohibition on open burning
   
94.03   Storage of firewood
   
94.04   Outdoor wood boilers
   
94.05   Patio wood-burning units
Fire Prevention Code
   
94.15   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
Fireworks
   
94.25   Definition
   
94.26   Possession, sale or use of fireworks
   
94.27   Exceptions; public display
   
94.28   Bond requirement
   
94.29   Inspection
 
   
94.99   Penalty
OUTDOOR BURNING
§ 94.00 PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY; SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. This subchapter is intended to promote the public health,
safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Kewanee by regulating the air
pollution and fire hazards of outdoor burning.
   (B)   Applicability. This subchapter applies to all outdoor burning within
the city.
      (1)   This subchapter does not apply to grilling or cooking food using
charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
      (2)   This subchapter does not apply to burning for the purpose of
generating heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a
building used for human or animal habitation.
      (3)   This subchapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene,
natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating,
construction or maintenance activities.
   (C)   Severability. Should any portion of this subchapter be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this subchapter shall not be affected.
(Ord. 4036, passed 12-14-20)
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED INCINERATORS. Any incinerator for which a current permit has been
granted by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Any container used as
a burning barrel or other similar device shall not be considered to be an
approved incinerator.
   BURNING BARREL. Any barrel, receptacle or container used to burn trash,
garbage, refuse or waste and not constituting an approved incinerator.
   CAMPFIRE. A small outdoor fire intended for recreation or cooking but not
including a fire intended for disposal of waste wood or refuse.
   CLEAN WOOD. Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated
with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with preservatives; and
does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood
products.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE. Building waste materials, including but
not limited to waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated wood, painted wood,
wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from construction,
remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a house, commercial or
industrial building, or other structure.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any vegetable or plant refuse, including weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery, yard trimmings and tree limbs, but not to include garbage,
agricultural waste, refuse, trash or other waste.
   OPEN BURNING. Kindling or maintaining a fire where the products of
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing tlu.ough a
stack or a chinmey. This includes burning in a burn barrel.
   OUTDOOR BURNING. Open burning or burning in an outdoor wood furnace or patio
wood-burning unit.
   OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACE. Also known as an outdoor wood-fired boiler, outdoor
woodburning appliance, or hydronic heater, means a fuel-burning device that is
designed to burn clean wood or other approved solid fuels and is not located
within a building intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals; and
heats building space and/or water through the distribution, typically through
pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a mixture of water
and antifreeze.
   PATIO WOOD-BURNING UNIT. A chimnea, patio warmer, or other portable
woodburning device used for outdoor recreation and/or heating.
   REFUSE. Any waste material except trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, grass
clippings, and other vegetative matter.
(Ord. 4036, passed 12-14-20)
§ 94.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION ON OPEN BURNING.
   Open burning is prohibited in the City of Kewanee unless the burning is
specifically permitted by this subchapter.
   (A)   Open burning of the following materials is prohibited.
      (1)   Refuse.
      (2)   Construction and demolition waste.
      (3)   Hazardous substances including but not limited to batteries,
household chemicals, pesticides, used oil, gasoline, paints, varnishes, and
solvents.
      (4)   Furniture and appliances.
      (5)   Tires.
      (6)   Any plastic materials including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic
containers.
      (7)   Corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper.
      (8)   Treated or painted wood including but not limited to plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished or
treated with preservatives.
      (9)   Grass clippings and weeds.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or use a burning
barrel.
   (C)   Open burning shall be permitted in the city in any approved
incinerator at any time provided that the approved incinerator is being
operated in compliance with the requirements of the Illinois Environment
Protection Act and the rules and regulations of the Illinois Pollution Control
Board and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   (D)   The burning of landscape waste shall be permitted only in compliance
with the requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act and the
rules and regulations of the Illinois Pollution Board and the rules and
regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and shall be
subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   Only on the premises on which waste is generated and the following
criteria are followed:
         (a)   Landscape material has dried, or is dry and will not result in
excessive smoke;
         (b)   No burning shall be conducted within ten feet of any structure
or combustible material, or directly under any tree limbs or wires;
         (c)   Burn piles must be kept manageable by those attending to them,
and attendant must be able to see around pile while it is burning which shall
result in burn piles of less than four feet in height;
         (d)   Ash resulting from the burning of landscape waste should be
allowed to cool through the adding of water, and shall then be disposed of;
         (e)   Burning of grass clippings and weeds prohibited;
      (2)   Only on Wednesdays and Saturdays, during the months of April, May,
June, September, October and November, or on other days as stipulated in a
motion approved by the City Council assembled, from 8:00 a.m. until sunset when
permitted by the Chief of the Fire Department of the city. All fires must be
attended by a responsible person and shall be extinguished and no fires shall
be allowed to remain burning or continue to smoke after sunset. Open burning
shall be prohibited when the following conditions exist as determined by the
Fire Chief or his designated agent:
         (a)   Wind speed exceeding 20 miles per hour.
         (b)   Wind speed less than five miles per hour.
         (c)   Drought conditions which present an excessive risk for spreading
of the open fire.
         (d)   During a water shortage or other emergency.
         (e)   If more than one-half inch of rain has fallen in the 24 hours
prior to the allowed burn day, which would result in heavy smoke.
         (f)   An outdoor event of community-wide interest may be disrupted by
nuisance smoke from said landscape waste burning activities.
         (g)   If a severe weather event (thunderstorms, tornado, severe wind
or other weather event) is determined to be a possible safety concern as
forecast in the Hazardous Weather Outlook published by the National Weather
Service office in the Quad Cities or by data received from any other NWS or
NOSA group. These reports shall be read and considered on each burn day prior
to determination to prohibit or allow open burning.
      (3)   The determination to prohibit open burning shall be made prior to
8:00 a.m. on Wednesdays and Saturdays and communicated to the Police
Department, local media and citizens. Once made, the determination to prohibit
open burning will apply for the remainder of the day on which the determination
is made and shall not be reversed. It is the responsibility of each citizen
openly burning landscape waste to verify that open burning is allowed for the
day of burning prior to commencing such activity.
   (E)   The maintenance and use of camp fires and barbecue grills for cooking
purposes shall not be prohibited by this section except that said camp fires or
barbecue grills shall be extinguished immediately after their use for cooking
purposes and said camp fires and barbecue grills shall otherwise comply with
the requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act and the rules and
regulations of the Illinois Pollution Control Board and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (F)   Open burning of landscape waste on public streets, alleys, highways,
rights-of-way and public sidewalks shall be prohibited.
   (G)   The prohibition of and restriction against open burning as provided
hereunder shall not apply in the event of the granting of a permit which may be
authorized in the exercise of the appropriate discretion of the Fire Chief,
Code Enforcement Officer or designee, which application for permit shall be
considered in conjunction with cleanup efforts as directed or approved by the
City Code Enforcement Officer, provided all previous stipulations hereunder are
met.
(Ord. 4036, passed 12-14-20; Am. Ord. 4214, passed 11-25-24)
§ 94.03 STORAGE OF FIREWOOD.
   Storage of firewood for use shall be done in accordance with the following
provisions:
   (A)   Firewood shall be stored only upon the parcel for which it will be
used.
   (B)   Firewood shall be stored only in the backyard and setback from
property lines the same distance as required for an accessory structure
pursuant to §
155.106 of the City Code.
   (C)   It shall be prohibited to store firewood in an unorganized pile.
   (D)   Firewood shall not be stored in direct contact with the ground.
   (E)   Firewood shall be stored using a log rack or pallets and posts.
      (1)   If using pallets and posts, place the pallet on the ground and
place posts or stakes at each corner. Additional posts shall be placed close
enough together to keep the firewood from rolling off the sides.
   (F)   Firewood shall not be stacked higher than six feet.
   (G)   A cover to protect the firewood from rain and snow may be used across
the top of the stack leaving the front and back of the stack fully open so
moisture can escape allowing the firewood to breathe.
(Ord. 4036, passed 12-14-20)
§ 94.04 OUTDOOR WOOD BOILERS.
   Outdoor wood boilers installed on or after December 14, 2020 must conform
with the following provisions:
   (A)   Only outdoor wood boilers that are compliant with the EPA's Phase 2
emission standards shall be permitted within the city.
   (B)   The outdoor wood boiler shall comply with all setbacks as required for
an accessory structure pursuant to §
155.106 of the City Code.
   (C)   The outdoor wood boiler shall be constructed, established, installed,
operated and maintained in conformance with the manufacturer's instructions and
the requirements of this subchapter. In the event of a conflict, the
requirements of this subchapter shall apply unless the manufacturer's
instructions are stricter, in which case the manufacturer's instructions shall
apply.
   (D)   The outdoor wood furnace shall be laboratory tested and listed to
appropriate safety standards such as UL, CAN/CSA, ANSI or other applicable
safety standards.
   (E)   The outdoor wood furnace shall be located on the property in
compliance with manufacturer's recommendations and or testing and listing
requirements for clearance to combustible materials.
   (F)   The outdoor wood boiler shall have a permanently attached stack with a
minimum stack height of 15 feet above the ground that also extends at least two
feet above the highest peak of any residence located less than 30 feet from the
outdoor wood furnace. The stack shall be installed, supported and maintained
per manufacture specifications.
   (G)   Fuel burned in the outdoor wood boiler shall be only clean wood, wood
pellets made from clean wood, or other listed fuels specifically permitted by
the manufacturer's instructions such as fuel oil, natural gas or propane
backup.
   (H)   The following items are strictly prohibited in outdoor wood boilers:
      (1)   Any material not listed in division (B) of this section.
      (2)   Wood that has been painted, varnished, or coated with similar
material and/or has been pressure treated with preservatives and contains
resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products.
      (3)   Rubbish or garbage, including but not limited to food wastes, food
packaging, food wraps.
      (4)   Any plastic materials including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic
containers.
      (5)   Rubber, including tires or other synthetic rubber-like products.
      (6)   Newspaper, cardboard, or any paper with ink or dye products.
      (7)   Any other items not specifically allowed by the manufacturer or
this provision.
(Ord. 4036, passed 12-14-20)
§ 94.05 PATIO WOOD-BURNING UNITS.
   The use of patio wood-burning units shall conform with the following
provisions:
   (A)   Burning of the following materials in a patio wood-burning unit shall
be prohibited.
      (1)   Refuse.
      (2)   Construction and demolition waste.
      (3)   Hazardous substances including but not limited to batteries,
household chemicals, pesticides, used oil, gasoline, paints, varnishes, and
solvents.
      (4)   Furniture and appliances.
      (5)   Tires.
      (6)   Any plastic materials including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic
containers.
      (7)   Corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper.
      (8)   Treated or painted wood including but not limited to plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished or
treated with preservatives.
      (9)   Grass clippings and weeds.
   (B)   Only clean firewood may be burned in a patio wood-burning unit.
   (C)   The patio wood-burning unit shall be located at least ten feet from
the nearest structure.
   (D)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not cause a nuisance to neighbors.
(Ord. 4036, passed 12-14-20)
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 94.15 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   There is hereby adopted by the City Council for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as "The International Fire Code (IFC),
edition 2021", as amended by the Kewanee Fire Department appearing in digital
form. A copy of said Code has been filed in the office of the City Clerk for
use and examination by the public. Said Code is hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out herein and from the effective date hereof, the
provisions of said Code shall be controlling within the limits of the said
city. No further printing or publication of said code shall be required.
('71 Code, § 6-1-1) (Ord. 2025, passed 6-26-69; Am. Ord. 4159, passed 12-11-23)
FIREWORKS
§ 94.25 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREWORKS. Any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion,
deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons, in
which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath
to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs
or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any
explosive compound or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects;
provided, however, that the term FIREWORKS shall not include sparklers, toy
pistols, toy canes, toy  guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps
containing .25 grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they
are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in
place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain
less than .25 grains of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be
permitted at all times.
('71 Code, § 6-2-1) (Ord. 2276, passed 5-10-82)
§ 94.26 POSSESSION, SALE OR USE OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Only consumer distributors or retailers registered with the Office of
the Illinois State Fire Marshal (OSFM) may distribute or sell fireworks within
the City of Kewanee. No distributor may sell or transfer fireworks to any
person who does not possess a valid display permit. All sales and use of
consumer fireworks must be in full compliance with all state laws (425 ILCS
35/, Pyrotechnic Use Act) and all requirements of the OSFM.
   (B)   Consumer distributors or retailers registered with the OSFM shall
apply to the City Clerk for a permit to sell fireworks within the city. The
permit fee shall be $250.
      (1)   The location of the distributor or retailer shall be inspected and
approved by the Director of Community Development prior to the selling of any
fireworks.
      (2)   The inventory of the distributor or retailer shall be inspected and
approved by the Fire Chief for compliance with state laws and regulations of
the OSFM prior to the selling of fireworks.
      (3)   The permit to sell fireworks shall be valid only for a period from
8:00 a.m. June 20th through 9:00 p.m. on the Saturday immediately following
July 4th or two days after July 4th, whichever is less.
   (C)   No sale of fireworks or novelty items to anyone below the age of 18
shall be permitted.
('71 Code, § 6-2-2) (Ord. 2276, passed 5-10-82; Am. Ord. 4098, passed 5-9-22;
Am. Ord. 4235, passed 4-28-25)    
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.27 EXCEPTIONS; PUBLIC DISPLAY.
   Public exhibitions or displays of fireworks or pyrotechnics shall be
permitted when such display or exhibition is under expert supervision, however,
that no public exhibition or display of pyrotechnics shall be had without first
obtaining the approval of the Fire Chief and the consent of the City Council.
Every such display shall be handled by a competent individual designated by the
City Fire Chief and shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or
fired, as not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
Application for permits shall be made in writing at least five days in advance
of the date of the last Council meeting prior to the date of the display and
action shall be taken on such applications within 24 hours after such
application is approved by the City Council. After such privilege shall have
been granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such
display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder
shall be transferable. Permits may be granted hereunder to any groups of three
or more adult individuals applying therefor.
('71 Code, § 6-2-3) (Ord. 2276, passed 5-10-82; Am. Ord. 4214, passed 11-25-24)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.28 BOND REQUIREMENT.  
   Every licensee shall file a bond with the city in a sum not less than $1,000
conditioned on compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
regulations of the State Fire Marshal prior to the issuance of any permit for a
supervised public display of fireworks.
('71 Code, § 6-2-4) (Ord. 2276, passed 5-10-82)
§ 94.29 INSPECTION.
   Any permit for a supervised public display of fireworks shall be issued only
after inspection of the display site by the City Fire Chief and after he shall
determine that such display shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any
person or persons.
('71 Code, § 6-2-5) (Ord. 2276, passed 5-10-82; Am. Ord. 4214, passed 11-25-24)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provisions of this chapter for which another
penalty has not been provided, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $500 for
any one offense.
   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
94.01 shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $500, or the city may be ordered to
correct the violation, or all of the foregoing for any one offense. The minimum
fine to be levied against a person convicted of a violation of any section of
this chapter shall be $25, and should the city be ordered to correct the
violation existing, the person convicted shall pay for the city's correction of
said violation, and the city may impose a lien upon the premises until the cost
of said correction shall be fully paid. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day, during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
('71 Code, § 8-1-19) (Ord. 2497, passed 2-11-85; Am. Ord. 2785, passed 5-26-92)
CHAPTER 95: HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Nuisances
   
95.03   Nuisances constitute violation
   
95.04   Standing to complain
   
95.05   Abatement proceedings in general
   
95.06   Emergency abatement of certain nuisances
   
95.07   Smoking prohibited
   
95.08   Expectorating
   
95.09   Offensive, decaying animal matter
   
95.10   Dumping or depositing of litter prohibited; exemptions
   
95.11   Dumping or depositing litter from motor vehicle prohibited
   
95.12   Accumulation of litter prohibited
   
95.13   Presumption of violation by operator throwing litter from motor vehicle
   
95.14   Receptacles required in public areas
   
95.15   Chronic nuisance - criminal offenses
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LITTER. Any discarded, used, or not consumed substance or waste. LITTER may
include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings, or other lawn or garden waste; newspaper, magazines, glass,
metal, plastic, or paper containers, or other packaging, construction material,
abandoned vehicle (as defined in §
90.01), motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal, any
nauseous or offensive matter of any kind; any object likely to injure any
person or create a traffic hazard; potentially infectious medical waste as
defined in section 3.84 of the Environmental Protection Act, or anything else
of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been discarded, abandoned, or
otherwise disposed of improperly.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in
Chapter 70 of this Code.
   NUISANCE. Per ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-60-2 municipalities may define,
prevent, and abate nuisances. A nuisance is to cause any of those acts or
omissions that are declared to be nuisances by the laws of the state, and such
as are known as nuisances to the common law, not hereinafter enumerated in this
section or this Code; or to cause those acts or omissions which are nuisances
in fact.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 4208, passed 10-28-24)
§ 95.02 NUISANCES.
   Within the city, it is hereby declared a nuisance for any person:
   (A)   Nuisances defined by this Code. To cause any of those acts or
omissions that are declared by this Code to be nuisances.
   (B)   Unsafe, unsightly structures. To maintain or construct an insecure or
unsafe building, stack, sign, billboard, chimney, well, cistern, cesspool, or
other structure, which from its situation, mode of construction, condition, or
repair, or other cause, may be unsafe, hazardous, or in an unsightly condition.
   (C)   Distillery, slaughterhouse, etc. To carry on, use, or occupy any
distillery or slaughtering establishment, or establishment for steaming or
rendering lard, tallow, offal, dead animals, or other substance of like nature
within the limits of the city or within one mile of such limits, without the
permission of the city council.
   (D)   Odors. To engage in any activity which causes or produces unreasonably
offensive odors, except that this subsection shall not apply to those
activities carried on in the public interest.
   (E)   Putrid substances. Maintain or permit any substance on the premises
which is, or may become, putrid or create an unhealthy condition.
   (F)   Noises. To cause or allow unreasonably loud noises tending to cause
alarm or to disturb the public peace and quiet.
   (G)   Licenses. To fail or refuse to obtain and possess any license required
by this Code or other ordinance of the city.
   (H)   Continuing violations of this Code. To continue to do any act, acts,
omission or omissions which constitutes a violation of this Code or other
ordinance of the city.
   (I)   Attractive nuisances. For the owner or occupant of any premises to
create, maintain, or suffer an attractive nuisance to remain on the premises.
   (J)   Zoning violations. To violate the City Zoning Ordinance.
   (K)   Unhealthy conditions. To create, allow, maintain, or permit any
condition which may endanger the public health.
   (L)   Encroachments. To cause, allow, permit, or suffer any encroachment
upon public ways or upon public grounds without obtaining a permit therefor.
   (M)    Unlawful assemblies. To organize, lead, or participate in any
unlawful assembly of persons.
   (N)   Violation of technical codes. To cause, allow, permit, or suffer the
violation of the building code of the city, the electrical code of the city,
the fire prevention code of the city, the mechanical code of the city, the
plumbing code of the city, or any other technical code adopted by any provision
of this Code or any other ordinance of the city.
   (O)   Abandoned refrigerators. To leave or permit standing outside of any
structure, or within any abandoned structure, in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned, unattended, or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or
other container which has an air tight door or lid with a snap lock or other
locking device which cannot be released from the inside; except that it shall
not be a nuisance under the subsection if the door is first removed from the
device; however, said device shall not remain outside for more than seven days.
   (P)   Littering.
      (1)   To allow, suffer, permit, or cause to be dropped, thrown,
discarded, placed, or deposited on any public way or public place, or on any
private property when public property may be affected thereby, any paper,
glass, plastic, wood, metal, solid or liquid vegetable or animal compound,
rubbish, garbage, waste, effluent, junk, debris, litter, solid, or any
combination thereof, except in a refuse receptacle or transfer station of the
city.
      (2)   To throw, place, maintain, or allow to be thrown, placed, or
maintained any dead tree, any dead or broken tree limb or branch still hanging
from the tree or on the ground, vegetation overgrowth, brush, junk auto bodies,
junk auto chassis, auto parts, inoperable machines of any type, appliances,
lumber piles, and building materials not being used in actual construction,
cans, broken glass, broken fence, broken or abandoned furniture, boxes, crates,
debris, junk, rubbish, and garbage upon premises occupied, owned, or possessed
by a person in the city, or upon any other public or private property in the
city. These provisions do not apply to a permitted solid waste disposal site
authorized by the city or to properly authorized junk yards in the case of junk
that they are authorized to handle.
   (Q)   Construction and heavy equipment noise. To allow, suffer, permit or
cause to be operated, or, otherwise engaged vehicles licensed by the State of
Illinois or another state as a second division truck exceeding gross vehicle
weight of 30,000 pounds or unlicensed motor vehicles used in the construction
industry and commonly referred to as heavy construction equipment (such
equipment to include but not to be limited to road graders, back hoes, steam
rollers and crane) for the purpose of making commercial deliveries or engaging
in building construction, other construction, or making commercial pickups,
such as refuse collections, at any location within 500 feet of a residential
use, prior to 6:00 a.m. on any day and after 9:00 p.m. on any day; however,
this prohibition shall not apply in cases where a repair is immediately
required for the protection of life or property. Nothing herein is intended to
prohibit mere travel of legally authorized vehicles upon the streets of the
city;
   (R)   Graffiti.
      (1)   Graffiti shall be defined as any sign, symbol, marking, drawing,
name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture, or letter placed upon the real
or personal property of an owner without the owner's express, written
permission: provided, however, it shall not be a defense that the owner or
occupant has given permission where this graffiti tends to incite violence.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the real
or personal, public or private, property of another.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of fixed real or
personal property located within the public view to place or give permission to
place graffiti, as otherwise defined in this chapter on said real or personal
property if the graffiti tends to incite violence by referring to gang or
criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity (as defined in §
134.02) or contains defamatory material about a public or private person,
except as otherwise allowed by law.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, while in any public
building or facility, or while on private property, any of the following
materials with the intent to use such materials to violate subsection (1) or
(2) above: spray paint containers, paint, ink, marking pens containing non-
water soluble fluid, brushes, applicators or other materials for marking,
scratching or etching.
      (5)   Upon being notified, in writing, by the city, the property owner
upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the graffiti within
15 days of the date of notice. By written request, this time period may be
modified due to weather conditions by the City Manager or designee thereof. The
property owner may, in writing to the City Manager, request assistance for the
graffiti removal based on the owner's inability to perform removal; however,
such request shall not bind the city to provide the requested assistance and
labor, material, and equipment costs will be billed to the property owner.
Failure to remove the graffiti within the specified time shall cause the
summary abatement of this nuisance as prescribed in this chapter and costs
shall be assessed to the owner.
      (6)   The penalty upon conviction for the offense of failure to remove
graffiti or any other part of this chapter shall be per §
10.99 of this code for each offense and each day such failure shall continue
shall be considered a separate offense and fines shall be assessed accordingly.
      (7)   In addition to the penalty for violating division (R)(2), the
offender may also be ordered by the Court, in addition to fines, to pay
restitution to the property owner for the costs of restoring the property to
its condition before the graffiti was applied.
   (S)   Weeds and tall grasses. To maintain or permit any cockle burrs,
thistles, burdocks, jimson or other weeds or tall grass to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches upon any lot or premises owned or controlled by him
within the city. This shall include the area between the owner’s property and
the traveled portion of the street or alley when the property lies adjacent to
a public street or alley. This area shall be kept in a neat appearing manner
and free of tall brush, weeds and grass.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee, or occupant of
property within the city limits to keep such property clear and free of cockle
burrs, thistles, or other weeds and tall grass.
      (2)   If any such person fails to comply with the provisions of this
subparagraph, and further fails to comply with the deadline for the removal of
the same as provided by the Health, Building and Zoning Officer, or his
designee, in a notice provided as specified in subsection (3) of this section,
such officer shall request a private contractor or have the city remove or mow
such weeds or tall grass and the cost thereof shall be billed to the owner,
lessee, or occupant of the property. If the owner, lessee or occupant fails to
pay the bill by the deadline provided therein, such costs shall be lien upon
the real estate affected upon compliance and in accordance with the provisions
of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-7.
      (3)   Notice shall be provided by the Health, Building, and Zoning
Officer, or his designee, by posting a notice at the property which states the
violation and the remedy for the same, and further provides five days from the
posting of the notice for the property owner, lessee or occupant of the
property an opportunity to remedy the violation. A notice shall also be sent by
first class mail to the last known owners' address, as substantiated by records
maintained by the Henry County Treasurer's office. Further, the city shall only
be required to post a single notice and send a single letter during any
calendar year, and such posting and letter shall serve as proper notice to the
owner, lessee or occupant of the property that compliance is required and that
at any time it is found that weeds or grass are allowed to exceed the eight
inch limitation of this section, the city may cause to cut the weeds and tall
grass without additional notice. Also, the posting of the notice shall be
accomplished by either personal service; or affixing the same to a structure on
the property, or a tree or post on the property, with every attempt made to
ensure that the notice is visible to an occupant or anyone that may approach
the property.
   (4)   Any person who violates this subparagraph and for whom the city
removes or causes to be removed or mows weeds or tall grass shall be charged a
$40 administrative fee in addition to actual costs incurred for said removal or
mowing on each occurrence, and such charge shall be a lien upon the real estate
where said removal or mowing takes place, and the same shall be in addition to
all other charges and penalties issued. It is hereby found that the minimum
cost for mowing shall be $65 per hour.
   (T)   Ponds and sinkholes. To maintain any lot or parcel of land in the city
who shall make or cause to be made or suffer to exist on any such lot or parcel
of land, any pond, pit, or sinkhole; and any owner, occupant, or possessor of
any such lot or parcel of land who shall refuse or neglect to remedy or abate
said nuisance by causing the same to be filled, or shall cause the water
therein to be drained therefrom or securely fence the same under the
supervision, and to the approval of the City Engineer after being notified so
to do by the Health, Building, and Zoning Officer, or any City Police Officer
or Code Enforcement Officer.
   (U)   Cisterns. To maintain, allow, or permit to exist on any lot or parcel
of land in the city any cistern, well or cesspool without having the same
securely covered and protected.
   (V)   Open cellar doors and vaults; stairways. To leave open or suffer or
permit to be left open, any cellar or trap door, or the grating of any vault,
in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city; or
whoever shall keep or maintain any uncovered opening or a covered opening for
which the cover is not being properly maintained in any such place so to
endanger the life or limb of any persons passing the same. Every stairway in
the city leading from any street or alley to the basement of any building shall
be guarded by secure railings on the sides thereof and shall be further secured
at night by a chain or bar across the opening between such railings.
   (W)    Night soil, manure, or other offensive substances. To deposit any
night soil, dead animal manure, slops, or other filthy, nauseous or offensive
substance or any substance likely to become offensive, whether animal or
vegetable, upon any lot, street, alley or other public or private place in the
city.
   (X)   Foul cellars, vaults, and privies.
      (1)   To suffer or permit any cellar, vault, private drain, pool, sewer,
or sink upon any premises in the city belonging to or occupied by the person to
become nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious to the public health.
      (2)   To keep or maintain any privy within the corporate limits of the
city.
   (Y)   Obstruction of streams and sewers. To erect or maintain any
obstruction in or across any watercourse, stream, creek, or brook so that water
is thereby caused to stand therein and stagnate or whoever shall place or
deposit therein any straw, hay, manure, dead animal or other obnoxious or
offensive matter or thing, or whoever shall, by any means, dam or obstruct any
sewer, drain or gutter.
   (Z)   Casting filth into a well or cistern. Who throws, casts, or deposits
any filth, offal, or other substance or thing of an offensive character in any
public or private well or cistern within the jurisdiction of the city.
   (AA) Garbage. To burn or bury garbage within the city or to permit garbage
to accumulate in any manner within the city so as to attract flies, vermin, or
rats.
   (AB) To allow any tree, brush, shrubbery, or any other vegetation or other
object to partially or completely obstruct any city sidewalk, street sign,
traffic control device, roadway, alley or other city right-of-way.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 3160, passed 5-26-98; Am. Ord. 3848,
passed 9-12-16; Am. Ord. 4208, passed 10-28-24)
§ 95.03 NUISANCES CONSTITUTE VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain or permit the
creation or maintenance of a nuisance as above defined upon property under such
person's control. A person who violates this section shall be guilty of
violation of this Code and such violation shall be punished as set forth in
this Code. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit injunctive or other
equitable relief.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.04 STANDING TO COMPLAIN.
   The following shall have standing to complain of any condition declared to
be a nuisance by this chapter:
   (A)   The city.
   (B)   Any person whose interest, rights, or property are particularly
adversely affected by the nuisance.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96)
§ 95.05 ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS IN GENERAL.
   Any person having standing to complain of a nuisance under this chapter, or
the head of any city department having cognizance of a nuisance, shall report
the fact of the nuisance and the details surrounding it to the city attorney
who shall, if it is justified under the circumstances, institute abatement
proceedings in accordance with the laws of the state.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96)
§ 95.06 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT OF CERTAIN NUISANCES.
   When a nuisance as defined by this chapter exists and the nuisance causes or
threatens imminent danger or great peril to persons or property, the nuisance
may be immediately abated by the city, by using the following procedure:
   (A)   The City Manager, or designee, shall find that the nuisance exists,
and that the nuisance causes or threatens imminent danger or great peril to
persons or property, and that an emergency exists. A copy of the City Manager's
findings made shall be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The City Manager, or designee, shall immediately issue a notice
directed to the owner or occupant of the premises on which the nuisance exists,
directing the owner or occupant to immediately abate the nuisance.
   (C)   The notice issued pursuant to this section shall be served upon the
owner or occupant of the premises upon which the nuisance exists. The notice
may be served by any officer or employee of the city. In the event that the
owner or occupant of the premises is not to be found, the notice may be posted
on the premises on which the nuisance exists.
   (D)   Upon being served with a notice to abate a nuisance as provided in
this section, the owner or occupant of the premises on which the nuisance is
located shall immediately abate the nuisance. The failure of the owner or
occupant to immediately abate the nuisance upon service or posting of the
notice shall be a violation of this Code and shall be punished as provided in
this Code.
   (E)   In the event that the owner or occupant of a premises on which a
nuisance is ordered to be abated under this section does not immediately abate
the nuisance, the appropriate city department or person or persons hired by the
city shall immediately abate the nuisance. The cost of the abatement by the
city shall be assessed against the property on which the nuisance existed, and
shall be collected as other special assessments.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 4208, passed 10-28-24)
§ 95.07 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to smoke or
use cigarettes on any street, alley, or park or other property used for public
purposes, or in any public place of business or amusement in the city. It shall
further be unlawful for any person to use an electronic cigarette, “vape”, or
smoke tobacco in any form, whether in a pipe, cigarette, cigar or otherwise, in
or upon any public conveyance within the city, except in a compartment provided
for smoking purposes, in any such conveyance, or on any city-owned property
excluding right-of-way, cemeteries, Francis Park, and parking lots in the
downtown. Any person violating the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 3823, passed 1-25-16; Am. Ord. 3965,
passed 5-28-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.08 EXPECTORATING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate upon any sidewalk in the
city or upon any floor of any car, omnibus, hack or other vehicle which is used
for the purposes of conveying passengers, upon the stairway, floor, walk or
entrance of any public building or place. Any person violating the provisions
hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.09 OFFENSIVE, DECAYING ANIMAL MATTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person having the ownership or control of any
animal matter which is in process of decay or is offensive or dangerous to the
public health within the city to permit the same to be and remain while in such
condition within the city, for more than 12 hours.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.10 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS
   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause, or permit
the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding, or leaving of litter
upon any public or private property in this city, or upon or into any river,
lake, pond, or other stream or body of water in this city unless:
   (A)   The property has been designated by the city or any of its agencies
for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that property in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the IEPA;
   (B)   The litter is placed into a receptacles or other container intended by
the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of
litter;
   (C)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property
or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful, or unless
the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant and does
not create a public health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, or a fire
hazard;
   (D)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency situation
where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly disposes of any
litter, including, but not limited to, potentially infectious medical waste as
defined in section 3.84 of the Environmental Protection Act, when the emergency
situation no longer exists.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.11 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, or otherwise dispose of
litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any public or
private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream, or body of
water in this city except as permitted under §
95.10. Nor shall any person transport, by any means, garbage or refuse from any
dwelling, residence, place of business, farm, or other site to and deposit the
material in, around, or on top of trash barrels or other receptacles placed
along public highways or at roadside rest areas.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.12 ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which the
person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as to
constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be blown
or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of another
person.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.13 PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY OPERATOR THROWING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor
vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the
operator of that motor vehicle has violated §
95.11, but that presumption may be rebutted.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96)
§ 95.14 RECEPTACLES REQUIRED IN PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   In order to assist the public in complying with this chapter, the
owner or person in control of any property which is held out to the pubic as a
place for assemblage, the transaction of business, recreation, or as a public
way shall cause to be placed and maintained receptacles for the deposit of
litter of sufficient volume and in sufficient numbers to meet the needs of the
numbers of people customarily coming on or using the property.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE
TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS includes, but is not limited to commercially operated
parks, campgrounds, drive-in restaurants, automobile service stations, business
parking lots, car washes, shopping centers, marinas, boat launching areas,
industrial parking lots, boat moorage and fueling stations, piers, beaches and
bathing areas, airports, roadside rest stops, drive in movies, and shopping
malls; and PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR ASSEMBLAGE, RECREATION, OR AS A
PUBLIC WAY includes, but is not limited to any property that is publicly owned
or operated for any of the purposes stated in the definition in this division
for PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS but
excludes state highway rights-of-way and rest areas located thereon.
(Ord. 3040, passed 3-11-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.15 CHRONIC NUISANCE - CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   Any property within the City of Kewanee which becomes a chronic nuisance
property is in violation of this chapter and is subject to its remedies. Any
person in charge who permits property under his or her ownership or control to
be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this chapter and
subject to its remedies.
   (A)   Definitions:
      (1)   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Property that either: Upon which either
two or more of the following criminal activities have occurred during any 90-
day period, or three or more of the following activities have occurred during
any 365-day period, as a result of separate factual events that have been
independently investigated by a law enforcement agency:
         (a)   Unlawful possession or consumption of alcohol by a minor (235
ILCS 5/6-20);
         (b)   Any homicide offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/9-1 et seq.;
         (c)   Any kidnapping offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/5.10-1 et seq.;
         (d)   Any sexual assault, sexual abuse or related offenses as defined
in major sex offenses, 720 ILCS 5/11-1.10 et seq., prostitution offenses, 720
ILCS 5/11-14 et seq., or pornography offenses, 720 ILCS 5/11-20 et seq.;
         (e)   Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS
5/12-1 et seq.;
         (f)   Any offense involving damage and trespass to property as defined
in 720 ILCS 5/21 et seq.;
         (g)   Any offense involving deadly weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24
et seq.;
         (h)   Any offense involving disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS
5/26-1 et seq.;
         (i)   Any offense involving the possession, manufacture or delivery of
controlled substances in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/
401 et seq.;
         (j)   Any offense involving the possession, manufacture, or delivery
of methamphetamine as defined in the Methamphetamine Control and Community
Protection Act, 720 ILCS 646/1 et seq.;
         (k)   Any offense involving the possession, cultivation, manufacture
or delivery of cannabis as defined in the Cannabis Control Act 720 ILCS 550/
1 et seq.
      (2)   CONTROL. The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or
govern conduct that occurs on property.
      (3)   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm, or corporation having any legal or
equitable interest in the property. OWNER includes, but is not limited to a
mortgagee in possession in whom is vested all or part of the legal title to the
property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the
present use and enjoyment of the premises; or an occupant who can control what
occurs on the property.
      (4)   PERMIT. To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to
prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of the act.
      (5)   PERSON. Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation
capable of owning or using property in the city.
      (6)   PERSON IN CHARGE. Any person in actual or constructive possession
of a property, including but not limited to an owner, occupant of property
under his or her domain, ownership or control.
      (7)   PROPERTY. Any real property, including land which is affixed,
incidental or pertinent to the land, including but not limited to any premises,
room, house, building, or structure or any separate part or portion thereof.
   (B)   Commencement of action under §
95.06, service; hearing. The owner(s) of a property designated a chronic
nuisance property under §
95.06 by the city shall be served with process in a manner reasonably
calculated to give them actual notice, this process will be by in person
service on the owners(s). The owner will be given a warning notice by the Chief
of Police of the city, or his designee. The warning will be in written form
detailing the alleged violations. If the violation continues the owner will be
served in person with a written notice to appear for an adjudicatory hearing.
The notice shall contain the date and time of the adjudicatory hearing to be
held on the property's designation as a chronic nuisance property, the citation
to the code section on which the designation was based, and the penalties for
failure to appear.
      (1)   Upon a finding of guilty, the owner(s) of the chronic nuisance
property shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $500 for a first offense,
$750 for each subsequent offense, payable to the City of Kewanee. The fine
assessed hereunder shall be considered a debt due and owing the city as of the
date of the final determination. Each day after notice provided that the
nuisance condition exists shall be a separate violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. 4023, passed 9-28-20)
CHAPTER 96: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Rules and regulations governing parks
City Parks and Playgrounds
   
96.15   West Park Playground and Recreation Center
   
96.16   Francis Park; reservations; regulations
   
96.17   Veteran's Memorial Park
   
96.18   Dooley Park
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING PARKS.
   The following rules are hereby adopted for the government of the public
parks of the city.
   (A)   No person shall discharge any fireworks or firearms in the parks of
the city without the permission of the City Council or Commissioner of Public
Property.
   (B)   No person shall write upon or mark or deface in any manner, or use in
any improper way, any water closet, seat, fence or any property or thing
pertaining to or in any park of the city.
   (C)   No person shall drive or ride upon the grass or footways or elsewhere
than upon the roads for the use of vehicles in said parks.
   (D)   No person shall break, cut, mutilate or injure, remove or carry away
any tree, plant, shrub, fence or any property in or upon any park or on any
street, avenue or highway around the same.
   (E)   No person shall chase, kill, set snare for, catch or attempt to catch
any squirrels, birds, fish or any animal being in or belonging to said parks or
kept therein.
   (F)   No person shall paste, affix or inscribe any handbill or poster on any
structure or property in or on any such park, place or square or highway
surrounding the same.
   (G)   No person shall curse, swear, yell or use abusive language, or fight
or throw stones, or behave in a riotous or disorderly manner in any of said
parks.
   (H)   No person shall sell any article whatever in any of said parks, except
when authorized by the Council.
   (I)   No person shall fasten a horse or other animal to a tree in any of
said parks.
   (J)   Gambling and playing cards are prohibited in the parks.
   (K)   No person shall make a fire for any purpose on the grounds of any of
the parks except a park employee when so directed by his superiors
   (L)   No person shall bring any dog into any of the parks except when
fastened or led by a cord, string or chain sufficient to properly retain the
same.
   (M)   No person shall trespass on any grounds enclosed with a wire, rail or
other fence in any of the parks.
   (N)   No picnic shall take place in the parks without a permit being
obtained for the purpose from the Council or Commissioner of Public Property,
but private family picnics shall not be included within this prohibition.
   (O)   No person shall disturb any picnic or intrude himself upon it without
the consent of those composing it.
   (P)   No person shall throw, scatter or leave any paper, trash, garbage or
any rubbish or materials whatsoever in any park, but all such matter shall be
deposited at once in receptacles provided for that purpose.
('71 Code, § 9-7-1) (Am. Ord. 1944, passed 12-27-76)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CITY PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
§ 96.15 WEST PARK PLAYGROUND AND RECREATION CENTER.
   (A)   Permission and authority are hereby granted to, and the power is
vested in the Kewanee Park District of Henry County, Illinois, upon the terms
and subject to the conditions hereof, to provide, maintain and conduct a
playground and recreation center in the portion of West Park described as
follows: A triangle situated in the north end of West Park bounded on the north
by Park Avenue, on the southwest by the sidewalk or path extending from the
northwest corner of said Park to the point of intersection of the sidewalks or
paths originating at the four corners of the said Park and extending diagonally
across said Park, the said point of intersection being approximately in the
center of said Park, and on the southeast by the sidewalk or path extending
from the said point of intersection to the northeast corner of said Park.
   (B)   The said District shall have the right to use the existing structure
on said triangle and to make any alterations, improvements or additions to said
structure or to erect any other structures or enclosures on said triangle as it
deems necessary, at its own expense and cost.
   (C)   Said District shall provide, maintain and conduct the said playground
and recreation center at its own expense and shall indemnify and save harmless
the city from any and all damages, judgments, costs and expenses of every kind,
which may arise or result by reason of or in consequence of the provision,
maintenance and operation of said playground and recreation center.
('71 Code, § 9-7-2) (Ord. 1290, passed 1-29-51)
§ 96.16 FRANCIS PARK; RESERVATIONS; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Reservations. There shall be no reservations made for the use of said
Park or any of its facilities before the normal opening of business on the
first working day of the year for the year in which the use is desired. All
reservations shall be made at the City Clerk's office in the city. The Clerk
shall keep or cause to be kept, a list of all such reservations and shall
advise the Grounds Maintenance Manager and Francis Park caretaker of the
reservations.
   (B)   Fees. There shall be charged for the use of the Park the following
amounts:
      (1)   Thirty dollars for ½-day use of the large enclosed shelter house
and $32 for the full day use of the large enclosed shelter house, to be paid at
the time that reservation is made for the use thereof. Fifteen dollars for ½-
day use of either of the two, open shelter houses and $25 for the full day use
of either of the two, open shelter houses, to be paid at the time that
reservation is made for the use thereof.
      (2)   For a tour of the Francis home located on the property the sum of
$5 for persons 12 years of age and older, $1 for persons from the age of five
through 11 years, and children under the age of five years free.
      (3)   The Clerk shall at the time of the payment of the reservation
charge for the shelter houses, prepare or cause to be prepared, a receipt in
triplicate, one of which shall be retained by him in his office, one shall be
delivered to the caretaker of the Park and one shall be delivered to the
customer.
      (4)   Thirteen dollars per diem per unit for camping.
      (5)   Seventy-eight dollars per week per unit for camping. Any seven
consecutive days are considered one week. The owner of the camping unit must
register and pay in advance for one week's camping to be eligible for this
rate. Any refunds will be based on the seventh day being a free day.
      (6)   Ten dollars per use for use of the dump station for units not
registered to camp at Francis Park.
      (7)   Ten dollars per tent per diem in the tent area. No electrical
hookups shall be allowed for tent camping at this rate.
   (C)   Reservation periods.
      (1)   Reservations for shelter house and stands shall be divided into two
periods for each day, the first period being from 9:30 a.m. until 3:30 p.m. and
the second period shall be from 4:00 p.m. until 10:00 p.m.
      (2)   All reservations must designate the area desired and in those cases
where receipt is issued for the use of any of the shelter houses, the receipt
shall state the name of the person or group, the date of the reservation, the
area desired, the number of people in the group and the time for which the
reservation is made. When making all other reservations, the area desired, the
number of persons in the group and the name of the person making the
reservation shall be stated.
   (D)   Disposition of fees. All money or moneys collected for charges for the
use of the facilities of the said Park shall be kept in a special fund by the
City Treasurer and shall be used only for maintenance, repair or additions to
the said Park.
   (E)   No dogs shall be allowed in the said Park unless on a leash or
otherwise under the control of the owner.
   (F)   Camping in the Park be and hereby is permitted during all those
seasons of the year that the park is open to the public. No reservations shall
be taken. All fees provided for herein shall be paid in advance. Camping shall
be under the supervision and direction of the caretaker of the Park.
('71 Code, § 9-7-3) (Ord. 1944, passed 12-27-76; Am. Ord. 2053, passed 5-29-79;
Am. Ord. 2257, passed 2-8-82; Am. Ord. 2560, passed 2-24-86; Am. Ord. 2769,
passed 12-23-91; Am. Ord. 2874, passed 12-27-93; Am. Ord. 3238, passed 12-27-
99; Am. Ord. 3375, passed 12-9-02; Am. Ord. 3593, passed 11-24-08; Am. Ord.
3827, passed 4-11-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.17 VETERAN'S MEMORIAL PARK.
   The park located in said city now known as East Park be and the same is
hereby changed to Veteran's Memorial Park.
('71 Code, § 9-7-4) (Am. Ord. 1882, passed 6-23-75)
§ 96.18 DOOLEY PARK.
   The park located in said city bounded by Main Street on the east, Loomis
Street on the south, Tremont Street on the west, and Burlington Northern
Railroad on the north, is hereby named “Dooley Park.”
(Ord. 3085, passed 11-4-96)
CHAPTER 97: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
97.001   Casting refuse on public ways
   
97.002   Discharging water onto streets or sidewalks
   
97.003   Coasting on streets
   
97.004   Riding bicycles on sidewalks; skateboards
   
97.005   Playing ball; flying in streets
   
97.006   Planting poisonous vines
   
97.007   Removing cornerstones showing grade of streets and sidewalks
prohibited
   
97.008   Unsafe scaffolding
   
97.009   Awnings; height and construction
   
97.010   Transportation of materials along or upon streets
   
97.011   Traction engines; moving over streets
   
97.012   Installation of street lights
   
97.013   Honorary street name sign program
Obstructions
   
97.025   Removal of obstructions
   
97.026   Buildings or fences in streets
   
97.027   Obstruction of streets and alleys prohibited
   
97.028   Exhibitions obstructing streets
   
97.029   Obstructing streets with merchandise
   
97.030   Encroachment prohibited
   
97.031   Deposit of snow or ice upon a public right-of-way
Excavations; Constructions
   
97.040   Permit required
   
97.041   Application for permit; fee
   
97.042   Bond required
   
97.043   City Engineer to supervise excavations
   
97.044   Emergency excavations
   
97.045   Approval of city engineer required
   
97.046   Occupation of street while building; permit
   
97.047   Contractor paving streets to erect guards
   
97.048   Interference with danger signals
Driveways, Parking Strips and Curbs
   
97.060   Driveways; construction; maintenance and use
   
97.061   Curbs not to be removed or lowered
   
97.062   Restriction on lowering grade on parking strip
   
97.063   Private business use of streets prohibited
Sidewalks
   
97.080   Concrete construction; compliance
   
97.081   Location of sidewalk provided by ordinance
   
97.082   Cost apportioned
   
97.083   Owner may build sidewalks
   
97.084   Notice to Engineer
   
97.085   Engineer to prepare tax list
   
97.086   Delinquent tax list to County Treasurer
   
97.087   Judgment ordained by County Treasurer
   
97.088   Walk built or replaced by private individuals
   
97.089   Contract to be let to lowest bidders
   
97.090   City engineer to have supervision
   
97.091   Sidewalk specifications
Numbering Buildings
   
97.115   Buildings to be numbered
   
97.116   Designation of streets
   
97.117   Numbering plan
   
97.118   Application for numbers
   
97.119   Size and display of numbers
Railroads; Crossings
   
97.130   Construction or blocking of crossing prohibited
   
97.131   Failure to maintain crossings
   
97.132   Ringing of bell; head lights
   
97.133   Care of stock cars
   
97.134   Playing about railroad yards or cars prohibited
Enforcement
   
97.150   Violations of provisions deemed nuisance; abatement
   
97.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.001 CASTING REFUSE ON PUBLIC WAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, lay or place upon any
sidewalk, street, alley, park or other public place within the city any of the
following: The rind or peel of any orange, banana, apple or other fruit, broken
glass, bottles, wires, waste paper or other brittle ware or rubbish of any kind
whatever, crockery, nails, tacks, tin or iron cuttings or other article or
thing liable to wound or injure any person, beast or vehicle. It shall be the
duty of every person owning or occupying any lot or parcel of land adjoining
any public or private alley in the city to keep the same clean and in an
inoffensive condition, and also keep the gutter in front, behind, or beside the
premises owned or occupied by him, or under his control, free from filth or
other offensive matter, including, but not limited to, landscape waste or
leaves, that may prevent the free flow of water therein. No property owner,
occupant or any other person shall place, rake, or blow any leaves or landscape
waste in any of the public street gutters adjoining their property owned,
occupied or at which a person is working for hire or as a volunteer. Any person
violating the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-7) (Am. Ord. 3829, passed 5-23-16) Penalty, see §
97.999
§ 97.002 DISCHARGING WATER ONTO STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   Whoever shall suffer or permit any water to be discharged or thrown or to
fall from any roof, gutter or water pipe into or upon the surface of any
street, alley or other public place within the city, shall be deemed guilty of
maintaining a nuisance.
('71 Code, § 8-1-14)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.003 COASTING ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to indulge in the sport commonly called
coasting in or upon any of the public streets, avenues, alleys or sidewalks of
the city. Any person violating the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-8)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.004 RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS; SKATEBOARDS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle, tricycle or
other wheel or toy of a like character on any sidewalk of the city in front of
a business establishment which is in a district zoned for business. Any person
violating the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. ('71
Code, § 7-1-41) (Am. Ord. 2832, passed 6-14-93)
   (B)   Skateboards.
      (1)   No person shall ride a skateboard anywhere in the central business
district of the city. The central business district is defined as the area
bounded by the south line of the Burlington- Northern railroad tracks, the
south line of Central Boulevard, the west line of Lexington Avenue and the east
line of Burr Boulevard.
      (2)   No person shall ride a skateboard in a reckless manner on any
public street or public sidewalk. No person shall ride a skateboard on a
sidewalk or public street without exercising due care for the safety of other
persons using the sidewalk or street.
      (3)   Any commercial establishment selling or renting skateboards shall
post a copy of this section in a conspicuous place where persons buying or
renting skateboards will see it.
('71 Code, § 7-1-40(A)-(C)) (Ord. 2710, passed 7-10-89)
(Ord. 3442, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 4246, passed 8-11-25) Penalty, see §
97.999
§ 97.005 PLAYING BALL; FLYING IN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person on any street, lane, alley or public
place in the city to fly kites, throw stones, trundle hoops, play ball or
engage in any sport or exercise likely to frighten horses, injure passengers or
embarrass the passage of vehicles, and any person violating the provisions
hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-34)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.006 PLANTING POISONOUS VINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any poison ivy or other
poisonous vine or plant within the city so near any public sidewalk, street or
alley as to injuriously affect passersby, or to permit any such vine or plant
to grow in or upon any premises owned or controlled by him. Any person
violating the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-35)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.007 REMOVING CORNERSTONES SHOWING GRADE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or heedlessly change, remove
or destroy any stone, stake or post set or placed to mark the corner of any lot
or parcel of ground, street or alley, or to show the grade of any street, alley
or sidewalk within the city. Any person violating the provisions hereof shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-39)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.008 UNSAFE SCAFFOLDING.
   Whoever shall erect or use or cause or suffer to be erected or used, within
the city, any insecure or unsafe scaffold, whereby the safety of persons
working thereon or passing thereunder may in any manner be endangered, shall be
deemed guilty of creating a nuisance.
('71 Code, § 8-1-16)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.009 AWNINGS; HEIGHT AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   All awnings above any street or sidewalk in the city shall be set not
less than eight feet above the grade of such street or sidewalk and shall be
securely supported by iron brackets or iron framework firmly attached to the
building so as to leave the sidewalk or street wholly unobstructed and so as to
permit it being rolled up close to the wall of the building. No awning shall
project over any sidewalk to exceed three-fourths of the width thereof nor
shall any such awning be allowed to remain in such condition as to endanger or
inconvenience persons passing under or near the same. Any awning in the city
not constructed or set in accordance with the requirements of this section is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (B)   Any awning, sign, signboard, flag or other sign fixture in the city
already erected or placed and not in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
('71 Code, § 5-7-1)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.010 TRANSPORTATION OF MATERIALS ALONG OR UPON STREETS.
   Any person hauling any material along or upon the streets, avenues or alleys
of the city shall so construct, keep and maintain the means of conveyance
thereof so that at no time shall any of said material so hauled be dropped or
spilled onto said streets, avenues or alleys. Any person hauling trash or any
other material along or upon the streets, avenues or alleys of the city which
trash or material is to be deposited in the Kewanee landfill or any other
landfill shall cover the means of conveyance thereof with a tarp or other like
material so that at no time shall any of said trash or other material so hauled
be dropped, spilled or allowed to fall or blow onto said streets, avenues or
alleys. Any person failing or refusing to comply with the terms of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 9-1-15) (Am. Ord. 2133, passed 5-27-80)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.011 TRACTION ENGINES; MOVING OVER STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to take or move into or through
any street or alley in the city, any traction engine, bulldozer or excavator
without first obtaining a permit so to do, as required by this section.
   (B)   Any person desiring a permit, shall make application in writing to the
City Clerk describing the route over which it is proposed to move any such
traction engine or bulldozer or excavator. Before issuing any such permit
provided for herein, the Clerk shall require a bond for not less than the sum
of $500 with one or more sureties to be approved by the Clerk, conditioned to
indemnify, save and keep harmless the city from and against all liabilities,
suits, judgments, costs, damages and expenses which may in any way arise or
come against the city in consequence of the granting of any such permit, and
for the repair of any street or sidewalk that might be injured, and for the
compliance of all provisions of this code pertaining to the moving of such
traction engines and bulldozers or excavators in and across and through the
streets of the city. Upon receiving such application and bond as required by
this chapter, the Clerk shall issue a permit to the party applying for the
same. The permit when granted, shall be delivered to the Street Commissioner,
and such official notified when such traction engine or bulldozer or excavator
is to be moved through or across the streets of the city.
   (C)   No person shall move any traction engine, bulldozer, or excavator
across any pavement or sidewalk or brick crossing without first sufficiently
planking the same so as to protect such pavement, sidewalk or crossing from
damage. No person receiving any such permit shall, while running such traction
engine, bulldozer or excavator, sound any whistle or allow any steam to escape
in such manner as to annoy any person, and shall at all times have a competent
person in charge thereof, and a person a sufficient distance in advance of such
traction engine, bulldozer or excavator to warn persons of its approach and to
provide for the safety of passing vehicles and persons; provided, that nothing
in this section shall apply to engines or locomotives running on any railroad,
sidetrack or switch in the city.
('71 Code, § 9-1-19)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.012 INSTALLATION OF STREET LIGHTS.
   Every dedicated street (alleys excluded) intersection shall have a street
light for which the city will pay the electric bill. If the distance between
intersections is greater than 500 feet, then street lights will be placed so
that the distance between lights is no greater than 500 feet. The type of light
will be determined by the City Manager, or his designee, based on the
recommendation of the utility company with respect to the most energy efficient
light. Installation of lights and if necessary new poles will be subject to
budget considerations. Priority for new lights and poles will be given to areas
where residents pay the city for the initial cost of installing a new light and
if necessary a new pole. This provision shall not be construed so as to give a
right to any person to demand the installation of a street light or pole
whether the light is requested for an existing street, a new subdivision or
along a new street.
(Ord. 2807, passed 11-9-92)
§ 97.013 HONORARY STREET NAME SIGN PROGRAM.
   As a way to honor Kewanee residents who died while serving our country in
the armed services, there is hereby established an honorary street name sign
program as described below. All honorary street name signs shall comply with
the guidelines of this program. Honorary street name signs shall not have the
effect of changing platted street names or official addresses.
   (A)   Application process.
      (1)   To request an honorary street sign designation, citizens must fill
out an application for the sign.
      (2)   Members of the surviving family requesting the honorary sign must
be Kewanee residents at the time of application.
      (3)   The person being honored must have been a Kewanee resident.
      (4)   The person being honored must have died in combat as determined by
the U.S. Department of Defense.
      (5)    Applications are to be as promulgated by the City Manager.
      (6)   Completed applications shall be filed with the City Manager.
   (B)   Honorary Street Sign Advisory Committee.
      (1)    In order to allow proper review of any honorary sign application
received, there shall be created an advisory committee to be known as the
Honorary Street Sign Advisory Committee.
         (a)   The Honorary Street Sign Advisory Committee shall consist of the
following persons: Police Chief, Fire Chief, Public Works Department Head, City
Manager, and one representative of the Kewanee Veterans Council.
         (b)    The Honorary Street Sign Advisory Committee shall review all
applications received, and make recommendations to the City Council as to type
of honorary sign to be placed, if any; the location(s) of the sign; and the
date for the unveiling ceremony for the sign.
         (c)   This Committee is advisory in nature only.
      (2)   The City Council reserves full and final authority regarding
honorary street signs and the funding therefor.
   (C)   Approval process.
      (1)   Upon submission of an application, the Honorary Street Sign
Advisory Committee will provide a letter to the applicant acknowledging receipt
of the application, and explaining the approval process.
      (2)   The Committee shall cause letters to be sent to residents living in
the vicinity of the proposed honorary street sign location to inform them of
the proposed sign.
      (3)   If approved, the honorary street sign will be installed on a street
sign pole at both ends of a city block. The sign color shall be brown
background with white letters and any other ornamentation as deemed
appropriate.
      (4)   The applicant will be notified of the outcome of the application
review. If an honorary street sign is approved by the City Council, the
proclamation establishing the sign shall contain information as to the date of
its installation and unveiling ceremony.
   (D)   Administrative list.
      (1)   To supplement the application process in division (A) above, there
shall be maintained by city administrative staff a list of all those Kewanee
residents listed by the U. S. Department of Defense as having died in combat.
      (2)   For those whose names appear on this administrative list but for
whom no application as described in division (A) above has been submitted, the
Honorary Street Sign Committee shall be the applicant, and signs shall be
erected for those on the administrative list, subordinate to applications
received per division (A) above, and subject to available funding as budgeted
on an annual basis.
(Ord. 3604, passed 4-27-09)
OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 97.025 REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   The owner, occupant or person in control of any building, fence,
porch, steps, gallery or other obstruction which is now or may hereafter be
erected or placed upon any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk or other public
ground of the city, shall remove the same upon written notice of the
Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements, and any person failing or
refusing to comply with such notice within ten days after being so notified
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 9-1-12)
   (B)   Whenever the owner, occupant or person in control of any building,
fence or other obstruction upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or public
ground in the city shall refuse or neglect for a period of ten days after
notice as prescribed in the preceding section to remove the same, or if the
owner, occupant or person in control cannot be readily found for the purpose of
such notice, the said Commissioner shall remove or cause to be removed such
obstruction, and the expense thereof shall be recoverable from such owner,
occupant or person in control. Every person who shall oppose or resist the
execution of said Commissioner in such regard shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 9-1-13)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.026 BUILDINGS OR FENCES IN STREETS.
   Whoever shall make or cause to be made any enclosure, fence or building of
any kind extending upon, over or across any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or
other public place within the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed
guilty of maintaining a nuisance.
('71 Code, § 8-1-15)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.027 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND ALLEYS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Automobiles. No automobile shall be permitted to park, stand, or
remain in any public street or alley within the city unless it is legally
parked. Automobiles actively making deliveries to or directly servicing an
adjacent site are permitted but must not completely block the roadway or
obstruct a private drive.
   (B)   Other conveyances. No wagon, trailer, non-motorized implement, or
similar conveyance shall be permitted to park, stand, or remain in any public
street or alley within the city, even if attached to an automobile, except
while actively loading, unloading, or providing services directly to an
adjacent site. These conveyances are allowed a maximum of eight hours in the
public street or alley for such activities. They must not fully obstruct the
roadway, making it impassable to other traffic, nor block a private drive. Non-
motorized implements such as construction dumpsters and construction trailers
may be exempt from the eight-hour limit if they have the required building
permits for the adjacent site. Such implements may remain in the street or
alley only for the duration of the permitted work being done and must adhere to
all other applicable regulations.
   (C)   Obstructions. During loading, unloading, or servicing, any automobile,
vehicle, truck, wagon, trailer, or other conveyance must remain in compliance
with these guidelines to ensure public streets and alleys remain passable to
other traffic and accessible to adjacent properties
('71 Code, § 9-1-16) (Am. Ord. 3343, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 4213, passed 11-
25-24)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.028 EXHIBITIONS OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any game, sport or
amusement, or exhibit any machine, show or animal, or indulge in any acrobatic
feats, or do anything else in the streets or upon the sidewalks, which shall
have a tendency to frighten horses, or which shall collect any crowd of persons
so as to interfere with the passage of teams, vehicles or persons along the
streets or sidewalks. Any person violating the provisions hereof shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-16)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.029 OBSTRUCTING STREETS WITH MERCHANDISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber any street,
alley or sidewalk in the city with merchandise, fuel or other articles of
property longer than shall be necessary for the prompt removal of the same.
('71 Code, § 9-1-18)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.030 ENCROACHMENT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ENCROACHMENT. Any building, fence, sign, or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located or maintained in, on, or over any portion of the roadway right-
of-way.
   ROADWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY. Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by
fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or
cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, an encroachment (herein
above defined), within the limits of the roadway right-of-way.
(Ord. 2786, passed 6-8-92)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.031 DEPOSIT OF SNOW OR ICE UPON A PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or institution, public or private, shall
plow or remove or cause to be plowed or removed ice or snow from any shopping
center, parking lot, commercial or institutional service area or driveway or
any other public or private service area or driveway and deposit such ice or
snow upon a public highway or street or public right-of-way or along the
shoulder or edge of a public highway or street.
   (B)   The above prohibition shall not pertain to a driveway or sidewalk in a
zoning district designated as residential; however, even in these districts
snow or ice shall not be collected and deposited on city or state roads and
streets. Furthermore snow or ice shall not be piled higher than three feet in
the public right-of-way adjacent to roads and streets.
(Ord. 2880, passed 2-28-94)
EXCAVATIONS; CONSTRUCTIONS
§ 97.040 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, for any purpose, to dig or make
any ditch, drain, excavation or hole in, across or under any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place within the city and to fail, within a reasonable
time, to refill the same and fix such street, alley, sidewalk or other place in
as good condition as the same was found; or for any person, during the
existence or continuance of any such ditch, drain, excavation or hole, to fail
to have the same so watched, guarded and protected as to reasonably insure the
safety of person passing near the same.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any
obstruction, opening or excavation in any street, sidewalk alley, parking strip
or other public place within the corporate limits of the city without first
obtaining a permit so to do from the city.
('71 Code, § 9-1-1)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.041 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to dig or excavate in the streets, alleys, parking
strips or other property belonging to the city must first file an application
with the City Engineer asking for a permit to dig and excavate, which
application must set forth the following:
      (1)   The place where said digging or excavating is to be done.
      (2)   The purpose of said digging or excavating.
      (3)   The time the work is to start and the time same is to be completed.
      (4)   The person or persons doing the work.
      (5)   The party on whose behalf said work is being done.
      (6)   Any other information that the City Engineer shall require to be
given in said application.
   (B)   It is further provided that the City Engineer shall approve all
applications for permits to dig or excavate, before the issuance of a permit,
which permit shall be for a period of 30 days and shall be issued by the Clerk
on receipt of an approved application, and said applicant shall pay a fee of $1
for said permit, which fee shall accompany the application.
('71 Code, § 9-1-2)
§ 97.042 BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   The applicant shall file with the City Engineer at the time of making
said application a bond in the sum of $1,000 with two sureties, which sureties
shall schedule on the back of the bond real property with the value of twice
the amount of said bond. However, in lieu of sureties the party signing the
bond may place on deposit with the City Engineer or with some depository
designated by him the sum of $1,000.
   (B)   Said bond given under the provisions hereof shall have one of the
following requirements:
      (1)   Shall be good during the life of a permit granted.
      (2)   Shall be good for a period of one year with the surety of an
approved surety company or surety corporation.
      (3)   Shall be good for a period of six months with two sureties other
than an approved surety company or surety corporation.
('71 Code, § 9-1-3)
§ 97.043 CITY ENGINEER TO SUPERVISE EXCAVATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to ascertain from the applicant
whether or not the applicant is complying with the provisions of this code, and
it shall be his further duty to inspect the excavation made under the permit to
ascertain whether or not the parties digging or excavating are complying with
the provisions of this code. Said City Engineer is hereby given police power
and has the power to arrest any person violating said provisions in regard to
digging or excavating in the streets, alleys, parking strips or other public
property belonging to the city, and it shall be the duty of said City Engineer
to forthwith prosecute any person violating the provisions of this chapter or
the city code in regard to digging or excavating as herein set forth.
('71 Code, § 9-1-4)
§ 97.044 EMERGENCY EXCAVATIONS.
   In case of an emergency it is necessary to dig or excavate in the streets,
alleys, parking strips or other property belonging to the city, at such a time
that any person is unable first to make application to obtain a permit, that
such person shall within 24 hours after commencing such work make application
for a permit so to do, which application shall in addition to other matters
required therein, set forth the circumstances under which the digging or
excavating is done, which application must meet the approval of the City
Engineer and show that an emergency existed. If no emergency is shown to have
existed, then such applicant shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
chapter and said City Engineer shall refuse approval of the application for
said permit.
('71 Code, § 9-1-5)
§ 97.045 APPROVAL OF CITY ENGINEER REQUIRED.
   The City Engineer shall inspect all work during the conduct of the same and
on completion of said work said person doing such digging or excavating shall
obtain the written approval from the City Engineer before they shall be
released from liability under their bond.
('71 Code, § 9-1-6)
§ 97.046 OCCUPATION OF STREET WHILE BUILDING; PERMIT.
   Any person desiring to occupy any portion of the public streets of the city
while engaged in the erection of buildings along the line of either or any of
said streets, shall first file an application with the City Clerk for a permit
to so occupy the same. Said application shall state the location of the
proposed building, the amount of space in the street desired for occupation and
length of time to be occupied. It shall be accompanied by an obligation on the
part of the applicant to observe the provisions of this code in relation
thereto, and to protect the city from any liability to any person or persons on
account of accident or damage arising from such occupation, and fully to remove
all materials, dirt and rubbish from said occupied space, and to restore the
street to its original condition immediately upon the expiration of the period
granted in said permit.
('71 Code, § 9-1-11)
§ 97.047 CONTRACTOR PAVING STREETS TO ERECT GUARDS.
   (A)   When any street, alley or other public place in the city shall
hereafter be paved or otherwise improved, it shall be the duty of the
contractor or contractors who have charge of said work to cause to be placed in
said street, alley or public place at the intersection of all cross streets,
proper and sufficient guards to prevent automobiles, wagons, buggies, machinery
or vehicles of all kinds and descriptions, and animals of all kinds and
descriptions, from entering in and upon such streets so being paved or
otherwise improved, for a distance of at least one block from that part of the
said improvement that has been lastly constructed.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or in any manner
propel any kind of vehicle or piece of machinery, or to lead, ride or drive any
horse, mule or cow over, along or upon that portion of any street, alley or
other public place in the city so being paved or otherwise improved that is
within the guards or obstructions placed upon such street, alley or public
place by the party in charge of such pavement or improvement as provided in
division (A) above.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than those engaged in the
construction of said pavement or improvement to remove or destroy any such
guards or obstructions placed upon any such street, alley or public place that
is being paved or improved.
('71 Code, § 9-1-17)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.048 INTERFERENCE WITH DANGER SIGNALS.
   Any person who with the written consent of the said Commissioner, or without
the consent of the person doing or superintending the work, shall throw down,
displace or remove any obstruction, guard or red light placed to protect work
or repairs on streets, sidewalks or public places, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 9-1-14)
Penalty, see § 97.999
DRIVEWAYS, PARKING STRIPS AND CURBS
§ 97.060 DRIVEWAYS; CONSTRUCTION; MAINTENANCE AND USE.
   (A)   In areas zoned as residential, no person shall construct, maintain or
use any approach or driveway, across the parking strip, curb or gutter to any
premises with a greater width at the outer edge of the sidewalk than 24 feet
and 24 feet at the curb. In areas not zoned as residential approaches and
driveways shall be approved by the city's building official and shall comply
with the state Department of Transportation (IDOT) specifications contained in
the "Bureau of Local Roads Administrative Policies", dated March 1989 and any
future editions or replacements to these specifications.
   (B)   No person shall be permitted to construct, making or use more than two
approaches or drives across the parking strip, curb or gutter to any one
location or place of business, and where the two approaches enter the premises
and are adjoining there must be a safety island between said drives, which
safety island shall measure ten feet at the outer edge of the sidewalk.
   (C)   Any modifications to a curb associated with a driveway shall be full
depth and width. In all cases, whether associated with a driveway or not, the
partial removal of a cross-section of curb is prohibited.
   (D)   No person shall construct any such driveway or approach without first
having obtained a permit from the city building official. This permit may be
included with the building permit if the approach or driveway is a part of new
construction or modification that require a building permit.
('71 Code, § 9-1-7) (Am. Ord. 2924, passed 9-26-94; Am. Ord. 10-19-94)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.061 CURBS NOT TO BE REMOVED OR LOWERED.
   No person shall remove or lower any curb in a street except in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter and upon compliance with the following
provisions:
   (A)   A permit must be obtained from the Superintendent of Streets.
   (B)   There must be adherence to design data as shown on drawing attached to
said permit.
   (C)   A cash bond or deposit in the amount of $1 per lineal foot of curb
proposed to be cut, must be made or placed with the City Clerk. Said deposit
shall be returned upon acceptance of the work by the Superintendent of Streets;
provided, however, that should it become necessary for the city to remedy such
work that is not acceptable and corrected, such charges that are necessary for
the correction of such work shall be made and deducted from said cash deposit.
('71 Code, § 9-1-8) (Ord. 1280, passed 7-25-50)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.062 RESTRICTION ON LOWERING GRADE ON PARKING STRIP.
   No person shall lower the grade of any parking strip or surface any parking
strip with concrete or other substance except in the construction of drives and
approaches, for use as a public sidewalk or in widening the paved portion of
any street.
('71 Code, § 9-1-9)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.063 PRIVATE BUSINESS USE OF STREETS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use any street, parking strip or sidewalk within the city
for a private business purpose.
('71 Code, § 9-1-10)
Penalty, see § 97.999
SIDEWALKS
§ 97.080 CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION; COMPLIANCE.
   All sidewalks hereafter constructed within the city, upon any street, alley
or part thereof, unless otherwise specifically provided by law, shall be
constructed of concrete of the best material, according to the specifications
hereinafter provided.
('71 Code, § 9-3-1)
§ 97.081 LOCATION OF SIDEWALK PROVIDED BY ORDINANCE.
   The city, before any such sidewalk shall be constructed, shall provide by a
special ordinance for the location of same. Such ordinance shall define the
location and grade of such proposed sidewalk with reasonable certainty, shall
prescribe its width, and shall provide that the material of which it shall be
constructed, and the manner of its construction, be as provided in this
chapter, by incorporating therein this subchapter by reference hereto, and when
so incorporated this subchapter shall be as much a part of said ordinance as if
its terms had been fully set down therein by express recital, and said
materials and such construction shall be under the supervision of and subject
to the approval of the City Engineer.
('71 Code, § 9-3-2)
§ 97.082 COST APPORTIONED.
   Fifty percent of the cost of the construction of any sidewalk upon any
street, alley or part thereof in the city shall be paid for by special taxation
of the lot, lots, parcel or parcels of land touching upon the line where such
work shall be constructed in proportion to their frontage upon such walk, and
the residue of such cost shall be paid out of any fund of the city raised by
general taxation; except where said sidewalk construction is a public
improvement recommended by the Board of Local Improvements and provided for by
an ordinance duly passed by the City Council, then in that event the said
construction is to be paid for in the manner provided for in the said
ordinance.
('71 Code, § 9-3-3) (Ord. 1398, passed 7-27-59; Am. Ord. 1431, passed 9-10-62
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.083 OWNER MAY BUILD SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The owner or owners of any lot, lots, parcel or parcels of land
touching the line of any sidewalk which may be ordered by said city to be
constructed, are hereby required to construct a sidewalk in front of their
respective lots or parcels of land, in accordance with the specifications of
this subchapter and the ordinance ordering the construction thereof within 30
days after the mailing of notice of the passage of said special ordinance,
addressed to the party who paid the last general taxes on the respective lots
or parcels of said land.
   (B)   Notice of the intention of the owner to construct such sidewalk shall
be given in writing to said City Engineer at least ten days prior to the
commencement of the work of constructing the same in order that the City
Engineer may have opportunity to examine said materials for the purpose of
ascertaining whether they are of the kind and quality required by this chapter.
('71 Code, § 9-3-4)
§ 97.084 NOTICE TO ENGINEER.
   In case of the default of the owner or owners of any lot, lots, parcel or
parcels of land, as required by the provisions and specifications of this
subchapter and the special ordinance requiring such construction, the city may
furnish the materials and construct said sidewalk in accordance with this
subchapter and said special ordinance, or may enter into a contract for the
furnishing of said materials and the construction of said sidewalk is
hereinafter provided, and 50% of the total cost of the construction of said
sidewalk in front of any lot or lots or parcels of land, including supervision,
shall be charged against said lot, lots or parcels of land as a special tax in
proportion to the frontage of said lot, lots or parcels upon such walk, and may
be collected as hereinafter provided; and it shall be lawful for the city to
issue noninterest bearing vouchers in payment for such walks, payable solely
out of the special tax as herein provided for when the same is collected.
('71 Code, § 9-3-5) (Ord. 1398; passed 7-27-59)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.085 ENGINEER TO PREPARE TAX LIST.
   It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to make a bill of costs of such
sidewalk, showing the cost of construction and supervision thereof, together
with a list of the lots or parcels of land touching upon the line of said
sidewalks, the names of the parties who paid the last general taxes on the
respective lots or parcels upon said sidewalks. Said City Engineer shall
proceed to prepare a special tax list against such lots, blocks, tracts or
parcels in front of or touching, upon which said sidewalk has not been
constructed, ascertaining by computation the amount of special taxes to be
charged against each of said lots, blocks, tracts or parcels of land on account
of the construction of said sidewalk, according to the rule fixed for the levy
of such special taxation by this chapter, which special tax list shall be filed
in the office of the City Clerk and he shall thereupon issue warrants directed
to the Clerk (he being hereby designated as the owner who shall collect said
tax), for the collection of the amount of special tax so ascertained and
appearing from said special tax listed be due from the respective lots, blocks,
tracts or parcels of land touching upon the line of said sidewalk, and the
Clerk shall proceed to collect the warrants by giving notice in writing by
mailing same to address of party who paid the last general taxes on the
respective lots, blocks, tracts or parcels of land in said list, that same tax
list is in the hands of said Clerk for collection. All money so collected by
him shall by him be immediately paid over to the City Treasurer, whose receipt
he shall take therefor as his voucher or said payments.
('71 Code, § 9-3-6)
§ 97.086 DELINQUENT TAX LIST TO COUNTY TREASURER.
   Upon the failure to collect such special tax as heretofore provided, it
shall be the duty of the City Clerk on or before April 1, in each year, to make
report of all such special tax in writing to the County Treasurer, of all the
lots and parcels of land upon which such special tax shall be so unpaid, with
the names of the respective owners thereof, so far as the same are known to
said Clerk, and the amount due and unpaid upon each tract, together with a copy
of the ordinance ordering the construction of said sidewalk, which report shall
be accompanied by oath of the Clerk that the list is a correct return of the
lots and parcels of land on which the special tax levied by authority of said
city for the partial cost of the sidewalk in said ordinance specified remains
due and unpaid, and that the amounts therein stated are due and unpaid, have
not been collected, or any part thereof.
('71 Code, § 9-3-7)
§ 97.087 JUDGMENT OBTAINED BY COUNTY TREASURER.
   When the County Treasurer shall receive the report set forth in §
97.080, he shall at once proceed to obtain judgment against said lots or
parcels of land for said special tax remaining due and unpaid in the same
manner as may be provided by law for obtaining judgment against lands for taxes
due and unpaid to the county and state, and shall in the same manner proceed to
sell the same for said special tax due and unpaid. In obtaining said judgment
and making said sale, the said County Treasurer shall be governed by the
general revenue laws of the state, except as otherwise provided by state
statute.
('71 Code, § 9-3-8)
§ 97.088 WALK BUILT OR REPLACED BY PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS.
   If the owner of any lot or parcel of land touching upon a sidewalk shall
cause to be built by private contract and paid for and constructed under the
terms of this subchapter, and shall construct such sidewalk in accordance with
the special ordinance providing for the walk, or for any established sidewalk
thereupon, the city shall pay to said owner the sum of either $2.00 per square
foot for all sidewalk constructed at residential standard (min. of 4 inch
thickness concrete) or $3.00 per square foot for all sidewalk so constructed at
commercial standards (min. of 6 inch thickness concrete) as per the
specifications contained herein.
('71 Code, § 9-3-9) (Am. Ord. 2207, passed 6-22-81; Am. Ord. 2831, passed 6-14-
93; Am. Ord. 3226, passed 8-9-99; Am. Ord. 3510, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. 4150,
passed 10-10-23)
§ 97.089 CONTRACT TO BE LET TO LOWEST BIDDERS.
   All contracts for the construction of sidewalks as hereinbefore provided,
when the expense thereon shall exceed $500, shall be let to the lowest bidder,
in the following manner: Notice shall be given by said City Engineer, by
advertisement in some newspaper of general circulation in the city, that bids
will be received for the construction of such sidewalks in accordance with the
ordinance therefor. Such notice shall state the time of opening bids, not more
than ten or less than five days thereafter. All proposals of bids offered shall
be accompanied by cash, or a check payable to the order of the city, and
certified to by a responsible bank for an amount which shall not be less than
10% of the aggregate of the proposal and contracts shall be approved by the
Council.
('71 Code, § 9-3-10)
§ 97.090 CITY ENGINEER TO HAVE SUPERVISION.
   The City Engineer is hereby designated as the person whose supervision and
subject to whose approval said sidewalk shall be laid, constructed and built.
('71 Code, § 9-3-11)
§ 97.091 SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACT. The agreement entered into between the city and the contractor
governing the performance of the work and furnishing of the proper materials to
be used in construction of the sidewalk specified in the ordinance locating
same.
   CONTRACTOR. Any contractor or firm of contractors or any member of a firm
contracting for work, or any corporation undertaking a contract.
   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or his authorized agent employed by the city.
   PLANS. All drawings and profiles or reproductions thereof which have been
made for the purpose of truly representing the construction to be completed on
the work designated and made b part of the ordinance locating said sidewalk.
   SPECIFICATIONS. Provisions and requirements retaining to the proper
performance of the work to be done and materials to be used to complete the
work specified in the ordinance locating such sidewalk. All sidewalks built
within the city shall comply in all respects with the following specifications:
   (B)   Specifications.
   Thickness. The sidewalk slab shall be four inches thick in residential
districts and six inches thick in the business districts.
   Width. The width of all permanent sidewalks shall be established by the
ordinance locating the same.
   Grade. All sidewalks shall be laid, constructed and built so as to conform
in all respects when completed to the grades heretofore established by the
provisions of this code, or which may be established by the ordinance locating
the said sidewalk.
   Subgrade. The subgrade shall be evenly tamped or rolled until thoroughly
compacted and as near as practicable have uniform density throughout. The
subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grade and cross- section as shown on
plans and which are made a part of the ordinance locating said sidewalk. All
soft and unstable material which will not compact readily shall be removed as
directed and replaced with suitable material. Wherever filling is required it
shall be made with suitable material and compacted thoroughly by rolling or
tamping. Fills exceeding 12 inches in depth shall be settled and compacted in a
manner suitable to the City Engineer.
   Forms. Side forms shall be of lumber, 1¾-inches thick or of steel of equal
rigidity. They shall be set with exactness to the required grade and alignment
and held securely in place by stakes or braces. The forms for the sidewalks
shall be so set that the slab will have a fall of one-inch vertical to four-
feet horizontal from the edge nearest the property line toward the edge
farthest from the property line. After the forms are set the subgrade shall be
tested with an approved template to insure the specified cross- section.
   Mixing. The concrete shall be mixed only in the quantity required for
immediate use. Concrete which has been mixed longer than 30 minutes, or which
has developed initial set shall not be used. Retempering concrete by adding
water or by other means will not be permitted. No materials containing frost or
lumps of hardened materials shall be used.
   The aggregates and the cement shall be thoroughly mixed in an approved batch
mixer for a period of not less than one minute. The water shall be introduced
in a uniform manner during the first 15 seconds of the mixing period. The
mixing time may be extended if necessary to obtain thorough mixing and uniform
consistency. Any concrete mixed less than the specified mixing time shall be
rejected and shall be disposed of by the contractor at his expense. The entire
contents of the drum shall be discharged before any materials are placed
therein for the succeeding batch. The volume of material mixed per batch shall
not exceed the manufacturer's rated capacity of the drum in cubic feet of mixed
concrete. The batches shall be so designed that they will not require
fractional bags of cement.
   Hand mixing will not be permitted except in case of emergency and then only
with the written permission of the Engineer.
   Consistency of Concrete. The mixture shall contain no more water than is
necessary to produce a concrete which is workable and plastic and shall have a
slump of not less than two inches nor more than six inches.
   Placing and Finishing. The subgrade shall be adequately moistened just
before the concrete is placed. The concrete shall be placed in successive
batches for the entire width of the slab, struck off from ½-inch to ¾-inch
higher than the finished slab, tamped until all voids are removed and free
mortar appears on the surface, thoroughly spaded along the edges, struck off to
a true grade, and finished to a true and even surface with suitable trowels and
floats. Use of metal trowels will be prohibited. The surface shall be divided
into rectangular slabs with division plates which shall be removed after the
concrete has hardened sufficiently to avoid breaking the edges of the slab. The
length of each slab shall be the same as the width of the sidewalk established
by the ordinance locating said sidewalk. The edges of the slabs shall be edged
with an edging tool rounded to a radius of ¼-inch. The operations of
depositing, com pacting and spading shall be conducted so that the concrete,
after the removal of the forms, will be free from aggregate pockets and honey
comb. All exposed surfaces shall be uniformly smooth, dense and free from
projections. All unexposed surfaces shall be dense and free from excessive
depressions or projections. All concrete which does not meet these requirements
shall be removed and replaced by the contractor, or shall be repaired as
directed by the Engineer.
   Expansion Joints. Expansion joints one-inch thick shall be placed at
intervals of one 100 feet in the sidewalk, and between driveway pavement and
sidewalk. Expansion joints ½-inch thick shall be provided between the sidewalk
and all structures such as light standards, traffic light standards, trolley
poles and manholes, which extend through the sidewalks. Expansion joints shall
consist of bituminous premolded expansion joints consisting of bitumen, felt
and mineral. It shall be of such character that it will not be deformed by
ordinary handling during hot weather, nor become brittle in cold weather. It
shall be of the dimensions shown on the plans which are made a part of the
ordinance locating said sidewalk.
   Curing. As soon as the pavement has been finished as specified herein, it
shall be protected against rapid drying by covering with burlap, laid directly
upon the surface as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to prevent
marring the surface. The burlap covering shall be applied wet and shall be kept
wet until removed by applying water in the form of a spray. In no case shall a
solid stream of water be directed on the burlap. Not earlier than 24 hours
after the concrete is placed, the burlap covering shall be removed and the
sidewalk cured by a method suitable to the Engineer.
   Placing Concrete in Cold Weather. Concrete may be mixed or placed when the
air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat is 40° F., and
falling only with the written permission of the Engineer. Necessary precautions
shall be taken to protect the work from freezing. In no case shall concrete be
deposited upon a frozen subgrade.
   Subdrains. In case of subgrades which are continually wet, and which, in the
opinion of the Engineer do not insure a well-drained foundation, a line of tile
shall be laid parallel to the walk on the uphill side to intercept the seepage.
In cases where tiling is impracticable or impossible, and when special
preparation for drainage is necessary the subgrade shall consist of a four-inch
foundation of cinders, gravel or similar material.
   Upon all questions concerning the execution of the work, concerning the
interpretation of these specifications and concerning the measurement and
classification of the work, the decision of the City Engineer shall be final
and binding.
   Composition of Concrete. The proportions of cement, fine aggregate, course
aggregate and water will be determined by the Engineer, before the work begins
so as to produce a workable plastic concrete having a compressive strength of
not less than 3,500 pounds per square inch, and a modules of rupture of not
less than 650 pounds per square inch at the age of 14 days when tested by
standard methods. This determination will be based upon the tests of the
aggregates selected by the contractor for use in the work. The quantities of
aggregates for each batch of concrete shall be measured by weight.
   The Engineer reserves the right to determine as the work progresses, the
proportions of cement, water and the aggregates actually furnished which will
produce workable plastic concrete having the strength specified herein.
   The Engineer may, at his discretion, permit the contractor to proportion the
aggregates for the concrete for a limited extent of sidewalk by volume. In
proportioning by volume the unit of measurement shall be one cubic foot. One
sack of cement (94 pounds) shall be considered as equal to one cubic foot.
Aggregates shall be measured separately by volume, using measuring devices
approved by the Engineer. The volume of fine or course aggregate shall be based
upon dry loose materials.
   Cement. All cement used shall be American Portland Cement conforming to the
requirements of the “Standard Specifications for Portland Cement, A.S.T.M.
Designation: C.9-30.”
   Cement shall be sampled and tested as provided in the “Standard Methods of
Testing Cement, A.S.T.M., Designation C.77-30,” except that on small, isolated
jobs, the cement shall conform to requirements determined by the City Engineer.
Different kinds or brands of cement, or cement of the same brand from different
mills, shall not be mixed during use, except as directed by the Engineer.
Different kinds or brands of cement, or cement of the same brand from different
mills, shall not be used alternately in any one class of construction.
   If it is necessary to store cement after its arrival on the work, the
contractor shall provide an approved weather-proof means of storage acceptable
to the Engineer. Cement showing deterioration after being in storage shall be
rejected and replaced by the contractor.
   Water. Water for use in cement or mortar shall not be salty or brackish and
shall be free from oil, acid, injurious alkali or vegetable matter. Water from
suspected sources shall not be used until tested and approved by the City
Engineer.
   Fine Aggregate. Fine aggregate shall consist of sand having hard, strong,
durable particles and shall conform to the requirements of these
specifications:
   Fine aggregate shall be sampled in accordance with the “Methods of Sampling
Stones, Slag, Gravel, Sand and Stone-Block for use as Highway Materials,
Tentative Method T-2” of the A.A.S.H.O.
   Fine aggregate must be free from loam clay and injurious amounts of organic
impurities and at the time of its use be free from all foreign material such as
burlap, paper, wood, or dirt stock piles of fine aggregate shall be built in
such a manner so as to prevent segregation, and insure reasonable uniform
graduation throughout the pile.
   Fine aggregate shall be well graded from course to fine and, when tested by
means of laboratory sieves, shall conform to the following requirements:
   (A)   Fine aggregate for concrete:
      Passing a 3/8-inch sieve      100%
      Passing Number 4 sieve      95%   -100%
      Passing Number 8 sieve      70%   - 90%
      Passing Number 16 sieve      45%   - 75%
      Passing Number 50 sieve      5%   - 20%
      Passing Number 100 sieve      5/8%   - 5%
   (B)   Fine aggregate for mortar:
      Passing Number 8 sieve      100%
      Passing Number 50 sieve      15%   - 40%
      Passing Number sieve      0%   - 10%
   Both laboratory and field sieves shall have square openings.
   Course Aggregate.  
   Course aggregate shall consist of crushed stone or gravel having hard,
strong, durable pieces, free from adherent coating and conforming to the
requirements of these specifications.
   Course aggregate shall be sampled in accordance with the “Methods of
Sampling Stone, Slag, Gravel, Sand and Stone-Blocks for use as Highway
Material, Tentative Method T-2” of the A.A.S.H.O.
   Course aggregate shall be free from loam, clay, and injurious amounts of
organic impurities and at the time of its use be free from all foreign matters
such as burlap, paper, wood or dirt which may have become mixed with it. Stock
pile shall be so constructed as to prevent caning. Separate stock pile shall be
provided for crushed stone and gravel.
   Course aggregate, at the time it is proportioned shall be well graded
between the limits specified and shall conform to the grading requirements
given below. Aggregates in which the different sized particles, have become
segregated due to improper stockpiling, improper handling, or for other reasons
shall, before being proportioned be remixed in such manner that they will
conform to the grading requirements specified herein.
   Passing 1½-inch sieve      100%
   Passing 1-inch sieve      60%   - 90%
   Passing ¾-inch sieve      40%    - 75%
   Passing ½-inch sieve      10%    - 30%
   Passing No. 4 sieve      0%   - 5%
   Both laboratory and field sieves shall have square openings.
   Sidewalks Over Vaults and Basements.
   For the construction of sidewalks over vaults and basements a plan and
design shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval before the
contractor shall start work.
   All such sidewalks shall not be less than six inches thick and conform to
the foregoing specifications as to material and mixtures.
   Reinforcement steel shall be of clean new stock, free from kinks, defects
and bends not required by the plans, and free from mill and scale rust. The
bars shall be wired together at all contact points over six inches apart with
an annealed iron wire of diameter not less than No. 18 gauge, or by suitable
clips. The bars shall be supported firmly by metal chairs or hangers while the
concrete is being poured.
   The cross-sectional area and weight per lineal foot for steel reinforcing
bars shall be as follows:
Square Inch   Pounds Per Foot
Size and Shape (Inches)   Area   Weight
¼ round   .05   .167
3/8 round   .11   .376
½ round   .20   .668
½ square   .25   .850
5/8 round   .31   1.043
¾ round   .44   1.502
7/8 round   .60   2.044
1 square   .79   2.670
1 square   1.00   3.400
11/8 square   1.27   4.303
¼ square   1.56   5.313
   Structural steel, including angles, I-beams, columns, lintels and all other
structural steel required shall conform to the requirements of “Specifications
for Structural Steel, Serial Designation A-9-29” of the American Society for
Testing Materials.
   The design for sidewalks over vaults and basements shall be for a safety
factor of three.
   Protection of Work. The contractor shall erect and maintain suitable
barriers to protect the sidewalk from traffic. All work while in progress must
be protected from injury from sun, rain and other causes. Damage from traffic
or other causes, prior to official acceptance of the work, shall be cause for
replacing the damaged areas by the contractor, at his expense.
   Protection to Public. The contractor shall take all precautions that may be
necessary to make the work secure and decrease the possibilities of accidents
from any cause. He shall maintain barricades and signals at all holes, trenches
or dangerous places and shall comply with all provisions of this code in
relation to construction work. The contractor will be held responsible for all
accidents and shall give and agree to indemnify and protect the city from all
suits, claims, and actions against the city, and all costs and damages which
the city may be put to by reason of any injury to the person or property of
another, in the construction of the work provided for in the ordinance locating
said sidewalk, or the performance of the work therein provided for, or in
guarding same, or for any material used in its prosecution or its construction,
including court costs and attorney's fee, and said contractor agrees to procure
suitable and sufficient insurance in responsible companies written so as to
protect the owner against all such suits, claims, actions, damages and costs,
including compensation insurance to employees of said contractor, pursuant to
the statutes in such case made and provided, and said bonds shall be
conditioned accordingly.
   Performance Bond. The contractor shall furnish a bond with sureties to the
satisfaction of the city in the penal sum equal to 100% of the amount of the
contract, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his contract, and upon
the payment of all persons supplying labor and furnishing materials, and to
indemnify and save harmless the city against all liabilities, judgments, costs,
damage or expense which may in any wise accrue against said city, in
consequence of the granting of such contract or which may in any wise result
from the carelessness, neglect or default of the contractor, his agents,
assignees, subcontractors, employees, or workers, or any of them in any respect
whatever.
   The contractor shall take all necessary precautions to avoid damaging
structures contiguous to the work. Any damage done to any structure caused by
or resulting from the work or neglect of the contractor shall be immediately
placed in a safe condition and repaired and replaced in a permanently safe
condition free of cost or liability on the part of the city.
   Utilities. The contractor shall take all necessary precautions to avoid
damaging pipes, conduits, wires and other property belonging to others which
may be encountered in the prosecution of the work. If it becomes necessary to
maintain or remove and replace any such property, the contractor shall
immediately make arrangements with the owner or owners of the utilities to
perform the required work.
   Line and Grade Stakes. The contractor shall carefully preserve all stakes
set for lines, grades or measurements of take work in their proper places and
in case of wilful or careless destruction of same, the contractor shall be
charged with the expense of replacement.
   Any work done without lines and grades given by the City Engineer or done
without the supervision of the Engineer may be ordered removed and replaced at
the contractor's expense.
   Contractor's Default; Forfeiture of Contract. The work herein specified
shall be prosecuted with such force as the City Engineer may deem adequate to
its completion within the time specified. If the rate at which work is
performed is not, in the judgment of the City Engineer, for its completion
within a specified time, or to in any event, the contractor fails to proceed
with the work in accordance with the requirements and conditions of these
specifications, the city shall have full right and authority to take the work
out of the hands of the contractor and to employ other workmen to complete the
unfinished work, or to relet the same to other contractors, and to deduct the
expense occasioned by such default from any money that may be due and owing to
the contractor.
   If the work be wholly or in part improperly constructed, the city shall have
the right to order the entire reconstruction of the same, and in case the
contractor shall default or refuse to reconstruct any work improperly done,
declare said work forfeited either as to a portion or the whole and to relet
the same. In event of such default or forfeiture the city shall have the right
to adjust the difference of damage or price (if there by any), which, according
to a just and reasonable interpretation of these specifications and the
contract as a whole, the contractor should pay to the city as damages for
failure to properly commence and prosecute or to properly construct said work
in all respects according to the conditions hereinbefore specified, or if for
any other default; and it is hereby understood and agreed that for the amount
of damage or price determined by the city to be paid to the city by the
contractor for any such default, or for any money paid out by the city on
account of the contractor, in consequence of any such default, there shall be
applied in payment thereof a like amount of any money that may be due and owing
to the contractor on account of said work so far as there may be any such
moneys and so far as the same shall be sufficient; and if there shall not be a
sufficient amount retained from said contractor, then in such case the amount
to be paid to the city in consequence of such default shall be a just claim
against the contractor and be recovered from him at law, in the name of the
city before any court of competent jurisdiction, either by suit upon his bond
or otherwise.
   In case the City Engineer deems it necessary to declare any portion or
section of the work forfeited, it is expressly stipulated and understood that
such declaration of forfeiture shall not in any manner relieve the contractor
from the covenants and conditions of the contract for said work, but the same
shall remain valid and binding on said contractor.
   In case the contractor abandons or in any manner fails to complete the work
within the time herein specified, the city is authorized and empowered to pay
any laborer who has been employed by the contractor upon the said work, the
amount due such laborer out of any funds due the contractor or its intention to
do so. In every such case, the City Clerk of the city is authorized and
empowered to ascertain in such a manner and upon such proofs as he may deem
sufficient the amount due any such laborer from the contractor without giving
any notice of such proceeding to the contractor. The amount so found to be due
such laborer shall be final and conclusive as against the contractor and may
thereafter be paid over to such laborer by the city.
   Assignment of Work. No part of the work herein specified shall be assigned
without the written consent of the city, and in no case shall such consent
relieve the contractor or his surety from the obligations herein entered into
or change the terms of the agreement.
   Character of Workers and Equipment. The contractor shall employ only
competent and efficient labor, mechanics, or artisans, and whenever, in the
opinion of the Engineer, any employee is careless or incompetent, or obstructs
the progress of the work or conducts himself improperly, the contractor shall,
upon the request of the Engineer, discharge or otherwise remove him from the
work and shall not employ him again, except with the consent of the Engineer.
   All machinery and equipment owned or controlled by the contractor which is
proposed to be used by him on the work, shall be of sufficient size and in such
mechanical condition as to meet with the requirements of the work and to
produce a satisfactory quality of work. The Engineer may order the removal of
any unsatisfactory equipment and require its replacement with equipment meeting
his approval.
   Maintaining Traffic. The contractor shall make suitable provisions for free
passage of vehicles and pedestrians along the location of the work unless
otherwise permitted by the City Engineer. He shall afford ready access to all
fire hydrants and water valves. The contractor shall not obstruct the gutter or
any street contiguous to the work, nor prevent in any manner the flow of water
in the same.
   Guarantee. The contractor will be required to give a one year guarantee bond
acceptable to the Council to keep the sidewalk in repair for said term.
   Increased or decreased quantities. Whenever the quantity of any item or work
as given in the proposal shall be increased or decreased, payment shall be made
on the basis of the actual quantity completed at the unit price for such item
named in the proposal.
   Walk built by private contract. No walk may be built by the owner of any lot
or parcel of land touching upon a sidewalk, without having the construction of
same supervised by the City Engineer.
   Supervision. If the City Engineer or his authorized representative shall
point out to the contractor any neglect or disregard of the specifications such
defect shall at once be remedied and further defective work be at once
discontinued Whenever the contractor is not present on the work, direction or
orders given by the City Engineer to any superintendent or overseer, who may
have charge of any particular work, shall be received and obeyed the same as if
given to the contractor.
('71 Code, § 9-3-12)
Penalty, see § 97.999
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
§ 97.115 BUILDINGS TO BE NUMBERED.
   The several buildings that are now or that may hereafter be erected in the
city shall be numbered by the owner or owners thereof according to the plan
described in this subchapter.
('71 Code, § 5-9-1)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.116 DESIGNATION OF STREETS.
   All those portions of streets running north and south, or having their
principal directions north and south, lying north of First Streets, shall be
designated by the word “North” prefixed to the name of such street. All
portions of streets lying south of said First Streets shall be designated in
like manner by the prefix “South.” All portions of streets running east and
west, lying east of Main Streets, shall be designated by the word “East”
prefixed to the name of such street. All portions of streets lying west of said
Main Street shall be designated in like manner by the word “West” prefixed to
the name of such street.
('71 Code, § 5-9-2)
§ 97.117 NUMBERING PLAN.
   Those streets shall be numbered on what is known as the Philadelphia or St.
Louis plan of 100 numbers to each block and one number for each 25 feet as base
lines, beginning with the number 100 at each base line, North, South, East or
West, as the case may be. Even numbers shall be assigned to the east and north
sides of each block, odd numbers to the west and south side of each block. All
streets that neither touch nor cross either of said base streets shall be
numbered in the same manner as though they crossed said base streets.
('71 Code, § 5-9-3)
§ 97.118 APPLICATION FOR NUMBERS.
   Any owner or occupant of any lot or building, desiring to place upon it the
number thereof, shall make application to the City Engineer who shall, under
the direction of the Council, designate the number appropriate to such building
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 5-9-4)
§ 97.119 SIZE AND DISPLAY OF NUMBERS.
   All numbers placed upon buildings in the city shall consist of figures not
less than two inches in height and shall be displayed in a conspicuous manner
and placed on the front of the building for which the same are designated.
('71 Code, § 5-9-5)
Penalty, see § 97.999
RAILROADS; CROSSINGS
§ 97.130 CONSTRUCTION OR BLOCKING OF CROSSING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, conductor, engineer or other
person to stop any engine, car or train of cars, or permit the same to be done,
upon any railroad track at the crossing of any street or alley intersecting
such railroad in the city so as to obstruct the passageway across such railroad
for a longer period than five minutes at any one time.
('71 Code, § 9-9-1)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.131 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN CROSSINGS.
   In the event that any railroad company or corporation fails or refuses to
construct, alter or repair any crossing, culvert or bridge when duly notified
to do so by a member of the Police Department, the City Council may order at
the expense of the city, such crossing, culvert or bridge to be constructed,
altered or repaired, and such company or corporation shall thereupon be liable
to the city in an action of debt for the cost and expense thereof.
('71 Code, § 9-9-2)
§ 97.132 RINGING OF BELL; HEAD LIGHTS.
   The bell of each locomotive engine shall be rung continually while running
upon any railroad track within the city; and every locomotive engine, car or
train of cars running in the nighttime on any railroad track in the city shall
have and keep a bright and conspicuous light at the forward end of such
locomotive engine, car or train of cars. If such engine or train shall be
backing, it shall have conspicuous light at the rear of the engine or train, so
as to show the direction in which the same is moving.
('71 Code, § 9-9-4)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.133 CARE OF STOCK CARS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or company to leave or cause to be left
or kept upon any railroad track within the city any car or cars which have been
used for hauling stock without the same having been first thoroughly cleaned
and freed from obnoxious odors.
('71 Code, § 9-9-6)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.134 INJURING FIRE HOSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, conductor, engineer or other
person to cause to be run over or injured by any engine, car or train any hose
laid across any railroad track for the purpose of extinguishing fire.
('71 Code, § 9-9-3)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.136 PLAYING ABOUT RAILROAD YARDS OR CARS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to play about or upon any railroad
track, depot, locomotive or car within the city, or, not being a regular
passenger, to climb on or off any locomotive, car or train of cars within the
city, while the same is in motion. Any person violating the provisions hereof
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-33)
Penalty, see § 97.999
ENFORCEMENT
§ 97.150 VIOLATIONS OF PROVISIONS DEEMED NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Any construction or obstruction in violation of the provisions of this
chapter is hereby declared a nuisance.
('71 Code, § 9-1-20)
   (B)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to abate such nuisance and
collect the cost of such abatement from the person maintaining such nuisance.
('71 Code, § 9-1-21)
§ 97.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty has not been provided, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $500, or
both, for anyone offense.
   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of §§
97.002,
97.003, and
97.005 through
97.008 and
97.026 shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $500, or the city may be ordered
to correct the violation, or both of the foregoing for any one offense. The
minimum fine to be levied against a person convicted of a violation of any
section of this chapter shall be $25, and should the city be ordered to correct
the violation existing, the person convicted shall pay for the city's
correction of said violation, and the city may impose a lien upon the premises
until the cost of said correction shall be fully paid. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day, during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
('71 Code, § 8-1-19) (Ord. 2497, passed 2-11-85; Am. Ord. 2785, passed 5-26-92)
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
97.004 shall be fined $5 for a first offense. A second or subsequent offense
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in division (A) of this section. Any
person selling skateboards who fails to post a copy of §
97.004 as required herein shall be subject to a penalty as provided in division
(A) of this section. A separate offense shall be deemed commend on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
('71 Code, § 7-1-50(D)) (Ord. 2710, passed 7-10-89)
CHAPTER 98: MUNICIPAL TREE ORDINANCE
Section
   
98.01   Purpose
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Authority and power
   
98.04   Tree planting and care standards
   
98.05   Prohibition against harming public trees
   
98.06   Adjacent owner responsibility
   
98.07   Certain trees declared a nuisance
   
98.08   Appeals
   
98.99   Violations and penalty
Cross-reference:
   Planting poisonous vines, see §
97.006
§ 98.01 PURPOSE.
   To enhance the quality of life and the present and future health, safety,
and welfare of all residents, to enhance property values, and to ensure proper
planting and care of trees on public property, the City Council herein
delegates the authority and responsibility for managing public trees,
establishes practices governing the planting and care of trees on public
property, and makes provision for the emergency removal of trees on private
property under certain conditions.
(Ord. 4263, passed 12-8-25)
§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
   DAMAGE. Any injury to or destruction of a tree, including but not limited
to: uprooting; severance of all or part of the root system or main trunk;
storage of material on or compaction of surrounding soil; a substantial change
in the natural grade above a root system or around a trunk; surrounding the
tree with impervious paving materials; or any trauma caused by accident or
collision.
   NUISANCE. Any tree, or limb thereof, that has an infectious disease or
insect; is dead or dying; obstructs the view of traffic signs or the free
passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or threatens public health, safety, and
welfare.
   PARKWAY. The area along a public street between the curb and the sidewalk;
or if there is no curb or sidewalk, the unpaved portion of the area between the
street right-of-way line and the paved portion of the street or alley.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All grounds and rights-of-way (ROWs) owned or maintained by
the city.
   PUBLIC TREE. Any tree or woody vegetation on city-owned or city-maintained
property or rights-of-way.
   TOP or TOPPING. The non-standard practice of cutting back of limbs to stubs
within a tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree.
(Ord. 4263, passed 12-8-25)
§ 98.03 AUTHORITY AND POWER.
   (A)   Delegation of authority and responsibility. The Director of the Public
Works Department and/or their designee, hereinafter referred to as the
"Director", shall have full authority and responsibility to plant, prune,
maintain and remove trees and woody plants growing in or upon all municipal
streets, rights-of-ways, city parks, and other public property. This shall
include the removal of trees that may threaten electrical, telephone, gas, or
any municipal water or sewer line, or any tree that is affected by fungus,
insect, or other pest disease.
   (B)   Coordination among city departments. All city departments will
coordinate as necessary with the Director and will provide services as required
to ensure compliance with this chapter as it relates to streets, alleys,
rights-of-way, drainage, easements, and other public properties not under
direct jurisdiction of the Director.
   (C)   Interference. No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Director or his agents while engaged in carrying out the execution or
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 4263, passed 12-8-25) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.04 TREE PLANTING AND CARE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards. All planting and maintenance of public trees shall conform
to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300 "Standards for Tree
Care Operations" and shall follow all tree care Best Management Practices
(BMPs) published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
   (B)   Requirements of franchise utility companies. The maintenance of public
trees for utility clearance shall conform to all applicable utility industry
standards.
   (C)   Preferred species list. The Director shall maintain an official list
of desirable tree species for planting on public property in two size classes:
ornamental (20 feet or less in height at maturity) and shade (greater than 20
feet at maturity). Trees from this approved list may be planted without special
permission; other species may be planted with written approval from the
Director.
   (D)   Planting distances. The Director shall develop and maintain an
official set of spacing requirements for the planting of trees on public
property. No tree may be planted within the visibility triangle of a street
intersection or within ten feet of a fire hydrant.
   (E)   Planting trees under electric utility lines. Only trees listed as
ornamental trees on the official city tree species list may be planted under or
within 15 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire.
(Ord. 4263, passed 12-8-25) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.05 PROHIBITION AGAINST HARMING PUBLIC TREES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to damage,
remove, or cause the damage or removal of a tree on public property without
written permission from the Director.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to attach
any cable, wire, sign, or any other object to any street, park, or public tree.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to "top" any
public tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, where best
pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this provision at the
determination of the Director.
   (D)   Any person, firm, corporation, or city department performing
construction near any public tree(s) shall consult with the Director and shall
employ appropriate measures to protect the tree(s), according to procedures
contained in the Best Management Practices (BMPs) for "Managing Trees During
Construction" published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
   (E)   Each violation of this section as determined and notified by the
Director shall constitute a separate violation, punishable by fines and
penalties under §
98.99, in addition to mitigation values placed on the tree(s) removed or
damaged in violation of this section.
(Ord. 4263, passed 12-8-25) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.06 ADJACENT OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The owner of land adjacent to any city street or highway, when acting
within the provisions of this chapter, may plant and maintain trees in the
adjacent parkway area.
   (B)   No property owner shall allow a tree, or other plant growing on his or
her property to obstruct or interfere with pedestrians or the view of drivers,
thereby creating a hazard. If an obstruction persists, the Director shall
notify the property owner to prune or remove the tree or plant. If the owner
fails to comply with the notice, the city may undertake the necessary work and
charge the cost to the property owner.
(Ord. 4263, passed 12-8-25) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.07 CERTAIN TREES DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   (A)   Any tree, or limb thereof, on private property determined by the
Director to have contracted a lethal, communicable disease or insect; to be
dead or dying; to obstruct the view of traffic signs or the free passage of
pedestrians or vehicles; or that threatens public health, safety, and welfare
is declared a nuisance and the city may require its treatment or removal.
   (B)   Private property owners have the duty, at their own expense, to remove
or treat nuisance trees on their property. The city may remove such trees at
the owner's expense if the owner does not comply with treatment and/or removal
as specified by the Director within the written notification period.
(Ord. 4263, passed 12-8-25) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.08 APPEALS.
   Appeals to decisions by the Director, or to penalties imposed after
violations of this chapter, shall be heard by City Council.
(Ord. 4263, passed 12-8-25)
§ 98.99 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $500 for each offense.
(Ord. 4263, passed 12-8-25)
CHAPTER 99: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
Drug Paraphernalia
   
99.01   Definition
   
99.02   Determination of drug paraphernalia
   
99.03   Offenses
   
99.04   Civil forfeiture
Prohibited Substances
   
99.10   Regulation of synthetic alternative drugs
 
   
99.99   Penalty
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 99.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind that
are used, intended for use, or designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, havest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, package, repackage, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale,
or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act. It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits designed for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or
harvesting of any species of plant that is a controlled substance or from which
a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Items used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose used, intended for use, or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      (10)    Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)    Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body;
      (12)    Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips; meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (i)   Electric pipes;
         (j)   Air-driven pipes;
         (k)   Chilums;
         (l)   Bongs;
         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers.
(Ord. 2871, passed 12-13-93; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 99.02 DETERMINATION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors,
the following:
   (A)   Statements by an owner or any individual in control of the object
concerning its use.
   (B)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or any individual in control
of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
   (C)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of this chapter.
   (D)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
   (E)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
   (F)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom they know or
should reasonably know, intend to sue the object to facilitate a violation of
this chapter; the innocence of an owner or any individual in control of the
object, as to a direct violation of this chapter shall not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (G)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use.
   (H)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use.
   (I)   National and local advertising concerning its use.
   (J)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
   (K)   Whether the owner, any individual in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
   (L)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
   (M)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
   (N)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(Ord. 2871, passed 12-13-93; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
§ 99.03 OFFENSES.
   (A)   Possession of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to use
or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this chapter. Any person who violates this section is guilty of an
unlawful offense and each day that any violation of this section shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any
person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent
to deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this
chapter. Any person who violates this section is guilty of an unlawful offense
and each day that any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute
a separate offense.
   (C)   Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. Any person 18 years of age
or over who violates division (B) hereof by delivering drug paraphernalia to a
person under 18 years of age who is at least three years his junior is guilty
of an unlawful offense and each day any violation of this section shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any
advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know
that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the
sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. Any person
who violates this section is guilty of an unlawful offense and each day that
any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 2871, passed 12-13-93; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)  Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.04 CIVIL FORFEITURE.
   All drug paraphernalia as defined by this chapter shall be subject to
seizure and forfeiture as is set forth in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 505 and any
amendment thereto, and this chapter does hereby adopt the provisions therein
concerning the disposal of the property.
(Ord. 2871, passed 12-13-93; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES
§ 99.10 REGULATION OF SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires different meaning.
      (1)   PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG. Any product
containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen, as
those terms are defined herein such as, but not limited to, the examples of
brand names or identifiers shown below:
 
2010                             Freedom           K2 Silver
8-Ball                           Fully Loaded      K2 Solid Sex on the Mountain
Aztec Gold                       Funky Monkey      K2 Solid Sex on the Mountain
Aztec Midnight Wind Tezcatlipoca Funky Monkey XXXX K2 Standard
 
Back Draft         G Four                      K2 Strawberry
Bad 2 the Bone     G Greenies Caramel Crunch   K2 Summit
Banana Cream Nuke  Genie                       K2 Summit Coffee Wonk
Bayou Blaster      Gold Spirit Spice           K2 Thai Dream
Black Diamond      Green Monkey Chronic Salvia K2 Ultra
Black Magic Salvia Greenies Strawberry         K2 Watermelon
Black Mamba        Heaven Improved             K3
Blueberry Hayze    Heavenscent Suave           K3 Blueberry
Bombay Blue        Humboldt Gold               K3 Cosmic Blend
Buzz               Jamaican Gold               K3 Dusk
C3                 Jamaican Gold               K3 Grape
C4 Herbal Incense  K Royal                     K3 Heaven Improved
Caneff             K1 Orbit                    K3 Heaven Legal
Cherry Bomb        K2                          K3 Kryptonite
Chill X            K2 (unknown variety)        K3 Legal
Chronic Spice      K2 Amazonian Shelter        K3 Legal - Original (Black)
Cill Out           K2 Amazonian Shelter        K3 Legal- Earth (silver) IC3
Citrus             K2 Blonde                   Legal- Sea (silver) IC3
Colorado Chronic   K2 Blue                     Legal- Sun (Black)
Dal3lock           K2 Blueberry                K3 Mango
Dark Night II      K2 Citron                   K3 Original
Demon              K2 Cloud 9                  K3 Original Improved
Diamond Spirit     K2 Kryptonite               K3 Strawberry
Dragon Spice       K2 Latte                    K3Sun
D-Rail             K2 Mellon                   K3 Sun
Dream              K2 Mint                     Improved K3 Sun
Earthquake         K2 Orisha Black Magic Max   Legal K3 XXX
Eruption Spice     K2 Orisha Max               K4 Bubble Bubble
 
Euphoria                    K2 Orisha Regular           K4 Gold
EXSES Platinum Strawberry   K2 Orisha Super             K4 Purple Haze
exSES                       K2 Orisha White Magic Super K4 Silver
EX-SES Platinum             K2 Peach                    K4 Summit
EX-SES Platinum Blueberry   K2 Pina Colada              K4 Summit Remix
EX-SES Platinum Cherry      K2 Pineapple                Kind Spice
EX-SES Platinum Strawberry  K2 Pineapple Express        K1 Gravity
EX-SES Platinum Vanilla     K2 Pink                     K1 Orbit
Fire Bird Ultimate Strength K2 Pink Panties             K2 Sex
Cinnamon Forest Humus
Legal Eagle                 Potpourri Gold              Stinger
Legal Eagle Apple Pie       Pulse                       Summer Skyy
Love Potion 69              Rasta Citrus Spice          Super Kush
Love Strawberry             Rebel Spice                 Super Summit
Magic Dragon Platinum       Red Bird                    Swagger Grape
Magic Gold Magic            S1 Swerve                   SYN Chill
Magic Silver                Samurai Spirit              SYN Incense LemonLime
Magic Spice                 Sativah                     SYN Incense Smooth
Mega Bomb                   Scope Vanilla               SYN Incense Spearmint
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar       Scope Wild berry            SYN Lemon Lime
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar (K2   Sence                       SYN Lemon Lime #2
Summit)
Midnight Chill              Shanti Spice                SYN Smooth
MNGB Almond Vanilla         Shanti Spice Blueberry      WYN Spearmint
MNGB Peppermint             Silent Black                SYN Spearmint #2
MNGB Pinata Coloda          Skunk                       SYN Suave
MNGB Spear Mint             Smoke                       SYN Swagg
MNGB Tropical Thunder       Smoke Plus                  SYN Vanilla
Moe Joe Fire                Space                       SYN Vanilla #2
 
Mojo                       Spice Arctic Strategy        Texas Gold
Mr. Smiley's               Spice Diamond                Time Warp
MTN-787                    Spice Gold                   Tribal Warrior
Mystery                    Spice Gold 2                 Ultra Cloud 10
Naughty Nights             Spice Silver                 Unknown cigarette
New Improved K3            Spice Tropical Synergy       Utopia
New Improved K3 Cosmic     Spicey Regular XXX Blueberry Utopia-Blue Berry
Blend
New Improved K3 Dynamite   Spicey Regular XXX           Voo Doo Remix (black
                           Strawberry                   package)
New Improved K3 Kryptonite Spicey Ultra Strong XXX      Voo Doo Remix (orange
                           Strawberry                   package)
New K3 Earth               Spicey Ultra Strong XXX      Voodoo Child
                           Vanilla
New K3 Heaven              Spicey XXX                   Voodoo Magic
New K3 Improved            Spicy Ultra Strong XXX       Voodoo Remix
                           Vanilla
New K3 Sea Improved        Spicylicious                 Who Dat
New-Kron Bomb              Spike 99                     Who Dat Herbal Incense
Nitro                      Spike 99 Ultra               Wicked X
Ocean Blue                 Spike 99 Ultra Blueberry     Winter Boost
POW                        Spike 99 Ultra Cherry        Wood Stock
Pep pourri Love Strawberry Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry    XTREME Spice
Pep pourri Original        Spike Diamond                Yucatan Fire
Spearmint
Pep pourri Twisted Vanilla Spike Gold                   Yucatan Fire 2
Pep pourri X Blueberry     Spike Maxx                   Zombie World
Paradise                   Spike Silver
Pink Tiger                 Spike99
Potpourri
 
      (2)   SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID. Any laboratory-created compound that
functions similar to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic
material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including
isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid
receptor agonist, such as:
         (a)   JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole).
         (b)   JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-
naphthalenylmethanone).
         (c)   JWH-018 (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole).
         (d)   JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-1-oyl)indole).
         (e)   JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone).
         (f)   JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-
yI)methanone).
         (g)   JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2-methyfindol-3-
yl)methanone).
         (h)   JWH-122 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole).
         (i)   JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-
yl)methanone).
         (j)   JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-
ylmethanone.
         (k)   JWH-203 (2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3-0ethan one.
         (l)   JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-0-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone .
         (m)   JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole).
         (n)   JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacetyl)indole).
         (o)   JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole).
         (p)   HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)- 6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol).
         (q)   HU-211 ((6aS, 10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)- 6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo c]chromen-1-ol).
         (r)   HU-308 ([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methloctan-2-
yl)phenyl]-7,7- dimethyl-4-bicyclo[3.1 .1]hept-3-enyl] methanol).
         (s)   HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-(lR,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1-methylethenyl)-2-
cyclohexen-1-yl]-5- pentyl-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione).
         (t)   CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl)
cyclohexyl]- 5-(2-.
         (u)   methyloctan-2-yl)phenol).
         (v)   CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5- (2-methyloctan-2-
yl)phenol) and its homologues.
         (w)   WIN 55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-
morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo [1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-
nepthalenylmethanone).
         (x)   RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl)methanone).
         (y)   RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)-2-(2-
methoxyphenyl)ethanone).
      (3)   SYNTHETIC STIMULANT. Any compound that mimics the effects of any
federally controlled Schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone,
MDMA and MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or
synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog
(including salts, isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which
have a stimulant effect on the central nervous system, such as:
         (a)   3-Fluoromethcathinone.
         (b)   4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone).
         (c)   3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC).
         (d)   3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV).
         (e)   4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC).
         (f)   4-Methoxymetxicatninone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA,
PMMC).
         (g)   4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC).
         (h)   Ethcathinone.
         (i)   Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names:
butylone, bk-MBDB).
         (j)   Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1).
         (k)   N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone).
         (l)   Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: alpha-PPP).
         (m)   4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP).
         (n)   3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name:
MDPPP).
         (o)   Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: alpha-PVP).
         (p)   6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxal-6-amine) (other name:
MDAI).
         (q)   Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino-1-phenyl-
1-propanone by modification or substitution in any of the following ways:
            1.   In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy,
alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further
substituted in the phenyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents;
            2.   At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent; or
            3.   At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or
methoxybenzyl.
      (4)   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGEN. Any compound that mimics the
effects of any federally controlled Schedule I substance, including but not
limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, esters,
ethers and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system and/or brain, such as:
         (a)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-E).
         (b)   2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D).
         (c)   2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C).
         (d)   2-(4-lodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I).
         (e)   2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyi)ethanamine(2C-T-2).
         (f)   2-(4-(lsopropylthio)-2,5-dimemoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-4).
         (g)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)emanamine (2C-H).
         (h)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N).
         (i)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P).
   (B)   Sale or delivery. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer
for sale or deliver any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant
or psychedelic/hallucinogen.
   (C)   Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a
product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/
hallucinogen.
   (D)   Use. It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of
a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen.
(Ord. 3687, passed 11-14-11) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
99.10 shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not less than $250 nor more
than $750.
(Ord. 3687, passed 11-14-11)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
110.   GENERAL LICENSING REGULATIONS
   
111.   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
   
112.   AMUSEMENTS
   
113.   CIGARETTE VENDORS
   
114.   JUNK DEALERS; JUNKYARDS; SCAVENGERS
   
115.   LODGING HOUSES; HOTELS
   
116.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
   
117.   RAFFLES
   
118.   VEHICLES-FOR-HIRE
   
119.   WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
   
120.   ENTERPRISE ZONE
   
121.   KEWANEE REVOLVING LOAN FUND PROGRAM
   
122.   REGULATION OF CONTRACTORS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING REGULATIONS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Persons subject to license
   
110.03   Granting of licenses; conditions of issuance
   
110.04   Issuance of license
   
110.05   Clerk shall register licenses
   
110.06   License subject to ordinances
   
110.07   Term of license
   
110.08   Rebate or refund
   
110.09   License to be posted
   
110.10   Liability of employees
   
110.11   Exceptions
   
110.12   Fee schedule prorated fees
Cross-reference:
   Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants licensing, see §§
116.05 -
116.11
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of Title XI the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUCTIONEER. Any person who shall cry at auctions or sell at auctions, except
as hereinbefore provided, any goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of
any kind.
   HACKMAN. Every person who shall by wagon, carriage, omnibus, hack or other
vehicle carry persons from place to place within the city for hire or who shall
operate any such vehicle in the city for the purpose of carrying persons for
hire.
   PUBLIC SCALES. All scales in the city upon which persons other than the
owners or keepers are allowed to weigh any materials of any kind for pay or
profit, and no person shall operate any such public scales without obtaining a
license so to do, and each day's operation of any such scale after the first
conviction shall be deemed a separate offense.
('71 Code, § 4-1-12) (Am. Ord. 2886, passed 4-11-94; Am. Ord. 3328, passed 11-
13-01)
§ 110.02 PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE.
   In addition to the licenses otherwise provided for by the provisions of this
code, the following persons, before carrying on either directly or indirectly
their business within the limits of the city, shall first procure licenses
therefor: Auctioneers, hackmen, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of
merchandise, peddlers, keepers of billiard and pool tables, or either,
scavengers, keepers of bowling alleys, keepers of shooting galleries, keepers
of gunpowder, nitroglycerine, pawnbrokers, (except as hereinafter provided).
Licenses are also required for persons operating or conducting shows, circuses,
menageries, museums, theaters, opera houses, skating rinks, merry-go-rounds,
and all other kinds and places of public amusement; persons giving or
conducting public concerts, lectures, theatricals, and other exhibitions,
musical performances, entertainments and amusements, for which an admission fee
is charged, in any building other than the City Hall or a duly licensed theater
or opera house and not given solely for the benefit of some literary,
scientific, religious or charitable organization of the city.
('71 Code, § 4-1-11)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.03 GRANTING OF LICENSES; CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE.
   (A)   In all cases where it is not otherwise expressly provided, the Mayor
shall hear and grant all applications for licenses upon the terms specified in
any of the provisions of this code; and all licenses shall be issued to such
person or persons as shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this
code, and as the Mayor, in his discretion, shall deem suitable and proper
persons to be licensed. The Mayor may, in his discretion, refuse to grant any
application for a license until the same shall have been ordered by the City
Council, to whom he shall refer such application at the next regular meeting of
the Council.
('71 Code, § 4-1-1)
   (B)   No license shall be granted to any person who is not, at the time
application for license is made, a person of good moral character. Applicants
shall provide proof of identity for them and all employees, as well as proof of
Illinois tax identification number. All licenses shall be subject to all
provisions of this code in relation to such licenses that may be in force at
the time of issuing the same or that may be passed subsequently; and if any
person receiving a license shall violate any provision thereof in relation to
his license or sell any immoral or pernicious publication or conduct his
business in a disorderly or offensive manner, or in such manner as to violate
any provision of this code, his license may be revoked by the Council. No
person shall be permitted to act under one license at more than one place at a
time or at any other than the place named unless so expressly mentioned in the
license.
('71 Code, § 4-1-9) (Am. Ord. 3195, passed 1-11-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Each license authorized and required by any provision of this code and
granted by the Mayor or City Council, shall be issued by the City Clerk upon
the payment of the license fee or tax, and not otherwise. Each license shall be
signed by the Mayor, attested by the Clerk under the corporate seal, and no
person shall be deemed to be licensed in any case until the actual payment of
the license fee or tax, and the issuing of the license in due form, signed,
attested, sealed and countersigned as herein required. 
('71 Code, § 4-1-2)
§ 110.05 CLERK SHALL REGISTER LICENSES.
   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to register all licenses issued under
the provisions of this code, entering the name of the person licensed, the
place of business the date of the license, for what purpose granted, date of
expiration.
('71 Code, § 4-1-4)
§ 110.06 LICENSE SUBJECT TO ORDINANCES.
   All licenses shall be subject to all ordinances and regulations which may be
in force at the time of issuing thereof, and all ordinances which subsequently
may be passed by the City Council; and if any person so licensed shall violate
any of the provisions of any ordinance regulating or relating to the business
for which he is licensed, he shall be proceeded against for any fine or penalty
imposed thereby, and upon conviction the Mayor may, in his discretion, revoke
his license.
('71 Code, § 4-1-5)
§ 110.07 TERM OF LICENSE.
   All licenses shall be granted for a period , as indicated in subsection
110.12(A), but in no case extend beyond a year, or April 30 next after the
issuing of the same. A license year shall be defined as May 1 to April 30.
('71 Code, § 4-1-3) (Am. Ord. 3195, passed 1-11-99)
§ 110.08 REBATE OR REFUND.
   No rebate or refund will be made in any license of any kind whatever issued
by the city.
('71 Code, § 4-1-6)
§ 110.09 LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
   Every person to whom a license may be issued under any provision of this
code shall forthwith post and keep the same in a conspicuous place in his
office or place of business.
('71 Code, § 4-1-10)
§ 110.10 LIABILITY OF EMPLOYEES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall authorize any such itinerant merchant or
transient vendor of merchandise to sell any goods, wares or merchandise at
auction in the city without first having obtained an auctioneer's license for
such purpose.
('71 Code, § 4-1-13)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.11 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as applying to sales by
executors, administrators, constables, trustees or other persons selling by
virtue of their office or to the preventing of any farmer, gardener, fruit or
vine grower from selling his products, including meats from stock grown on his
farm, ( which shall include trees, shrubs and other such produce), on the
streets or from house to house in the city; provided that, in so doing, no such
farmer, gardener, fruit or vine grower shall be permitted to obstruct the
streets, alleys, or public places in the city as provided by ILCS Ch. 505, Act
70, § 1.
('71 Code, § 4-1-8) (Am. Ord. 3195, passed 1-11-99)
§ 110.12 FEE SCHEDULE PRORATED FEES.
   (A)   The fees for licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter
shall be as follows:
   Licensee                  Fee
Auctioneer, first class             $100 per year
Same                       10 per day
Hackman, for each vehicle used          50 per year or any part of a year
Scavenger     
Pawnbroker                    250 per annum
Keeper of public scales               250 per annum
Circus and menagerie or either with one ring only,   50 per day
more than one ring                  150 per day
Side show accompanying circus or menagerie    50 per day
Peddlers from non-profit and community-based organizations    0 per annum
authorized by the Mayor to peddle with a free license
“Street carnival”                  200 per week or portion thereof
“Air dome”                    100 per annum
Theater or opera house, where the price of admission exceeds
$.20 for the individual              100 per annum
All other kinds and places of public amusement permitted, but
for which no fee is specified           100 per annum
Cross-reference:
   Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants licensing fees, see §
116.06
   (B)   Carnivals.
      (1)   License to conduct an entertainment or show commonly known as a
carnival consisting of several shows, concessions, rides, games, and amusements
shall be $500 per week or portion of any week, excluding Sundays, the said
license to be issued on the presentation of a written application for license
which application shall list and describe all shows, concessions, rides, games
and amusements. Such listing and description shall be of sufficient nature to
enable the licensing authority to ascertain whether or not they are in
violation of any provision of this code or state law and said licensing
authority may refuse a license if said shows, concessions, rides, games or
amusements in any way violate the provisions of this code or the laws of the
state it is also provided that said license be issued to said applicant in
consideration that the applicant pay in addition to said fee the usual and
customary wages of three special police officers to be in attendance upon such
carnival during the hours of its operation, in charge of and under the
direction of the Police Department of the city.
      (2)   This license shall be signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk only
after the payment of the license fee and the additional compensation for the
special police; however, it is provided herein that when any such carnival is
conducted under the auspices and for the benefit of a chartered non-profit
organization or organizations in the city, the license fee then shall be $150
per week or any portion thereof, excluding Sundays, together with all the other
provisions hereinbefore set forth but no such organization shall be granted a
permit for more than one such carnival in any calendar year. It is further
provided that the number of carnivals showing in the city shall be limited to
one per calendar month, and no licenses shall be issued unless the application
therefor is accompanied by the written consent of the majority of the number of
residents on property abutting on the streets adjacent to the property on which
said carnival is proposed to be held, for a distance of 600 feet from each
corner of the property on which it is proposed to hold a carnival.
('71 Code, § 4-1-14) (Am. Ord. 2465, passed 9-24-84; Am. Ord. 2563, passed 3-
10-86; Am. Ord. 2886, passed 4-11-94)
   (C)   In all cases enumerated in this chapter where an annual license fee
only is specified, it shall be lawful to issue a license for the remainder of
the municipal year in which application for such license is made and to charge
for such license such proportion of the annual license fee as the remaining
portion of the municipal year bears to the entire year.
('71 Code, § 4-1-15)
(Am. Ord. 3195, passed 1-11-99; Am. Ord. 3328, passed 11-13-01)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Title
   
111.02   Definitions
Licensing Provisions
   
111.15   Compliance with requirements
   
111.16   License required
   
111.17   Application for license
   
111.18   Classification of licenses; fees and hours of sale
   
111.19   Issuance of license when certain requirements are met
   
111.20   Approval of applicant; revocation of license
   
111.21   Renewal or transfer of licenses
   
111.22   Separate license required for each location
   
111.23   Display of license
   
111.24   Entitlement of license restricted
   
111.25   Number of licenses permitted
   
111.26   Condition of license as permit
   
111.27   Limitation on number of video gaming terminals
   
111.28   Where license revoked for cause
   
111.29   Special licenses; restrictions
   
111.30   License F public event licenses; restrictions
Sale of Alcoholic Liquor Regulated
   
111.40   Location of retail place of business restricted
   
111.41   Sale of alcoholic liquor upon premises having access to other private
or public areas
   
111.42   Certain buildings prohibited from selling or furnishing alcoholic
liquor
   
111.43   View into interior of premises to remain clear; lights
   
111.44   Premises to be kept in sanitary condition
   
111.45   Conditions of employment
   
111.46   Sale of alcoholic liquor to certain persons; possession or
consumption; remaining on premises prohibited
   
111.47   Permitting sale in home or apartment
   
111.48   Restricting advertisement of premises
   
111.49   Unlawful use of premises prohibited
   
111.50   Gambling
   
111.51   Entertainment and playing music restricted
   
111.52   Extension of credit prohibited; exception
   
111.53   Curb service prohibited
   
111.54   Hours of operation
Administration and Enforcement
   
111.65   Duties of Police Department
   
111.66   Complaints by citizens
   
111.67   Right of entry for purposes of inspection
   
111.68   Emergency closing
   
111.69   Appeals from decision of local Liquor Control Commissioner
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known an entitled as the “Sale of Alcoholic Liquor
Within the City Regulations.”
('71 Code, § 4-17-1)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and include synthetic
ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. The four varieties of liquor as herein defined, namely:
Alcohol, spirits, wine and beer.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
   BOTTLED BEER. Beer which is bottled at the brewery and sold by the retailer
without ever having been removed from the original bottle in which it was so
acquired.
   BOWLING ALLEY. Every establishment or building, or part of an establishment
or building, as the case may be, wherein the game of bowling, played with
composition balls and ten wooden pins, is played.
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building, or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation
of its members and their guests and provided with  suitable and adequate
kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number
of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for
its members and their guests.
   DRAUGHT BEER. Beer that is acquired by the retailer in kegs and all other
beer excepting that included in the term BOTTLED BEER as defined in this
section.
   HOTEL. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers
and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 20 or more
rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or
more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping
accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same buildings in
connection therewith and such building or buildings, structure or structures
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity.
   LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER. The Mayor of the city, who is charged
with the administration within the jurisdiction of the city of the appropriate
provisions of Hose Bill No. 9, as amended, being an Act, entitled “An Act
Relating to Alcoholic Liquors,” passed January 30, 1934, and approved by the
Governor, and of this chapter, and to receive all license fees herein provided,
in accordance with the provisions of Section 2 of Article 4 of said Act and to
have such powers and to perform such other and further duties and functions as
are provided by law.
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead
or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed
and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to maintain and to convey
any alcoholic liquor.
   PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE. A store which is separate and apart from a tavern and
is used for the retail sale of original package or packages of alcoholic
liquors not to be consumed on the premises.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually
and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
   RETAILER. A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use
or consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE AT RETAIL. A sale in less than case lots to any person for any purpose
other than for resale.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration and includes and means all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance, in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   TAVERN. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where alcoholic liquors are sold at retail for
consumption on the premises.
   WINE. Any alcohol beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the additions of alcohol or spirits, as a be defined in this
section.
(‘71 Code, § 4-17-2) (Ord. 1958, passed 4-11-77; Am. Ord. 4168, passed 2-12-24)
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 111.15 COMPLIANCE WITH REQUIREMENTS.
   Continued compliance with all requirements, whether contained in this or
other sections, which are a condition precedent to the issuance of a license is
required of all licensees during all the period that they may continue to hold
a license under this chapter.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(R))
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.16 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall sell, keep or offer for sale, at retail, or conduct
any place for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor within the corporate
limits of the city without first having a valid license so to do issued by the
local Liquor Control Commissioner of the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall require any further or additional
license in the case of any employee, servant or agent who is acting for and on
behalf of a principal who is duly licensed according to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Pursuant to the authority granted by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-42-10.1,
no person shall operate a business that permits the consumption of alcoholic
liquor on the business premises unless said business has a valid City of
Kewanee liquor license and is properly licensed under the Illinois Liquor
Control Act of 1934.
(‘71 Code, § 4-17-3) (Am. Ord. 3801, passed 7-13-15; Am. Ord. 3802, passed 7-
13-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.17 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Before any license shall be issued, an application for such license,
under oath, shall be filed with the local Liquor Control Commissioner or to
some other person or agency appointed by him, accompanied with the license fee,
as herein provided, stating:
      (1)   The name and residence of the applicant. If the applicant is a
copartnership, the application should state the names and addresses of all of
the partners, and of those entitled to share in the profits. If the applicant
is a corporation, the application should state the date and place of
incorporation and the officers and directors of the corporation, together with
the address of each director and such officers, and if a majority of the stock
is owned by one person, the name of such person.
      (2)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States.
      (3)   The place of birth of the applicant, or if a naturalized citizen,
the time and place of naturalization.
      (4)   Whether or not the applicant or applicants, or its officers, have
ever been convicted of a felony.
      (5)   The location and the description of the premises for which the
license is desired.
      (6)   The character of the business of applicant, the length of time in
business and in case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
      (7)   The length of time such corporation has been in business of that
character and the date charter was issued.
      (8)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
      (9)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license.
      (10)    A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in the state law or city provisions pertaining to the sale of
alcoholic liquor.
      (11)    That he will not violate any of the laws of the state, or of the
United States or the provisions of this code in the conduct of his place of
business.
      (12)    That he has not received or borrowed money or any thing else of
value and that he will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value
(other than merchandising credit) in the ordinary course of business for a
period not to exceed 90 days, directly or indirectly from any manufacturer,
importing distributor or distributor, representative of any such manufacturer,
importing distributor or distributor, nor be a party in any way directly or
indirectly to any violation by a manufacturer, distributor, or importing
distributor.
      (13)    That he will obey and comply with any order, rule or regulation
not inconsistent with the law promulgated or prescribed by the local Liquor
Control Commission.
      (14)    That he will permit any police officer, local Liquor Control
Commissioner, or any person appointed or authorized by him to inspect his
premises at any time.
      (15)    That he consents that his license may be revoked.
      (16)    The application must contain a statement signed by at least three
reputable citizens stating the length of time each of said persons has known
the applicant, or in the case of a corporation, the officers of such
corporation, that the person so signing the statement believes the applicant,
the members of the partnership, or the officers of the corporation, as the case
may be, to be of good moral character, and that to the best of such person's
knowledge and belief, such persons have never been convicted of a felony.
   (B)   In the event the premises proposed to be licensed are not owned by the
applicant, an agreement signed by the owner of such premises that such owner
will agree that if the license for said premises is revoked for cause, that the
Commissioner will not be either requested or required to issue a new license
for said premises for a period of one year from the date the same was revoked,
and a further agreement that such provisions shall be binding upon any
subsequent owner or lessee in the premises.
('71 Code, § 4-17-5) (Am. Ord. 2287, passed 6-28-82; Am. Ord. 3419, passed 11-
24-03)
§ 111.18 CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES AND HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   The classes of licenses and the fees and hours of sale for each class
shall be as follows:
 
License Class                                                              Hours of    Annual
                                                                           Operation   License Fee
                                                                           6:00 a.m.
                                                                           to 2:00
A — Combined (onsite service and retail/packaged)                        a.m. of the $1,767.90
                                                                           following
                                                                           day, seven
                                                                           days a week
                                                                           6:00 a.m.
                                                                           to 2:00
B — Onsite Service (Any establishment that serves during standard hours) a.m. of the $1,607.18
                                                                           following
                                                                           day, seven
                                                                           days a week
                                                                           6:00 a.m.
                                                                           to 12:00
                                                                           a.m.
                                                                           (midnight)
C — Retail/Packaged Sales (liquor store, grocery store, drug store,      Monday
convenience store)                                                         through     $1,461.08
                                                                           Saturday;
                                                                           12:00 p.m.
                                                                           (noon) to
                                                                           10:00 p.m.
                                                                           Sunday
                                                                           6:00 a.m.
                                                                           to 12:00
                                                                           a.m.
                                                                           (midnight)
                                                                           of Monday
                                                                           through
D — Limited Onsite Service (Any establishment that serves during limited Thursday;
hours)                                                                     6:00 a.m.   $1,328.50
                                                                           to 1:00
                                                                           a.m. Friday
                                                                           and
                                                                           Saturday;
                                                                           12:00 noon
                                                                           to 10:00
                                                                           p.m. Sunday
                                                                           12:00 noon  $35 per day
                                                                           to 2:00     for special
E — Special License/Catering Add- On                                     a.m. of the license,
                                                                           following   $35 per
                                                                           day, seven  add-on
                                                                           days a week designation
                                                                           6:00 a.m.
                                                                           to 2:00
                                                                           a.m. of the
                                                                           following
                                                                           day. If
                                                                           event is on
                                                                           city
                                                                           property,   $100 per
F – Public Event License                                                 an          day or $150
                                                                           authorizing per multi-
                                                                           resolution  day event
                                                                           adopted by
                                                                           City
                                                                           Council is
                                                                           required
                                                                           before
                                                                           license can
                                                                           be issued.
 
   (B)   All license fees shall be due and payable in advance, one- half on or
before each April 30, and one-half on or before October 31, of the license year
which begins May 1 of each year except Class E, F, and G license fees for which
the total license fee shall be paid in advance. Any payment made after the
foregoing specified dates will have added to the license fee a 10% penalty per
month.
   (C)   Video gaming terminal fee. In compliance with the Illinois Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/65, there is hereby established an annual fee for the
operation of a video gaming terminal of $25 per year per terminal. Said annual
fee is due in full for each video gaming terminal in the premises and payable
in the same time and manner as the liquor license fee.
   (D)   Catering service fee. Any entity holding an A, B, or D license may
also obtain a catering service designation on their license that permits the
licensee to provide alcohol for events offsite of its licensed premise. Alcohol
shall be served only by a BASSETT holder employed by the licensee. The licensee
must also obtain dram shop insurance for a specified location and day of event.
The event host must obtain a Class E Special License and provide a copy of the
dram shop insurance for the event. Before completing the application, it is the
host's responsibility to make sure the liquor license with catering designation
is active with the city. It is the licensee's responsibility to make sure the
event host has obtained a Class E Special License.
(‘71 Code, § 4-17-4) (Ord. 1958, passed 4-11-77; Am. Ord. 2287, passed 6-28-82;
Am. Ord. 2703, passed 5-80-89; Am. Ord. 2724, passed 4-27-90; Am. Ord. 2882,
passed 3-28-94; Am. Ord. 2892, passed 5-9-94; Am. Ord. 3018, passed 11-20-95;
Am. Ord. 3026, passed 12-4-95; Am. Ord. 3644, passed 6-28-10; Am. Ord. 3668,
passed 2-14-11; Am. Ord. 3706, passed 6-11-12; Am. Ord. 3726, passed 2-25-13;
Am. Ord. 3801, passed 7-13-15; Am. Ord. 4168, passed 2-12-24; Am. Ord. 4173,
passed 3-11-24)
§ 111.19 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE WHEN CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS ARE MET.
   Licenses will be granted only when the applicant meets the following general
requirements:
   (A)   If an individual, the applicant must be an American citizen; if a
copartnership, all members of the partnership must be American citizens;
applicants must be of good character and reputation and persons who have not
been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state and who have not been
convicted of being a keeper or are keeping a house of ill-fame and who have not
been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor as are opposed to
decency and morality.
   (B)   If a place of business is to be conducted by a manager or agent, said
manager or agent must possess the same qualifications as are required of the
licensee.
   (C)   No person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or
state law or of any provision of this code concerning the sale of alcoholic
liquor subsequent to the passage of this chapter or shall have forfeited his
bond to appear in court to answer charges of any such violations, shall be
entitled to a license.
   (D)   No person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued, shall be entitled to a license.
   (E)   An applicant for any liquor license who has not provided evidence of
the following: evidence that all employees who will be engaged in mixing,
preparing, or delivering alcoholic liquor to customers, guests, or patrons,
have successfully completed the Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Services Education
Training (BASSET) program conducted by an agency licensed by the Illinois
Department of Alcohol and Substance Abuse or training provided by the insurance
company providing coverage to the license holder. Each new employee hired by
the licensee after issuance of the license shall complete the BASSET program at
the next available training session or within 60 days of actually beginning
work, whichever comes first. A copy of the certificate of completion of such
BASSET program for each employee shall be filed with the City Clerk. Each
certification shall be renewed every three years from the date of issue.
Organizations that are issued a Class E Special Event license shall not be
required to have their servers trained as set forth above. Organizers of the
Class E Special Event shall meet with designated city officials to go over the
standard protocol for serving alcoholic beverages prior to the event.
(‘71 Code, § 4-17-7) (Am. Ord. 3884, passed 5-22-17; Am. Ord. 3994, passed 1-
13-20)
§ 111.20 APPROVAL OF APPLICANT; REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon application for a license hereunder being filed with the local
Liquor Control Commissioner, or other person or agency appointed by him,
together with the license fee, the application shall thereupon be investigated
and if approved, the local Liquor Commissioner may issue the license if, in his
opinion, the applicant is legally entitled to such license, and said license,
when issued, may be suspended or revoked by the local Liquor Control
Commissioner for any one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation of the laws of the state or any of the provisions of this
chapter, or any provisions of this code pertaining to the sale of alcoholic
liquor.
      (2)   The willful making of any false statement as to a material fact in
the application for a license.
      (3)   Should the licensee, his agents or servants conduct and manage the
premises where and upon which such liquor is sold under the provisions of this
chapter, in an immoral, disorderly or indecent manner, detrimental to the good
order and morals of the city, the local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have
power and authority to revoke the license of such licensee, and suspend all
privileges and powers of said licensee under the said license, and if the said
licensee desires to be heard by the local Liquor Commissioner upon the question
of the revocation of his license, the local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
set a time and place within ten days of the application of said licensee to be
heard, and within the city, where evidence may be presented for and against the
said licensee with reference to the revocation of the license, and the local
Liquor Control Commissioner may upon a hearing of such evidence determine the
question as to whether such licensee shall again be permitted to operate under
his license or whether said revocation thereof shall become and remain
permanent.
   (B)   Any appeal from the decision of the Liquor Commissioner shall be taken
as provided by state statutes.
('71 Code, § 4-17-24) (Am. Ord. 3419, passed 11-24-03)
§ 111.21 RENEWAL OR TRANSFER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   All licenses shall be renewed upon strict and full compliance with the
regulations of the city at the time of the application for such renewal, but no
new retail liquor license (other than a renewal or reissue of a license as
hereinafter provided to be issued to vendees or assignees of a retail liquor
business and the issuance of a Class E — Special license) shall, at any time
thereafter, be granted or issued until the number of licenses in force at the
time, shall be less than 50, whereupon such new license may be issued from time
to time to lawful applicants, upon such compliance by the applicant with the
regulations in force in the city at the time of the application for such
license, until the total number of retail liquor licenses in force shall be 50.
   (B)   The owner, or his legal representative, of a retail liquor license
shall have and be given the right to a renewal or reissue of such license at
the same or different place of business upon compliance with the regulations
now in force in the city, or which may hereafter be passed governing the
issuance of retail liquor licenses and in the event such owner or his legal
representative of a retail liquor business shall lawfully sell and assign said
retail liquor business, the vendee or assignee of the same shall, upon full
compliance with the regulations then in force in the city governing the
issuance of retail liquor licenses, and upon surrender of the original licenses
to the Liquor Commissioner by such owner, and a cancellation of the same, and
upon payment of the fee for such license, shall be entitled to a new license
and may, in turn, lawfully sell and assign said business upon and under the
same terms and conditions as the original owner thereof could do hereunder. The
privilege of the owner to lawfully sell and assign said retail liquor business,
and the vendee or assignee thereof to obtain a new license as provided in this
regulation, shall apply only so long as the license in each case shall have
been kept in force continually and uninterruptedly in the name of the licensee
or his successor in interest.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to clubs as defined in the liquor
regulations, and shall not apply to drug stores, nor hotels located on the
premises in the district where liquor licenses may be issued under provisions
of this code heretofore in force, provided such hotels shall have been in
operation one year and over prior to the application for license, and shall
contain and operate 20 rooms and over for transient guests.
('71 Code, § 4-17-6) (Ord. 1958, passed 4-11-77; Am. Ord. 2287, passed 6-28-82)
§ 111.22 SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH LOCATION.
   A separate license shall be required for and with respect to each location
or premises at which or upon which alcoholic liquors are sold or offered for
sale at retail. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable
either as to location or as to the licensee named therein. Only one license
shall be outstanding and in force at any one time for any one location.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(F))
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.23 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each licensee shall display conspicuously within the interior of the
licensed premises, the license under which he is operating. No such license
shall be displayed after the period for which it was issued has expired or
after such license has been revoked.
('71 Code, § 4-17-9(S))
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.24 ENTITLEMENT OF LICENSE RESTRICTED.
   No public law enforcing official or members of the City Council, or member
of the County Board of Supervisors shall be entitled to a license and no such
official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the
sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(A))
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.25 NUMBER OF LICENSES PERMITTED.
   No distributor may receive more than one retailer's license and then only
for the premises in which he conducts his business as such distributor.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(B)) (Am. Ord. 2277, passed 5-10-82)
§ 111.26 CONDITION OF LICENSE AS PERMIT.
   A license shall be a permit to sell alcoholic liquors only upon the premises
described in this chapter, and in the manner and kind permitted under the
license obtained.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(M))
§ 111.27 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS.
   There shall be no more than 150 video gaming terminals licensed for
operation in the city at any given time and no more terminals in an
establishment than are permitted at the time by the Illinois Video Gaming Act
or are licensed for operation by the city for that establishment.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be responsible for creating, maintaining, and
publishing a video gaming waitlist of establishments that have an interest in
obtaining video gaming licenses in the event that none are available. The order
of establishments on the waitlist shall be determined by the date upon which a
valid application for a video gaming terminal designation is submitted to the
city.
   (B)   Video gaming terminal licenses shall be revoked immediately should an
establishment not meet the requirements for video gaming terminal licensure and
after 90 consecutive days of licensure without the operation of a video gaming
terminal or terminals.
(Ord. 4168, passed 2-12-24)
§ 111.28 WHERE LICENSE REVOKED FOR CAUSE.
   When a license has been revoked for cause, no license shall thereafter be
issued for the sale of alcoholic liquor upon the said licensed premises or to
the person in whose name the revoked license was secured, for a period of one
year from and after the date of such revocation. In the event that the
applicant for the license is not the owner of the premises described in the
application, the owner of such premises must sign an agreement whereby such
owner agrees to the foregoing provisions.
('71 Code, § 4-17-25)
§ 111.29 SPECIAL LICENSES; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A special license shall be issued only to organized clubs, societies,
associations, fraternal organizations, duly constituted churches or benevolent
organizations organized not for pecuniary profits. A special license shall be
issued to an individual who will be hosting a catered event who wishes to have
alcoholic beverages served during said event.
   (B)   A special license may be issued pursuant to this chapter for one day;
two consecutive days; three consecutive days; or four consecutive days. The
license shall specify on its face the duration.
   (C)   No organization shall be issued more than four special licenses during
any fiscal year of the city (May 1 to April 30).
   (D)   A special license issued pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the
licensee to sell or dispense spirits, beer and wine at any banquet, picnic,
fair or similar event.
   (E)   The location or area for which a Class E — Special license shall be
issued shall be fenced in or otherwise enclosed so that the premises on which
spirits, beer, or wine is to be sold or dispensed shall be secured and such
area shall contain one entrance and one exit for the purposes of persons or
patrons entering and exiting said premises.
   (F)   Every person or patron entering the premises for which a Class E —
Special license has been issued, shall receive a handstamp or some other form
of identification after verification that they are of legal age and have the
right to enter and remain on the premises.
   (G)   No spirits, beer, or wine shall be taken or carried from the area or
location for which a Class E — Special license shall have been issued. The area
or location shall be defined as that area or location which is fenced or
enclosed so as to be secured in order that only persons who are of legal age
for the consumption of alcohol shall be in said enclosed or fenced area.
   (H)   Any violation of any provisions of this section or any of the
provisions of this chapter shall subject any Class E — Special license which
has been issued to immediate suspension or revocation by the Liquor Control
Commissioner of the city.
(‘71 Code, § 4-17-26) (Ord. 2287, passed 6-28-82; Am. Ord. 2882, passed 3-28-
94; Am. Ord. 3026, passed 12-4-95; Am. Ord. 3433, passed 6-14-04; Am. Ord.
4173, passed 3-11-24)    
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.30 LICENSE F PUBLIC EVENT LICENSES; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A Class F public event license shall only be issued upon compliance
with the provisions of this §
111.30 and State of Illinois regulations as administered by the Illinois Liquor
Control Commission.
   (B)   Class F public event license is for an event with community-wide or
regional interest. Class F license shall comply with provisions stipulated by
the Liquor Commissioner in the letter issuing the Class F license.
   (C)   An individual Class F license may be granted for a time period of one
to four days.
   (D)   A Class F licensee holding an event on city owned property, shall
comply with the following provisions:
      (1)   Issuance of a Class F license for an event to be held on city owned
property, and the subsequent opportunity for the sale of alcohol and open
container, public consumption of alcohol shall occur only on public alley,
street, sidewalk or open land as designated in a resolution adopted by the City
Council.
      (2)   Alcohol consumed in designated area shall be either sold in
establishments abutting said area with liquor licenses allowing sale at retail
by the drink, or at a location inside the designated public area by licensee.
      (3)   No private individuals shall bring their own alcohol to consume in
said area.
      (4)   Abutting liquor retailers desiring to participate in an event with
sales and open consumption on public property shall petition the Liquor
Commissioner for a Class F license in connection with said event. Applicant
shall also give copies of the petition to the Chief of Police and City Manager.
      (5)   In the event the Liquor Commissioner, City Manager and Chief of
Police recommend said petition as submitted, or amended, the petition shall be
submitted to the City Council for approval of the Class F license by adoption
of a resolution.
         (6)   No petition for a Class F shall be recommended or approved by
the City Council unless the following elements in divisions (a) through (h)
below are present. The City Council shall hereby have the authority to make any
and all stipulations they deem necessary to best ensure the use of public
property for sale and consumption of alcohol does not cause nuisance conditions
or compromise public safety. Such stipulations include but are not limited to:
hours of operation, types of entertainment permitted, if any, noise limits,
security staffing, or any other concern deemed appropriate to regulate,
restrict or prohibit.
         (a)   Licensees shall provide access control to the Class F license
area with temporary fencing. Licensees shall have personnel at each point of
entry to, or exit from, the Class F license area. Said personnel shall ensure
good order is maintained in the Class F license area and no one under the age
of 21 years is in the Class F license area.
         (b)   Licensees shall check identification of all persons entering the
Class F license area, barring entry to anyone less than 21 years of age.
         (c)   Licensees shall provide persons over 21 years of age with a
wristband to be worn and displayed at all times the person is within the Class
F license area.
         (d)   Trash receptacles shall be provided by licensees.
         (e)   Class F license area trash shall be emptied by the licensees
along with cleanup when the event concludes.
         (f)   Only plastic containers for alcohol in the Class F license area.
         (g)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall have the
authority to immediately close the Class F license area, clear the area of
users and suspend the privileges granted by the Class F license in the event of
any disturbance, breach of the peace or other activities which threaten the
safety of the users of the area or the public as a whole.
         (h)   Any violations of the terms of the Class F license, or any
violations of the laws of the state or provisions of the City Code pertaining
to the sale of alcoholic liquor during the event covered by the Class F license
shall attach to the primary liquor license of the retailer to whom the Class F
license was issued for the purpose of possible violation, suspension or
revocation hearings before the Liquor Commissioner.
   (E)   An applicant for the Class F Public Event license must also submit
with the application proof satisfactory to the city that the applicant will
provide dram shop liability insurance to the maximum limits and general
liability insurance covering the city or the landowner as an additional insured
for the land on which the event is conducted.
(Ord. 3801, passed 7-13-15; Am. Ord. 4173, passed 3-11-24)
SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR REGULATED
§ 111.40 LOCATION OF RETAIL PLACE OF BUSINESS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school other than an institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for
veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station, provided,
that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service,
regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where
sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on; nor to the
renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises
within 100 feet of any church or school where such church or school has been
established within 100 feet since the issuance of the original license.
   (B)   In determining whether any retail place of business is within 100 feet
of any institution, named heretofore in this chapter, such retail place of
business shall be considered to be 100 feet or more distant from any such
institution, if it is 100 feet or more in any direction by measurement in a
straight line from the nearest property boundary of such business to the
nearest boundary of any such institution, with the exception that in the case
of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured from the nearest
property boundary of the business to the nearest part of any building used for
religious worship services or religious educational programs, and not to
property boundaries of the building used for religious worship services or
religious educational programs.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a
church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales
are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquors.
('71 Code, § 4-17-9(C))
(Am. Ord. 2287, passed 6-28-82; Am. Ord. 3046, passed 4-8-96; Am. Ord. 3605,
passed 4-27-09; Am. Ord. 3609, passed 5-11-09)
§ 111.41 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR UPON PREMISES HAVING ACCESS TO OTHER PRIVATE
OR PUBLIC AREAS.
   Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at
retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from such premises to
any other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or
lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use
by the public. This provision shall not prevent any connection between such
premises and such other portion of the building or structure which is used only
by the licensee, his family and personal guests, subject also to the provisions
of §
111.46.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(D))
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.42 CERTAIN BUILDINGS PROHIBITED FROM SELLING OR FURNISHING ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR.
   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold or delivered in any building belonging to
or under the control of the state or of any political subdivision thereof. No
person shall furnish or suffer to be furnished any alcoholic liquors to any
prisoner, confined in jail, reformatory, prison or house of correction except
upon physician's prescription for medicinal purposes.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(E))
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.43 VIEW INTO INTERIOR OF PREMISES TO REMAIN CLEAR; LIGHTS.
   In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the
premises is licensed (other than a restaurant, hotel or club) no screen, blind,
curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon
the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises, which shall
prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the
street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other
obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or
about the interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk, and said
premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of the entire
interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where
liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted
during business hours by natural light or artificial white lights so that all
parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the
view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provision shall
be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by him wilfully suffered to be obscured
or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation
in the manner herein provided.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(G))
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.44 PREMISES TO BE KEPT IN SANITARY CONDITION.
   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions of this
code regulating the condition of premises used for the storage of food for sale
for human consumption.
('71 Code, § 4-17-19)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.45 CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.
   Only persons of good moral character and persons who have not been convicted
of a felony shall be employed by any licensee or be allowed to sell alcoholic
liquor under a license issued by this city.
('71 Code, § 4-17-19)
§ 111.46 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR TO CERTAIN PERSONS; POSSESSION OR
CONSUMPTION; REMAINING ON PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Sale.
      (1)   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor
to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person or to any
person known by him to be an habitual drunkard, spend thrift, insane, mentally
ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment; no licensee under this
chapter nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee
of such licensee shall permit or allow any person of either sex under 21 years
of age at any time and under any circumstances to frequent, loiter or remain on
the premises of such licensee; this provision shall not apply, however, to
restaurants having no bar therein nor that portion of a licensed premises where
there is conducted some lawful business other than the sale of alcoholic
liquor; if said premises are clearly segregated and set apart by partition or
otherwise, it shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to
frequent, loiter or remain in that portion of said licensed premises so set
apart and segregated for the sale of alcoholic liquor, with the exception that
an employee of the licensee 18 years of age or older can serve, mix or handle
alcoholic beverages of all kinds provided they are under the direction of a
work supervisor of 21 years of age or older.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(H))
      (2)   No licensee, under this chapter shall offer or permit any boy or
girl, a minor, to be in or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or
adjacent to or situated in the room or place in which his licensed premises is
located.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(I))
      (3)   No licensee shall permit any person in an intoxicated or drunken
condition to be or remain upon the licensed premises, or in any room or other
enclosure adjacent with or connected thereto, nor shall any loud or boisterous
talking or disorderly conduct be permitted upon the licensed premises. If any
physical altercation occurs on licensed premises, the licensee shall report
said altercation to the local authorities immediately following said
altercation, but in no instance later than one hour after said altercation
occurred.
   (B)   (1)   No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic
liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person
under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or
service. For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any
licensee, or his agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic
beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of
identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of 21 years.
      (2)   Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a
document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, or
subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal
Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the
armed forces. Proof that the defendant- licensee, or his employee or agent,
demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any
transaction, forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may be
considered in any criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.
      (3)   No person shall sell, give, or furnish to any person under the age
of 21 years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence
of the age and identity of such person or sell, give or furnish to any person
under the age of 21 years evidence of age and identification of any other
person.
      (4)   No person under the age of 21 years shall present or offer to any
licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence
of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not actually his own for the
purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring
or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverage, or have in his
possession any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of
age and identity.
      (5)   No person under the age of 21 years shall have any alcoholic
beverage in his possession on any street or highway or in any public place or
in any place open to the public; this division does not apply to possession by
a person under the age of 21 years making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage
in pursuance of the order of his parent or in pursuance of his employment.
('71 Code, § 7-1-30) (Ord. 1798, passed 10-22-73; Am. Ord. 2094, passed 12-10-
79; Am. Ord. 3707, passed 6-11-12)
   (C)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of
age is forbidden, except that the possession and dispensing or consumption by a
person under 21 years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under 21 years of
age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent or those
persons standing in loco parentis of such person under 21 years of age in the
privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this division.
('71 Code, § 7-1-49) (Ord. 2595, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. 3571, passed 5-12-
08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.47 PERMITTING SALE IN HOME OR APARTMENT.
   No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of permitting the
sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor in any dwelling house, flat or apartment
building.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(K))
§ 111.48 RESTRICTING ADVERTISEMENT OF PREMISES.
   No person licensed under this chapter shall use the word “saloon” or “bar”
in any sign or advertisement as a designation of the premises where it is
authorized to sell alcoholic liquors.
('71 Code, § 4-17-9(L))
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.49 UNLAWFUL USE OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   No person licensed under this chapter shall conduct, or permit or suffer any
other person to conduct a house of prostitution or harbor any immoral persons
in the place so licensed or in any adjoining room, building, or premises owned
or controlled by him, or connected therewith within the city, nor permit such
place of adjoining room, building or premises to be used for any unlawful,
disorderly, or immoral purposes.
('71 Code, § 4-17-15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.50 GAMBLING.
   No person licensed under this chapter, shall permit any gambling with dice,
dominoes, cards, pool, billiards, bowling, balls, or other articles properly
licensed video gaming terminals in currently licensed establishments as put
forth in the Illinois Video Gaming Act, and any rules promulgated by the
Illinois Gaming Board.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(N)) (Am. Ord. 3706, passed 6-11-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.51 ENTERTAINMENT AND PLAYING MUSIC RESTRICTED.
   No licensee under this chapter except those licensees holding a Class A-1,
A-2, C-1, D or F license shall give, produce, present, offer, permit, suffer or
allow upon the premises, where he is licensed to sell alcoholic liquors, or in
any room or enclosure adjacent with or connected thereto any theatrical
entertainment, music originating upon or adjacent to the licensed premises,
(reproduced music as by radio and phonograph excepted, however, they shall not
be played or operated after 12:00 p.m. of any day and the time fixed by this
chapter for the resumption of licensed business on the succeeding day. There
shall not be used in connection with such phonograph and radios, any loud
speakers, amplifiers or other mechanical device for the purpose of reproducing
sound from such instruments outside of the licensed premises), exhibition,
show, amusement, cabaret, acts of entertainment or performance whatsoever,
whether musical or otherwise, or any dance or skating, either by patron or
other persons. Licensees holding Class A-1 or C-1 license shall not (except as
to reproduce music by radio or phonograph) give, produce, present, offer,
permit, suffer or allow the above named forms of entertainment except on Friday
and Saturday during the hours within which the sale of alcoholic liquor is
permitted on their premises. Any licensee holding a Class A-2 license shall not
allow live entertainment except on Friday and Saturday during the hours within
which the sale of alcoholic liquor is permitted on their premises, except that
entertainment in the form of live music shall be permitted on Sunday through
Saturday during the hours within which the sale of alcoholic liquor is
permitted on their premises.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(O)) (Ord. 2279, passed 4-26-82; Am. Ord. 2411, passed 2-13-
84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.52 EXTENSION OF CREDIT PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person on
credit or on a pass book, or order on a store, or in exchange for any goods,
wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered; and if any
person shall extend credit for such purpose the debt thereby attempted to be
created shall not be recoverable by law; provided that nothing herein contained
shall be construed to prevent any club from permitting checks or statements for
alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of members or
guests in accordance with the by-laws of said club. Nothing herein contained
shall be construed to prevent any hotel from permitting checks or statements
for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at said hotel and charged to
the accounts of said guests.
('71 Code, § 4-17-8(Q))
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.53 CURB SERVICE PROHIBITED.
   No curb service for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be carried on in
connection with the premises for which a license has been granted, for the sale
of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises, either upon the public
street or private property contiguous to such premises so licensed.
('71 Code, § 4-17-14)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.54 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the city at times other than those specified for the class of license
for the particular establishment.
   (B)   Whenever Christmas and New Years fall on a Monday, the sale of
alcoholic liquor is permitted and allowed in establishments having a Class A,
A-1, B, B-1, C, C-1, license between the hours of 12:00 noon on December 24 and
December 31 and 2:00 a.m. the following day.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to keep open for any purpose whatsoever any
premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours
within which the sale of said liquor is prohibited; except in the case of
restaurants, hotels, bowling alleys and clubs which establishments may be kept
open during such hours but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by
the members or public during such hours.
('71 Code, § 4-17-11) (Ord. 2279, passed 4-26-82)
Penalty, see § 10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 111.65 DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the city and the officers
in charge thereof to make a weekly report in writing of all arrests and
complaints for the violation of this chapter, which report shall set forth the
name of the person alleged to have violated the provisions hereof, the person
signing the complaint, the officer making the arrest, the action taken on same,
the date of arrest, and the date of hearing, whether the said party was fined
or released, the amount of fine paid and whatever disposition was made, showing
the docket and the page on which said case was entered, which report shall be
made in triplicate, one copy to be kept as part of the records of the Police
Department and two copies to be filed with the City Clerk not later than 10:00
a.m. of the Monday next following said week.
('71 Code, § 4-17-23)
§ 111.66 COMPLAINTS BY CITIZENS.
   (A)   Any five residents of the city have a right to file a complaint with
the local Liquor Commissioner stating that any licensee subject to the
jurisdiction of the local Liquor Commissioner has either been or is violating
the provisions of this code, as amended or the laws of the state in regard to
the sale of alcoholic liquor or any rules or regulations issued pursuant to
this code and laws, or said complaint shall state that the conditions in the
locality where such licensee is operating are such that the location of said
business outside of the district defined in this chapter is no longer desirable
and against the wishes of the property owners, such complaint shall be in
writing in such form as prescribed by the local Liquor Commissioner and shall
be signed and sworn to by the party or parties complaining, which complaint
shall state the particular provisions, rules or regulations believed to be
violated, or it may request, that such licensee, if the location of his
business be outside of the district as set forth in this chapter and in the
district for which written consent is required before the issuance of a
license, show by making a new application with written consent from the owners
of property as set forth in this chapter, that the location of his business is
not contrary to the desire and wishes of two-thirds of the property owners.
Said complaint shall also state facts upon which the said complaint is based
and also reasons for the request made in said complaint.
   (B)   If the local Liquor Commissioner is satisfied that said complaint
substantially charges the violation of this chapter or the state liquor laws or
the rules and regulations issued pursuant to same or that the facts therein
show reasonable cause for belief that there have been violations as stated or
reasonable cause for requiring the filing of a new application and consents
from the residents in the vicinity of said location, the said local Liquor
Commissioner in case of the alleged violation of this chapter, the state liquor
laws and the rules and regulations issued pursuant to same, shall set the
matter for hearing and serve notice on the licensee of the time and place of
such hearing and of the particular charges in the complaint; however, in case
of the request that the licensee be required to file a new application and
consents from the residents the said local Liquor Commissioner if he is
satisfied that the facts in said request and complaint justify the requiring of
a new application and consents he will cause notice to be given to said
licensee to forthwith file such new application and consents under the penalty
of revocation of his license for failure to do so. However, no licensee shall
be required to file more than one application with consent during any one year.
('71 Code, § 4-17-22)
§ 111.67 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSES OF INSPECTION.
   (A)   Any police officer or other official of the city shall at all times
have free and unrestricted access to the licensed premises for the purpose of
inspecting same, and it shall not be necessary for such officer to procure any
legal process before entering in and upon said premises.
   (B)   The Health Officer of the city is empowered, and it is his duty to
inspect and examine all of the premises licensed hereunder and determine from
such examination the sanitary conditions surrounding the premises. Every person
licensed hereunder shall at all times permit such inspection and assist said
officer according to the officer's direction; said officer may require samples
of any material or liquid in premises, and upon request every person licensed
hereunder shall furnish such sample, and such officer may analyze any sample.
   (C)   Before any license is issued, each applicant must agree to the
provisions of this Section.
('71 Code, § 4-17-13)
§ 111.68 EMERGENCY CLOSING.
   In all cases, where, in the opinion of the Mayor, the public peace is likely
to be endangered by the keeping open of premises licensed hereunder, it shall
be lawful for the Mayor to issue his proclamation, under seal of the city,
commanding and enjoining all persons licensed by the city to sell any of said
liquors, and their servants and agents, to close their shops and places of
business for such time as the Mayor shall deem necessary; and neither to sell,
give away, or suffer to be drawn, any of said liquors in or about their
premises during the time mentioned in said proclamation.
('71 Code, § 4-17-21)
§ 111.69 APPEALS FROM DECISION OF LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-9, all appeals from a decision by the
local Liquor Control Commissioner which are appealed to the State Liquor
Control Commission by the liquor licensee shall be submitted to the State
Liquor Control Commission on the record.
('71 Code, § 4-17-27) (Ord. 2605, passed 2-23-87)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Billiards, Poolrooms and Bowling Alleys
   
112.01   Licensed required; fees
   
112.02   Hours of operation
   
112.03   Clear vision into premises
   
112.04   (Reserved)
   
112.05   (Reserved)
   
112.06   Card playing prohibited
Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
   
112.20   Definition
   
112.21   Application of provisions
   
112.22   License application
   
112.23   License sticker required
Public Entertainment and Events
   
112.35   License required
   
112.36   Application; fee
   
112.37   License subject to provisions; discretion of Mayor
   
112.38   Unlawful or immoral activities prohibited
   
112.39   Parade routes designated
   
112.40   Amusement bills; destruction
   
112.41   Seats in aisles; obstruction of passengers
   
112.42   Employment of special police
Athletic and Theatrical Exhibitions
   
112.55   License required
   
112.56   License fee
   
112.57   Disturbance of peace prohibited; supervision
   
112.58   No license to be granted if exhibition deemed a nuisance
   
112.59   Hours of operation
Motion Picture Theaters
   
112.70   License required
   
112.71   Application for license
   
112.72   License fee
   
112.73   Inspection of premises
   
112.74   Revocation of license
   
112.75   Seats in aisles; loitering
Dance Halls
   
112.85   Definition
   
112.86   License required
   
112.87   Application for license; approval by Mayor
   
112.88   Classes of permits; fees
   
112.89   Supervision by police
BILLIARDS, POOLROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS
§ 112.01 LICENSED REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to keep in any place
of public resort any billiard or pool table or tables, or bowling alleys or
shooting gallery or skating rink, with a view of gain, either directly or
indirectly, or where money is charged for the use of or for playing on the
same, without first having obtained a license for that purpose.
   (B)   The following license fees shall be charged:
   Licensee             Fee
   Billiard or pool table         $25 per annum
      Each additional table        25 per annum
   Bowling alley              20 per annum for each alley
   Shooting gallery          50 per annum
   Skating rink             100 per annum
('71 Code, § 4-4-1) (Am. Ord. 2886, passed 4-11-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.02 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Such place of business located within the city shall be permitted to operate
seven days in each week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
(‘71 Code, § 4-4-5) (Ord. 3983, passed 11-12-19)
§ 112.03 CLEAR VISION INTO PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom license may be granted to
operate or keep any billiard or pool room, bowling alley, shooting gallery or
skating rink to frost, paint, stain or color the glass in any window or door in
any room or place where any such business may be carried on or to board up any
such window to a greater height than three feet above the floor.
(‘71 Code, § 4-4-3) (Ord. 3985, passed 11-12-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Regulations for accessory signs, see §
153.19(B)(2)
§ 112.04 (RESERVED).
§ 112.05 (RESERVED).
§ 112.06 CARD PLAYING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor or keeper of any billiard or pool
room, bowling alley, shooting gallery, skating rink or other similar place or
places of public resort in the city, to keep or maintain any table or tables
for the purpose of card playing in any such place or to permit persons to
assemble in any such place for the purpose of card playing or to permit people
who are assembled in any such place to play cards therein or in any room or
other place connected therewith.
(‘71 Code, § 4-4-4) (Ord. 3985, passed 11-12-19)
Penalty, see § 10.99
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 112.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any amusement device which requires the
insertion of a coin for its operation and shall include all types of ball
machines and music boxes or record players, commonly known as jukeboxes, which
are so operated by the insertion of a coin.
('71 Code, § 4-15-2)
§ 112.21 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   This subchapter shall apply to all persons owning or keeping for use by the
public any coin- operated amusement device.
('71 Code, § 4-15-1)
§ 112.22 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a license to own a coin-operated amusement device
shall be made to the office of the City Clerk upon a form to be provided by
such office, and shall be accompanied by a fee of $25 to be paid in advance at
the time of issuance of the license. Upon receipt of such application in proper
form, the Clerk shall provide, at the expense of the city, a proper license
sticker, which shall be attached to the amusement device. the removal of any
such sticker except by proper authority, shall be a violation of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The Clerk shall have authority to issue upon written application,
amusement licenses which shall be effective for one fiscal year. All such
licenses shall be dated May 1 of the year for which such licenses are issued.
('71 Code, § 4-15-4) (Am. Ord. 2886, passed 4-11-94)
§ 112.23 LICENSE STICKER REQUIRED.
   No person shall own or keep a coin-operated amusement device for use by the
public in the city without first having secured and attached to such device a
proper license sticker, as provided in §
112.22.
('71 Code, § 4-15-3)
Penalty, see § 10.99
PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT AND EVENTS
§ 112.35 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit in the city any show,
legerdemain, menagerie, figures or other things, or to perform any feats, such
as circus riding, or exhibitions or anything of the like nature, or exhibit any
panoramas, curiosities or other things, or to give theatrical or musical
performances, or musical concerts or entertainments, or to perform any tricks
such as are played by persons generally known by the name of magicians, rope
and wire dancers or to perform any sleight of hand with cards, cups, balls or
other things, where money is charged for admission to hear, see or operate the
same, or where money directly or indirectly is charged or solicited for
hearing, operating or seeing any such performance or exhibitions, or to parade
in the streets in connection with any circus, menagerie, wild west show or
other exhibition showing in tents or in the open air, without first having
obtained a license for that purpose, as hereinafter provided. However, no
license fee shall be paid when the entire net proceeds of any public
entertainment shall be for the benefit of any religious, fraternal, charitable
or educational institution located in the city.
('71 Code, § 4-2-1)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.36 APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every proprietor or lessee of any theater,
hall or other place where public entertainments are given, before he permits
any person or persons to use the same for the purpose of giving any
entertainment therein for gain, to obtain from the Mayor the license herein
required, either in his own name or in the name of the person proposing to give
such entertainment.
   (B)   A license fee of $25 per day shall be charged for shows or places of
amusement under canvas and not in a building.
('71 Code, § 4-2-2) (Am. Ord. 2886, passed 4-11-94)
§ 112.37 LICENSE SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS; DISCRETION OF MAYOR.
   Every license granted under the provisions hereof shall at all times be
subject to the provisions of this code existing when the same shall be issued,
or which shall thereafter be passed, so far as the same shall apply. And the
Mayor may, in his discretion, refuse to grant any such license when he has
reasonable cause to believe that the giving of any such proposed exhibition
would be a violation of any provisions of this code, or he may revoke the same
after having granted, for the same reasons.
('71 Code, § 4-2-3)
§ 112.38 UNLAWFUL OR IMMORAL ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   All licenses for entertainments shall contain a provision that no gaming,
raffle, lottery or chance gift, distribution of money or articles of value
shall be connected therewith or allowed by the person obtaining such license,
or in anyway permitted or held out as an inducement to visitors. Also, a
provision that no indecent, immoral, lewd or scandalous play or other
representation shall be given under such license. It shall be the duty of the
Mayor to revoke the license of any such person upon conviction for violation of
this section.
('71 Code, § 4-2-3)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.39 PARADE ROUTES DESIGNATED.
   Whenever it is desired to have a parade such as is described in §
112.35 of this chapter, the license shall be so drawn as to include the same,
and shall specify the streets and avenues in and along which any such parade
may be made, and such parade shall not be made in or among any other streets or
avenues than those named in such license.
('71 Code, § 4-2-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.40 AMUSEMENT BILLS; DESTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, tear, mutilate, cover over
or otherwise deface or injure any bill or poster, posted in such place as may
be permitted, descriptive of any performance or entertainment given in any
licensed theater or hall, or in pursuance of a license given by the city.
('71 Code, § 4-2-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.41 SEATS IN AISLES; OBSTRUCTION OF PASSENGERS.
   No chairs, stools or seats of any description shall be placed or permitted
to remain in or across the lobby, aisles or passageways in any theater, shall
or other public building when occupied by the public, nor shall people be
allowed to stand therein. It shall be the duty of the police force to see that
the foregoing provisions are strictly observed, and in case of any violations
thereof forthwith to proceed to clear any obstructed aisle, passageway or
lobby, and to arrest the offender or offenders.
('71 Code, § 4-2-7)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.42 EMPLOYMENT OF SPECIAL POLICE.
   It shall be the duty of every owner or lessee of every licensed theater,
hall or other building to keep and preserve pod order in and about his
premises, and to that end he shall hire and keep at his own expense a
sufficient number of special police officers.
('71 Code, § 4-2-8)
Cross-reference:
   Special police officers, see § 34.07
ATHLETIC AND THEATRICAL EXHIBITIONS
§ 112.55 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person wishing to operate or conduct traveling athletic exhibitions,
contests, and theatrical entertainment in connection therewith, not under
canvas, shall be required to obtain a license for the conduct of same. The
license for such entertainment and exhibition shall be granted by the Mayor and
issued by the City Clerk as in the case of other licenses granted by the city.
('71 Code, § 4-14-1)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.56 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee to be paid for the conducting of such athletic exhibitions,
contests and theatrical entertainment in connection therewith, shall be $60 per
week, payable in advance.
('71 Code, § 4-14-2)
§ 112.57 DISTURBANCE OF PEACE PROHIBITED; SUPERVISION.
   Any entertainment given under license granted by virtue of this chapter
shall be properly policed and there shall be no disturbance to any of the
residents in the immediate neighborhood where licensee is operating.
('71 Code, § 4-14-3)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.58 NO LICENSE TO BE GRANTED IF EXHIBITION DEEMED A NUISANCE.
   If any such traveling exhibition, contests or theatrical entertainment shall
be deemed a nuisance in the judgment of the licensing authority, no license
shall be granted for the operation of same under this chapter.
('71 Code, § 4-14-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.59 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Such entertainment and exhibition shall not be operated after 12:00 midnight
on week days and shall remain closed on Sunday.
('71 Code, § 4-14-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
§ 112.70 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a motion picture theater within the city
unless the license herein provided for shall first be issued and shall remain
in full force and effect, and unless the provisions of this chapter and of all
other applicable provisions of this code be adhered to.
('71 Code, § 4-6-1)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.71 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Before a license shall issue under this subchapter, the owner or manager of
the motion picture theater shall pay to the City Clerk the license fee herein
provided and shall file a written application for the license in question. Such
application shall describe the premises intended to be used, shall state the
names and addresses of the owner of the premises and of the proprietor of the
business, shall have sufficient evidence in connection with such application to
establish that said theater and its equipment and method of operation do and
will conform with all building, zoning, electrical, health and other applicable
provisions of this code and laws of the state; and shall contain such other
information as may be necessary or advisable in the form of application which
shall available in the office of the Clerk.
('71 Code, § 4-6-2)
§ 112.72 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee to be paid to the city at the time of the filing of
such application shall be a sum equal to $.35 per seat for each theater to be
licensed. All annual licenses shall expire on April 30 following the issuance
thereof. The license fee may be prorated only in the following manner: If the
application is filed before November 1, the applicant may pay one-half of the
fee with the application, and the remaining one-half will be due on November 1.
('71 Code, § 4-6-3) (Ord. 1311, passed 9-22-52; Am. Ord. 2886, passed 4-11-94)
§ 112.73 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to inspect, or cause to be
inspected, the place of business described in such application prior to the
issuance of the license therein applied for, and also to make such inspections,
or cause them to be made, from time to time; to insure that said place of
business is, and shall continue to be, suitable and safe for its use as a
motion picture theater, and that all provisions of this code and laws of the
state are being adhered to.
('71 Code, § 4-6-4)
§ 112.74 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have the right to revoke any
license issued under this subchapter in the event that any theater violates
this or any other provision of this code or any of the laws of the state;
provided, that such violation is continued or repeated after written notice
thereof has been served by the city upon the manager or other person in charge
of the theater in question.
('71 Code, § 4-6-6)
§ 112.75 SEATS IN AISLES; LOITERING.
   No persons, other than ushers in the employ of the theater shall be allowed
to remain standing, and no chairs or seats shall be permitted to remain within
any of the aisles, passageways or in the lobby of the theater; no loitering
shall be permitted in the lobby, outer entrance, or on the sidewalk adjacent to
the entrance at the theater.
('71 Code, § 4-6-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
DANCE HALLS
§ 112.85 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance or gathering where dancing is engaged in wholly or
in part as the evening's amusement and which is open to the public generally,
whether the same is free to the public or whether an admission fee is said or
tickets sold for the same.
('71 Code, § 4-5-1)
§ 112.86 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, either as owner, lessee, agent, manager or proprietor, shall
conduct any public dance in the city, use or rent any hall or room in the city
for a public dance, without first having obtained a permit from the Mayor.
('71 Code, § 4-5-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.87 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; APPROVAL BY MAYOR.
   Application for such permit shall be made to the City Clerk in writing, and
before the issuance of such permit, the same shall be presented to the Mayor
for his approval. Such permit shall be issued only upon the approval of said
Mayor and to persons of good moral character only; such application shall state
the time and the location of the hall or room where the dance is to be held,
and shall be signed by the person proposing to conduct the same.
('71 Code, § 4-5-3)
§ 112.88 CLASSES OF PERMITS; FEES.
   (A)   Permits to be issued under this subchapter shall be of two kinds: An
annual permit, which annual permit shall be issued for the period from May 1 to
April 30 of the following year inclusive; and a daily permit, which daily
permit shall include and be operative only for the day for which it is issued.
   (B)   The fee for such permits shall be $25 for the daily permit and $200
for the annual permit. The fees for the permit shall be paid to the City Clerk
before any such permit shall be issued, and shall be good only for the place of
location for which it is issued.
   (C)   Such permit shall not be transferable either in regard to location or
in regard to the person to whom it is issued. Any permit issued hereunder shall
be revocable for good cause shown. No such public dance shall be conducted on
Sundays. Public dances held on week days shall be conducted no later than 12:00
midnight.
('71 Code, § 4-5-5) (Am. Ord. 2886, passed 4-11-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.89 SUPERVISION BY POLICE.
   Any such hall, room or other place in the city where a public dance is
conducted shall be under the supervision of the police of the city. A police
officer shall be in attendance at such dances and said officer shall have the
power to arrest or eject any person guilty of loud, boisterous or disorderly
conduct and to regulate the style of dancing. The party or parties conducting
said dance shall reimburse the city for the expense of its having such officer
in attendance at such public dance.
('71 Code, § 4-5-4)
CHAPTER 113: CIGARETTE VENDORS
Section
   
113.01   Sales without license prohibited
   
113.02   Application for license; fee
   
113.03   Maintaining automatic vending machine without license prohibited
   
113.04   Inspection and analysis of machines and tobacco and alternative
nicotine products
   
113.05   Sale of deleterious drugs prohibited
   
113.06   Sale to underage persons prohibited
§ 113.01 SALES WITHOUT LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale any cigars, cigarettes, tobacco,
cigarette papers or wrappers, or alternative nicotine product as defined in
Illinois Public Act 098-0350, without first procuring the license herein
provided, and said license shall be renewed annually. License fees shall not be
prorated because the current fiscal year has partially expired.
('71 Code, § 4-13-5) (Am. Ord. 3789, passed 2-9-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE.
   Any person desiring to sell, have for sale or offer for sale any cigars,
cigarettes, tobacco, cigarette papers or wrappers, or alternative nicotine
product, shall make application for a license for that purpose to the City
Clerk in which application shall be set forth the full name of the applicant,
the location at which such sales are proposed to be made, and whether packaged
cigarettes only or other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products are
to be kept for sale. Such application shall be accompanied by evidence that the
applicant, if an individual, or the person in charge of the business, if a firm
or corporation, is a person of good character and reputation, and if the Clerk
shall be satisfied that such person is of good character and reputation and is
a suitable person to be entrusted with the sale of cigars, cigarettes and
tobacco, or alternative nicotine products, he shall cause a license fee of $50
per annum for each location at which said applicant expects to do business.
('71 Code, § 4-13-1) (Am. Ord. 2886, passed 4-11-94; Am. Ord. 3789, passed 2-9-
15)
§ 113.03 MAINTAINING AUTOMATIC VENDING MACHINE WITHOUT LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or permit to operate
or remain on premises in his possession any automatic vending machine for the
sale of cigarettes or tobacco or alternative nicotine product of any kind
without first procuring the license herein provided, irrespective of the
ownership of such machine or the disposition of the money taken therefrom.
('71 Code, § 4-13-2) (Am. Ord. 3789, passed 2-9-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.04 INSPECTION AND ANALYSIS OF MACHINES AND TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, and he is hereby
authorized and empowered, to inspect and examine all places where cigars,
cigarettes and tobacco, or alternative nicotine product, are licensed to be
sold for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of the state and of the
city in relation to the same are being complied with at such place, and he is
further authorized and empowered from time to time to inspect and examine all
cigars, cigarettes and tobacco or alternative nicotine product being sold or
offered for sale for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of the state
and of the city are being complied with, and it shall be his further duty to
cause all such laws and provisions of this code to be enforced.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of all persons or corporations licensed to sell
cigars, cigarettes or tobacco or alternative nicotine product upon the demand
of the Chief of Police to furnish him for his inspection samples of all cigars,
cigarettes and tobacco or alternative nicotine product, sold or offered for
sale, which samples of cigars, cigarettes and tobacco or alternative nicotine
product shall be analyzed by or under the direction of said Chief of Police and
a record of such analysis shall be made and kept in his office for the
inspection of the public.
('71 Code, § 4-13-3) (Am. Ord. 3789, passed 2-9-15)
§ 113.05 SALE OF DELETERIOUS DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall offer for sale or expose for sale to any person
directly or indirectly any cigar, cigarette paper, tobacco, vape, electronic
cigarette, or any other delivery system containing: opium, morphine,
jimsonweed, belladonna, strychnia, marijuana, cocaine or any other deleterious
or poisonous drug or drugs.
   (B)   In addition to the prohibitions outlined in division (A), no person or
business shall sell, offer for sale, or distribute any product intended for
human consumption-whether by inhalation, ingestion, or sublingual
administration-that contains any amount of:
      (1)   Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC);
      (2)   Hemp-derived intoxicating cannabinoids. including but not limited
to Delta-8, Delta-10, or any other isomer of THC; unless such product is sold
by a state-licensed dispensary operating in accordance with the Illinois
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
   (C)    This prohibition shall not apply to:
      (1)   Industrial hemp products used in textiles, paper, rope, or similar
non-consumable goods;
      (2)   Sales conducted by properly licensed cannabis dispensaries as
defined by Illinois state law.
   (D)   Any person or entity found in violation of this section shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and $500 for each subsequent
offense. Each day that a prohibited product is offered for sale shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to a separate fine. In
addition to monetary penalties, violations may result in the suspension or
revocation of the tobacco license in accordance with enforcement provisions
under applicable ordinances.
(‘71 Code, § 4-13-4) (Am. Ord. 3789, passed 2-9-15; Am. Ord. 4183, passed 5-13-
24; Am. Ord. 4236, passed 5-13-25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.06 SALE TO UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell or furnish any cigars, cigarettes or tobacco,
electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product in any form to any minor
under the age of 21 years.
(‘71 Code, § 4-13-6) (Am. Ord. 3789, passed 2-9-15; Am. Ord. 3965, passed 5-28-
19) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 114: JUNK DEALERS; JUNKYARDS
Section
Junk Dealers
   
114.01   Definition
   
114.02   License required
   
114.03   Issuance of license; bond
   
114.04   License fee
   
114.05   Vehicles to be numbered; display of license
   
114.06   Purchase from minors prohibited
   
114.07   Obstruction of streets prohibited
   
114.08   Enforcement by police officers
Junkyards
   
114.20   Definition
   
114.21   License required
   
114.22   License fee; bond
   
114.23   Purchases from minors prohibited
   
114.24   Screening of junkyards
   
114.25   Violation a nuisance
JUNK DEALERS
§ 114.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. Old iron, rags, hides, furs, old furniture, rubber, wool, used cars,
used car parts, old metals, bottles and the like.
('71 Code, § 4-11-1)
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of buying, selling or trading junk
within the city without first having obtained a license from the city.
('71 Code, § 4-11-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.03 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; BOND.
   A license shall be granted to any person of good moral character upon
written application being made in compliance with the terms of this subchapter
and on payment of the license fee required herein. A bond in the sum of $500
with good and sufficient surety thereto, shall accompany each application for
license, which bond shall be conditioned on the licensee's compliance with this
subchapter, the provisions of this code and the laws of the state.
('71 Code, § 4-11-3)
§ 114.04 LICENSE FEE.
   Each licensee shall pay a license fee as follows: $15 per month or any part
thereof for each vehicle used in buying, selling or trading junk. A licensee
requesting a yearly license shall pay a license fee of $75 a year for each
vehicle used in buying, selling or trading junk. The license year shall begin
on May 1 of each year.
('71 Code, § 4-11-4) (Am. Ord. 2886, passed 4-11-94)
§ 114.05 VEHICLES TO BE NUMBERED; DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Licensees, under this subchapter, upon receiving a license shall be assigned
a number for each vehicle to be used in said business and said licensee shall
cause to appear in a conspicuous place on such vehicle said number in figures
at least three inches high and one and one-half inches wide, and said licensee
or his duly authorized agent operating said vehicle shall have in his
possession at all times while engaged in the business of buying, selling or
trading junk, the license issued to the licensee or a certified copy thereof,
showing his right to engage in such business and that a number as been duly
assigned to the vehicle used.
('71 Code, § 4-11-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.06 PURCHASE FROM MINORS PROHIBITED.
   A licensee under this subchapter shall not purchase or receive from minors
any articles whatsoever without the written consent of their parent or
guardian.
('71 Code, § 4-11-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.07 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS PROHIBITED.
   No person licensed under this subchapter shall permanently or temporarily or
habitually obstruct or encumber any street, alley, or sidewalk within the city
with junk, vehicles or any other thing incident to such business, nor use any
street, alley, or sidewalk for storage or for any greater length of time than
is reasonably necessary for loading or unloading.
('71 Code, § 4-11-7)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.08 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE OFFICERS.
   It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to ascertain whether
or not any person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or trading junk
has been duly licensed by the city.
('71 Code, § 4-11-8)
JUNKYARDS
§ 114.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNKYARD. A plot of ground, which may be covered with buildings, partially
covered with buildings or without any buildings, which plot is used by anyone
for buying, selling, storing, exchanging, baling, packing, disassembling,
handling, wrecking or trading in junk, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or
parts thereof, dismantled or wrecked farm machinery or parts thereof,
industrial scrap, scrap iron, rags, and any secondhand article whatsoever
including but not limited to the foregoing enumerated items, except a plot of
ground used for any of the above purposes when dealing with junk, rags and
secondhand articles which has a zoning classification of R-1 to R-6 or B-1 to
B-3 as set forth in §§
155.060 through
155.068 and which plot of ground is used in compliance with those provisions.
('71 Code, § 4-12-1) (Ord. 2056, passed 6-11-79)
§ 114.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or maintain a junkyard within the city limits
without first having obtained a license from the city.
('71 Code, § 4-12-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.22 LICENSE FEE; BOND.
   (A)   A license shall be granted to any person of good moral character on
written application being made showing a compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter and §
155.170, M-1 Manufacturing District, Limited, and on payment of a license fee
of $50 per year. A bond in the sum of $500 with two sureties conditioned on
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, shall accompany the
application and license fee.
   (B)   A corporation wishing to engage in such business shall be granted a
license on an application made by its employee, who is to act as manager of
said yard, in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and §
155.170.
('71 Code, § 4-12-3) (Am. Ord. 2056, passed 6-11-79)
§ 114.23 PURCHASES FROM MINORS PROHIBITED.
   A licensee under this subchapter shall not purchase or receive from minors
any article whatsoever without the written consent of their parents or
guardian.
('71 Code, § 4-12-4) (Am. Ord. 2056, passed 6-11-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.24 SCREENING OF JUNKYARDS.
   (A)   Any junkyard in existence on the effective date of this section, or
hereafter established, which is within 1,000 feet of any street or roadway
which is used for travel within the city limits shall be screened so that none
of the items in the junkyard are visible from said street or roadway.
   (B)   The city may, in addition to any other remedies it might have,
initiate an action in Circuit Court to prevent the operation or maintenance of
a junkyard which is not in compliance with this section, or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation of the section. Should the city correct or abate
such a violation, the cost for said correction will become a lien upon the
property where such violation exists.
('71 Code, § 4-12-6) (Ord. 2504, passed 3-11-85)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.25 VIOLATION A NUISANCE.
   A junkyard established or operated in the city contrary to the terms of this
subchapter and § 155.010, M-1 Manufacturing District, Limited is hereby
declared a nuisance.
('71 Code, § 4-12-5) (Am. Ord. 2056, passed 6-11-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 115: LODGING HOUSES; HOTELS
Section
   
115.01   Definition
Licensing
   
115.15   License required
   
115.16   Application for license
   
115.17   Nontransference of license
   
115.18   Display of license
   
115.19   Cancellation of license
Standard of Operation
   
115.30   Registration in hotel
   
115.31   Numbering rooms
   
115.32   Use of hotel for immoral purposes prohibited
   
115.33   Liability of manager
Administration and Enforcement
   
115.45   Duty of Health Department
   
115.46   Inspection by city officers
§ 115.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOUSE. Hotels, rooming and lodging houses.
('71 Code, § 4-9-1)
LICENSING
§ 115.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct, keep, manage, operate or cause to be conducted,
kept, managed or operated either as owner, lessor, lessee, agent or attorney,
any hotel, rooming house, or lodging house within the corporate limits of the
city without having first obtained a license from the city so to do. All said
licenses shall be issued annually and shall expire April 30 of each year. The
fee for each license shall be $1 and no license shall be issued for less
amount.
('71 Code, § 4-9-1)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.16 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   No license shall be issued to any person to conduct a hotel, rooming house,
or lodging house within the city unless such person is of ascertained good
moral character; and when application for such license is made the applicant
shall present himself in person to the Commissioner of Public Health and
Safety, and at such time present to said Commissioner said proof of good moral
character. When application for license is made by or upon behalf of a
copartnership, corporation, or association, such application shall be made by
the manager, officer, agent or other person who has the charge and management
of such hotel, rooming house, or lodging house.
('71 Code, § 4-9-3)
§ 115.17 NONTRANSFERENCE OF LICENSE.
   No license as in this chapter provided shall be transferred or assigned.
('71 Code, § 4-9-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.18 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   It shall be the duty of every person to whom a license is issued, as
provided in this chapter, to display such license in a conspicuous manner in
the office of the hotel, rooming house, or lodging house to which said license
relates.
('71 Code, § 4-9-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.19 CANCELLATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council may cancel an license issued hereunder for violation of any
provision hereof. Before such cancellation, however, the licensee shall be
notified and shall have a hearing before the Council, if demanded. Nothing
herein contained shall be construed to deprive the city of power to revoke any
license issued.
('71 Code, § 4-9-12)
STANDARD OF OPERATION
§ 115.30 REGISTRATION IN HOTEL.
   Every person to whom a license shall have been issued to conduct a hotel,
rooming or lodging house shall at all times keep a standard hotel register, in
which shall be inscribed the names of all guests or persons renting or
occupying rooms in such house, which register shall be signed by the person
renting a room, or by someone under his direction. Such registration must be
made, and after the name or names so inscribed or registered, the manager of
the house, or his agent, shall write the number of the room or rooms which such
guest or person is to occupy, together with the time when such room is rented;
all of which shall be done before such person is permitted to occupy such room
or rooms. Such register shall be at all times open to inspection by any guest
of the house wherein such register is kept and to any executive or peace
officer of the city or of the state. It shall be unlawful for any person to
write or cause to be written in any hotel register any other or different name
than the true name of such person or the name by which such person is generally
known.
('71 Code, § 4-9-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.31 NUMBERING ROOMS.
   Any person to whom a license shall have been issued, as provided in this
chapter, shall cause each sleeping room and apartment in such house to which
such license relates to be numbered in a plain and conspicuous manner, the
number to be placed on the outside of the door to such room, and no two such
doors shall bear the same number.
('71 Code, § 4-9-8)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.32 USE OF HOTEL FOR IMMORAL PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person to whom a license shall be issued as provided in this chapter
shall suffer or permit the hotel, rooming house, or lodging house to which such
license shall be issued, to be used as a house of ill- fame, brothel, bawdy
house, or disorderly house, for the purpose of prostitution, fornication, or
lewdness; or other immoral practice to be carried on therein.
('71 Code, § 4-9-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.33 LIABILITY OF MANAGER.
   (A)   Where a license shall have been issued to any copartnership,
corporation, or association to conduct a hotel, rooming house or lodging house,
any person having charge, management or control of such hotel, rooming house or
lodging house shall be liable to prosecution for any violation of this chapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of determining the liability of any person to
prosecutions for violations of any of the provisions of this chapter it shall
be sufficient to show that such person was at the time of the act of violation
complained of the person in actual charge, management, or control of the house
in which such act is alleged to have been committed.
('71 Code, § 4-9-9)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 115.45 DUTY OF HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   The Commissioner of Public Health and Safety shall examine into and
investigate the character and qualifications of applications for licenses,
within the meaning of this Chapter and report to the Council his recommendation
as to whether or not a license shall be issued to such applicant.
('71 Code, § 4-9-2)
§ 115.46 INSPECTION BY CITY OFFICERS.
   Any officer of the city shall have the right to enter into and upon the
premises of any hotel, rooming house, or lodging house for the purpose of
inspection, at any reasonable hour.
('71 Code, § 4-9-11)
CHAPTER 116: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
General Provisions
   
116.01   Tag day sales
Licensing
   
116.05   Definitions
   
116.06   License fee
   
116.07   Adoption of Transient Merchant Act of 1987
   
116.08   License not transferable
   
116.09   License shall be carried
   
116.10   Practices prohibited
   
116.11   Solicitor regulations
   
116.12   Bond or cash deposit not required
   
116.13   Enforcement and penalty
Transient Photographers
   
116.25   Definition
   
116.26   License required
   
116.27   License fee; conditions
Cross-reference:
   General licensing regulations, see
Ch. 110
   Peddler's weights and measures, inspection, see §
119.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.01 TAG DAY SALES.
   Whenever any individual or group of individuals are granted permission by
the city to hold a tag day sale or permission to solicit funds in any manner
upon the streets of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to
solicit said funds or sell any articles in the doorway or entryway of any
business establishment and shall as all times place themselves a reasonable
distance from the doorway or entryway thereof.
('71 Code, § 4-28-1) (Ord. 1789, passed 8-27-73)
Penalty, see § 10.99
LICENSING
§ 116.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER.   Any person with no fixed place of business who goes from house to
house, from place to place, or from street to street, carrying or transporting
goods, wares, or merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale, making
sales and deliveries to purchaser.
   SOLICITING. Any one or more of the following activities:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, real property or personal property or services of any
kind for any consideration whatsoever;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of goods or services of any type, kind, or character;
      (3)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for incentives, credits, or
rebates of any type, kind, or character; or
      (4)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers, and every other type or kind of publication.
   SOLICITOR. A person engaged in the act of soliciting, including hawkers,
peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise. Except that
students 18 years of age and under who participate in solicitation activities
for fundraising purposes only and persons exercising their first amendment
rights, including the free exercise of religion, the freedom of speech or
press, the right of assembly and not engaged in soliciting shall not be deemed
to be solicitors.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, firm or corporation who engages temporarily
in the business of selling and delivering goods, wares, or merchandise within
the city, and, who, in the furtherance of such purpose hires, leases, uses or
occupied any building, structure, vacant lot, motor vehicle, trailer or
railroad car.
(Ord. 3328, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 4178, passed 4-22-24)
§ 116.06 LICENSE FEE.
   The fees for licenses granted under the provisions of this suchapter shall
be:
 
Licensee                                    Fee 
Peddlers, solicitors or transient merchants $100 per one calendar year
 
(Ord. 3328, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 4178, passed 4-22-24)
§ 116.07 ADOPTION OF TRANSIENT MERCHANT ACT OF 1987.
   The city does hereby adopt by reference the Transient Merchant Act of 1987,
cited as ILCS Ch. 225, Act 465. This Act shall regulate the conducting of
business of itinerant merchants, solicitors and peddlers in the city.
(Ord. 3328, passed 11-13-01)
§ 116.08 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   License issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall not authorize
any person or persons, except the identical person or persons named in said
license to engage in business thereunder, and such license shall not be
transferable.
(Ord. 3328, passed 11-13-01)
§ 116.09 LICENSE SHALL BE CARRIED.
   Every person licensed under this subchapter shall have with him/her while
engaged in such business the license received by him/her from the City Clerk
and shall produce the same at the request of any city official or at the
request of any individuals within the city to whom he/she is exhibiting his/her
goods or selling or attempting to sell the same.
(Ord. 3328, passed 11-13-01)
§ 116.10 PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person licensed under the provisions of this subchapter shall,
within the city, call attention to his/her business nor to the goods, wares or
merchandise which he/she is selling or offering for sale by crying them out, by
blowing a horn, by ringing a bell or by any loud or unusual noise.
   (B)   Exceptions. This subchapter shall not apply to sales made by
commercial travelers or selling agents in the course of business with bona fide
dealers, nor bona fide sales of articles by sample, for delivery at a future
date, nor sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court, nor to
bona fide auction sales conducted by an auctioneer duly licensed under the
statutes of the State of Illinois, nor to persons selling or peddling the
products of the farm or garden cultivated by him/her.
(Ord. 3328, passed 11-13-01)
§ 116.11 SOLICITOR REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Solicitors. A solicitor who solicits, or assists in solicitation, must
conform to the following regulations:
      (1)   Register with the City Clerk.
      (2)   Only solicit between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor entering upon any
residential property to be observant for the presence or a "No Solicitors" or
"No Soliciting" sign. If such a sign is present the solicitor shall immediately
and peacefully depart from the residence.
      (4)   Any solicitor who has gained entry onto any residential property
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do
so by the owner or occupant.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any premises and
ring the doorbell upon or near any door or a residence located thereon or rap
or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner to attract the
attention of the owner or occupant of such residence for the purpose of
securing an audience with the owner or occupant thereof and engage in
soliciting contrary to the notice exhibited.
   (B)   Notice. Every owner or occupant who desires no solicitors at his or
her residence shall provide notice of such by:
      (1)   Exhibiting or posting upon or near the front entrance door to the
residence a card, decal or sticker containing the following language or
language similar to the following: NO SOLICITORS or NO SOLICITING.
      (2)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor that solicitation of the owner or occupant of the premises is
prohibited.
      (3)   Lack of notice shall not prohibit an owner or occupant from
verbally requesting that a solicitor leave his or her premises.
(Ord. 4178, passed 4-22-24)
§ 116.12 BOND OR CASH DEPOSIT NOT REQUIRED.
   The city does hereby waive the surety/cash bond requirement as provided for
in 225 ILCS 465/4(d).
(Ord. 4122, passed 2-27-23)
§ 116.13 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter shall be enforced by the Kewanee Chief of Police
or his or her designee(s) and, at his or her discretion, may proceed through a
notice to appear. Any person who violates or assists in the violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance
violation and shall be fined as set forth below. Each verified address at which
a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   (A)   The first violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of
no less than $100.
   (B)   A second violation of this chapter by the same person, within a 12-
month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $250.
   (C)   A third or subsequent violation of this chapter by the same person,
within a 12-month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $500.
(Ord. 4178, passed 4-22-24)
TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHERS
§ 116.25 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHER. One who does not establish a studio in the city and
become a permanent resident of the city for the space of 60 days.
('71 Code, § 4-19-1) (Ord. 1417, passed 3-27-61)
§ 116.26 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any transient photographer to conduct the business
of photography for pay within the limits of the city, without first having
procured a license so to do.
('71 Code, § 4-19-2) (Ord. 1417, passed 3-27-61)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.27 LICENSE FEE; CONDITIONS.
   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a license for the conducting of
the business of photography for pay within the city by transient photographers,
upon the payment of a license fee of $25. Such license shall be valid for a
period of one year, and shall not be transferable, nor shall the license
authorize more than one person to conduct such business thereunder, but shall
be paid for each person employed in selling, taking or delivering photographs.
('71 Code, § 4-19-3) (Ord. 1417, passed 3-27-61)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 117: RAFFLES
Section
   
117.01   Adoption of state statute by reference
   
117.02   Licensing authority
   
117.03   Licensing system limitations per state statute
§ 117.01 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTE BY REFERENCE.
   There is hereby adopted by reference the State of Illinois Raffles Act, ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 15, § 2. Three copies of the Act will be maintained on file in the
office of the City Clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein and from the effective date hereof the
provisions thereof shall be controlling with the limits of the city. The Act
requires that certain provisions are made by a municipal corporation. Those
provisions follow this section.
(Ord. 2919, passed 8-22-94)
§ 117.02 LICENSING AUTHORITY.
   The City Clerk as authorized by the Mayor shall be the licensing authority.
(Ord. 2919, passed 8-22-94)
§ 117.03 LICENSING SYSTEM LIMITATIONS PER STATE STATUTE.
   Licenses shall be issued to qualified applicants upon the fulfillment of the
following requirements per the Raffles Act.
   (A)   A licensing fee is paid by the applicant. The fee for an individual
raffle license shall be equal to $10 or 1/10th of one percent of the aggregate
retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded, whichever is more. The fee
for an extended period multiple raffle license shall be $100. Said extended
term raffle license shall be valid for a period of time from the date of
issuance and thereafter running for a period of time not to exceed 364 days
after issuance for which the extended term raffle license is applied. There
shall be no pro-rating of the fee for the extended term raffle license.
   (B)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall be limited to $100,000.
   (C)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall be limited to $100,000.
   (D)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall be limited to $100.
   (E)   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
shall be limited to 90 days for a raffle conducted under an individual raffle
license and one year for a raffle conducted under an extended term raffle
license.
   (F)   Individual raffle licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
valid for one raffle. Extended term raffle licenses shall be valid for a
minimum of one and not to exceed 25 raffles during the effective term of the
extended term raffle license.
   (G)   If the raffles manager designated by the organization is a member of
the organization and has by unanimous vote of the members of the organization
been granted an exemption to the fidelity bond requirement of the State of
Illinois Raffles Act, the raffles manager shall not be required to give a
fidelity bond in favor of the organization. Otherwise the raffles manager shall
give a fidelity bond in the amount of the aggregate retail value of all prizes
or merchandise to be awarded by the organization for the raffle or raffles.
   (H)   The City Manager shall specify the form to be used when applying for a
raffle license. The form shall contain the necessary information to ensure that
the applicant know all of the requirements of the Raffles Act.
(Ord. 2919, passed 8-22-94; Am. Ord. 3570, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 3824,
passed 3-14-16)
CHAPTER 118: VEHICLES-FOR-HIRE
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Vehicles used for immoral purposes
   
118.02   Operators refusal to obey police
Taxicabs
   
118.20   Definition
   
118.21   License required
   
118.22   Application for license
   
118.23   License fees; affixing tags or stickers
   
118.24   Driver's license required; application; fee
   
118.25   Revocation of licenses
   
118.26   Operation of vehicles in safe, mechanical condition; safety tests
   
118.27   Sanitary condition
   
118.28   Manner of operation; liquor
   
118.29   Persons in front seat prohibited
   
118.30   Vehicles to park at taxicab stands
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01 VEHICLES USED FOR IMMORAL PURPOSES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC VEHICLE shall mean and include
cabs, taxicabs, for- hire automobiles and all other vehicles of a similar
nature engaged in the transportation of persons for hire.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any public vehicle to permit
any person to occupy or use such vehicle for the purpose of prostitution,
lewdness or assignation with knowledge or reasonable cause to know that the
same is or is to be used for such purposes, or to direct, take or transport, or
offer or agree to direct, take or transport any person to any other person with
knowledge or reasonable cause to know that the purpose of such directing,
taking or transporting is prostitution, lewdness or assignation.
   (C)   Any violation of this section by the driver of any public vehicle
shall be sufficient ground for the revocation of any license issued to said
driver, or for the operation of such public vehicle; and such person shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-44)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.02 OPERATORS REFUSAL TO OBEY POLICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any draymen, hackmen, cabmen, omnibus drivers,
baggagemen and other persons, at or about any railroad depot or other public
place in the city, to refuse to obey the commands and directions of the police
officer or officers who may be stationed or doing duty at or about such depot
or other public places for the preservation of order and enforcing the
provisions of this code. Any person so refusing to obey the commands and
directions of a police officer as aforesaid shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-22)
Penalty, see § 10.99
TAXICABS
§ 118.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAXICAB. All vehicles, however propelled, which carry passengers for hire
upon or along the streets of the city, except vehicles operating regularly upon
established routes.
('71 Code, § 4-16-1)
§ 118.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or maintain any taxicab, as defined in §
118.20, without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter set forth,
and unless said license is in full force and effect.
('71 Code, § 4-16-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.22 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring a license for any taxicab shall file an application
therefor with the City Clerk, setting forth the name, business and residence
address of the applicant, a full description of the motor vehicle for which a
license is desired, including the make, model, motor and engine number and the
state license number, and any other information that the Mayor or the Clerk may
require. Said license shall be issued by the Mayor upon conformance with the
terms of this subchapter.
('71 Code, § 4-16-3)
§ 118.23 LICENSE FEES; AFFIXING TAGS OR STICKERS.
   The following license fees shall be paid: For the first taxicab operated by
any person, the sum of $100 per year; for each additional taxicab, the sum of
$25 per year. All licenses hereunder shall be paid quarterly in advance, and no
license shall issue for less than one quarter. A metal plate or other suitable
tag or sticker shall be furnished by the City Clerk for each taxicab so
licensed, which plate, tag or sticker shall at all times be firmly affixed in a
conspicuous place on the front of the taxicab.
('71 Code, § 4-16-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.24 DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a taxicab as the driver thereof without first
having obtained a driver's license in the manner hereinafter set forth, and
unless said license is in full force and effect.
   (B)   Any person desiring a license as a driver of a taxicab shall file an
application with the City Clerk setting forth the name, sex, residence address,
date and place of birth, former occupation, experience as a driver and such
other information as the Mayor or Clerk may require. Such license shall be
issued by the Mayor to all persons of good moral character who have complied
with this subchapter and with all the laws of the state governing taxicab
drivers. No license shall be issued to any person under the age of 21 years.
   (C)   Each driver shall carry the license issued to him under this
subchapter at all times that he is driving or on duty with any such taxicab,
and shall exhibit it upon demand to any city policeman or law enforcement
officer.
('71 Code, § 4-16-5) (Am. Ord. 2886, passed 4-11-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.25 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall have the right to revoke any taxicab license issued
hereunder whenever said taxicab is not kept in the mechanical or sanitary
condition required by this subchapter, or is not equipped with the proper
devices in good repair as herein required.
   (B)   The Mayor shall have the right to revoke any license issued hereunder
to any person as a taxicab driver whenever such person violates any of the
provisions of this subchapter or any other provision of this code governing
taxicabs or traffic, and also whenever it appears that a person holding any
such license is not of good moral character.
('71 Code, § 4-16-11)
§ 118.26 OPERATION OF VEHICLES IN SAFE, MECHANICAL CONDITION; SAFETY TESTS.
   Every taxicab operated upon the streets of the city shall be kept and
maintained in a good and safe mechanical condition.
   (A)   Every such taxicab during the month of January and the month of July
of each year shall be subjected to the safety test hereinafter provided at an
official posting station as established and set up by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
13-101 et seq. Said safety test shall include the testing and inspection of
brakes, lights, horns, reflectors, rear view mirrors, safety chains, frames,
axle, body, wheels, steering apparatus and other safety devices and appliances.
The passing of the safety test shall not be a bar at any time to prosecution
for operating or causing to be operated a taxicab not in good and safe
mechanical condition.
   (B)   If the taxicab is in safe mechanical condition the operator of the
official testing station shall at once issue and affix to said taxicab a
certificate of safety which shall at all times be displayed on said taxicab. No
certificate of safety issued during the first six months of any year shall be
of any effect after August of that year and no such certificate issued during
the second six months of any year shall be of any effect after February 1 of
the succeeding year.
   (C)   No taxicab shall be operated upon the streets, alleys or public places
of the city without having been tested as herein required or without having
said certificate of safety displayed on said taxicab.
('71 Code, § 4-16-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.27 SANITARY CONDITION.
   Each taxicab shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
('71 Code, § 4-16-7)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.28 MANNER OF OPERATION; LIQUOR.
   No taxicab shall be driven, operated or controlled so as to violate any of
the parking or traffic provisions of this code or so as to obstruct traffic or
interfere with the free movement of traffic upon any street, alley or public
place. No person shall drive, operate or control any such taxicab while under
the influence of intoxicating liquor, and no driver shall drink any
intoxicating liquor, either inside or outside of said taxicab during the hours
he is driving or on duty with said taxicab.
('71 Code, § 4-16-8)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.29 PERSONS IN FRONT SEAT PROHIBITED.
   No person shall be allowed to ride in the front seat of any taxicab with the
driver except at such times as the rear seat or seats are fully occupied by
paying passengers and the person riding in said front seat is a bona fide and
paying passenger.
('71 Code, § 4-16-9)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.30 VEHICLES TO PARK AT TAXICAB STANDS.
   No unemployed taxicab shall stand or be parked upon any public street or
alley except at such places as from time to time shall be designated by the
City Council as taxicab stands and allotted to the particular licensee in
question.
('71 Code, § 4-16-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 119: WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Section
Standards of Operation
   
119.01   Standard of weights and measures
   
119.02   Duties of owners
   
119.03   Inspection application; unsealed weights and measures
   
119.04   Peddler's weights and measures; inspection
   
119.05   Sale of goods regulated
   
119.06   Fraud; using legal measures
   
119.07   Interference with sealer
Administration and Enforcement
   
119.20   City Sealer; bond; assistants
   
119.21   Inspection; stamp and seal
   
119.22   Books and register to be kept; reports
   
119.23   Receipt of unlawful compensation by Sealer or assistant prohibited
   
119.24   Complaints for false or inaccurate weights
STANDARDS OF OPERATION
§ 119.01 STANDARD OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
   To determine the accuracy and correctness of weights and measures, there is
hereby adopted the standard of all weights and measures as fixed by the
government of the United States. All weights and measures inspected and
examined by the City Sealer shall be compared as to correctness and accuracy
thereof with the standard so fixed by the government of the United States, and
none shall be deemed to be correct or accurate unless they agree with the
standard so fixed by said government of the United States. The City Sealer,
under the supervision of the City Council, may from time to time procure
necessary copies of all weights and measures from the government of the United
States to enable him to perform the duties of his office. He may have such
assistance as the Council may from time to time provide
('71 Code, § 1-32-3)
§ 119.02 DUTIES OF OWNERS.
   No person shall use or cause, suffer or permit, to be used in the city, any
weights or measures that are inaccurate or false according to the standards
herein fixed, and if they are found incorrect, inaccurate or false, he shall
make or have the same made accurate or correct, or else destroy or so dispose
of the same that they will not be further used.
('71 Code, § 1-32-7)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.03 INSPECTION APPLICATION; UNSEALED WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
   (A)   The owner or person in control of any weights and measures may have
the same inspected, stamped or sealed hereunder, and for that purpose shall
make application to the City Sealer therefor, who shall thereupon make such
inspection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Whenever any purchaser of any article or thing that has been weighed
or measured feels himself aggrieved or believes that such weights or measures
were inaccurate or incorrect, he may apply to the City Sealer to have the same
inspected hereunder and deposit with said City Sealer the fee therefor as
herein provided, and it shall then be the duty of the City Sealer to make the
inspection of such weight or measure complained of.
   (C)   If upon such inspection of such weight or measure he finds the same
accurate and correct, the person so making application for such inspection, and
depositing the fee therefor, shall pay for such inspection, and the City Sealer
is hereby authorized to retain the fee so deposited with him. If, however, upon
such inspection, such weight or measure is found to be incorrect, inaccurate or
false, the person or corporation so owning or controlling or using the same,
shall pay for such inspection. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any
weight or measure in the city that has not been first inspected, stamped or
sealed and a certificate of its accuracy and correctness issued and delivered
as herein provided.
('71 Code, § 1-32-8)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.04 PEDDLER'S WEIGHTS AND MEASURES; INSPECTION.
   Every peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant and transient vendor of
merchandise plying his trade in the city, and using any weights or measures,
shall have such weights and measures inspected, stamped or sealed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter; and it shall be unlawful for any peddler,
hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise to use any
weights or measures in the city unless they are so first inspected, stamped or
sealed, and a certificate of their accuracy and correctness issued and
delivered as in this chapter provided. No license held by any such person from
the city to ply such trade or calling shall prevent or be construed to
interfere with the operation of this section.
('71 Code, § 1-32-9)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.05 SALE OF GOODS REGULATED.
   (A)   Every person selling ice or offering ice for sale shall at the time of
delivery of any ice sold, weigh the quantity of ice delivered, and for that
purpose shall be provided with a steelyard balance or other apparatus for
weighing such ice, which shall have been duly adjusted and sealed by the City
Sealer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and all ice sold
within the city shall be sold by avoid upon weight, unless it is otherwise
especially agreed in writing upon between the buyer and seller. 
   (B)   No person shall sell any potatoes in the city except by standard
weight as herein provided.
   (C)   All fresh berries, cherries, currants and other small fruits, sold or
offered for sale in the city, shall, in the absence of a special agreement in
writing signed by the parties thereto to the contrary, be sold by Standard
Avoirdupois Net Weight, numerical count or in uniform size baskets, boxes or
other receptacles containing one quart, one pint or one-half pint standard dry
measures, or multiples thereof, and in no other way, and the said receptacles
shall be uniformly and evenly filled throughout. Said baskets, boxes or other
receptacles in which or out of which, such berries, cherries, currants and
other small fruits are sold or offered for sale, shall not be required to be
tested and sealed, but the Inspector of Weights and Measures, or any of his
deputies, may at any time test the capacity of the basket, box or other
receptacle in which, or out of which said berries, cherries, currants or
similar small fruits are sold or offered for sale.
   (D)   No person shall sell any bread by the loaf in the city unless the loaf
or loaves of bread weigh 12 ounces or more.
   (E)   No person shall sell any apples or bananas in the city except by
standard weight as herein provided.
   (F)   Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prohibit the sale
of fruits or vegetables by numerical count, except as otherwise provided
herein.
('71 Code, § 1-32-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.06 FRAUD; USING LEGAL MEASURES.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale any fruit, vegetables, berries or any
article of dry measurement in the city, or measure the same in anything but a
legal dry measure of the standard herein required, and fixed and inspected,
sealed or stamped and a certificate of its accuracy and correctness issued and
delivered as in this chapter required, and no person shall practice deceit or
fraud in the sale of wood, coal, hay, produce, commodity or other article of
trade or merchandise or by selling less than 128 cubic feet of wood for a cord
or less than 2,000 pounds of anything for a ton.
('71 Code, § 1-32-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.07 INTERFERENCE WITH SEALER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, obstruct or interfere with
the City Sealer or his assistants in any manner or way in the performance of
his duties hereunder, or to change or alter any; certificate issued by him, or
any such stamp or seal affixed to any such weight or measure, or to destroy any
such stamp, seal or certificate while the same is in force, or to change any
weight or measure or make the same inaccurate, incorrect or false after it has
been inspected, stamped or sealed hereunder, or to refuse or obstruct any such
inspection herein authorized, or to use inaccurate, incorrect, or false weight
or measure, or to sell or offer for sale any property, commodity, article or
thing for any standard quality, weight or amount as herein fixed that is in
fact less in quality, weight or amount
('71 Code, § 1-32-11)
Penalty, see § 10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 119.20 CITY SEALER; BOND; ASSISTANTS.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of City Sealer, who shall be
elected by the City Council, and who shall hold his office for one year and
until his successor is appointed and qualified. Before entering upon the duties
of his office he shall execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of $500,
with at least two sureties, to be approved by the Mayor, conditioned as by law
provided. The City Sealer shall be under the direction and supervision of the
Superintendent of the Department of Accounts and Finances.  
('71 Code, § 1-32-1)
   (B)   No one shall be appointed City Sealer or any assistant unless
competent to perform the duties of City Sealer. Neither the City Sealer nor any
such assistant shall deal in, sell or handle any such weights or measures,
either for himself or as agent, employee or otherwise for others.
('71 Code, § 1-32-4)
§ 119.21 INSPECTION; STAMP AND SEAL.
   It shall be the duty of the City Sealer to inspect and examine at least once
in every three months, all weights and measures used for weighing or measuring
any substance, article, or thing in the city, and if he finds the same to be
accurate, to stamp such weights and measures with an appropriate stamp or seal,
and deliver to the owner thereof a certificate of their accuracy, and if he
finds the same inaccurate or incorrect, he shall so notify the owner or person
in possession thereof, and it shall be unlawful for any person or corporation
to use or suffer or permit to be used any weight of measure that is not correct
or accurate.
('71 Code, § 1-32-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.22 BOOKS AND REGISTER TO BE KEPT; REPORTS.
   (A)   The City Sealer shall keep a book provided for that purpose wherein he
shall enter and cause to be preserved the transactions and affairs of his
office. The Sealer shall also keep a register of all inspections made and
weights and measures stamped or sealed, the date thereof, the name of the
owner, the nature or kind of weights or measures and all the money received for
each such inspection, examining, stamping or sealing. All inspections,
examinations, stamping and sealing and work done by his assistants, shall be
approved by the City Sealer, and shall be entered in the records herein
provided for.
   (B)   The City Sealer shall make a monthly report of the transactions and
affairs of his office, and submit the same to the City Council at its first
regular meeting in the month, and shall make an annual report to the Council at
its first regular meeting in each year showing fully and in detail all the
transactions and affairs of his office. The Sealer shall make such other and
further reports touching the duties of his office as the Council may from time
to time.
('71 Code, § 1-32-5)
§ 119.23 RECEIPT OF UNLAWFUL COMPENSATION BY SEALER OR ASSISTANT PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for said City Sealer or his assistants to demand, take
or receive any fees other than those provided for by the provisions of this
code, or any gift, compensation or emolument from any person or corporation
whose measures or weights he may examine, seal or stamp, or whose weights or
measures the Sealer is required to examine, stamp or seal in the course of
performing his duties.
('71 Code, § 1-32-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.24 COMPLAINTS FOR FALSE OR INACCURATE WEIGHTS.
   It shall be the duty of the City Sealer whenever he may have reason to
suspect the existence of false or incorrect weights, measures, scales, beams,
steelyards or other instruments as aforesaid being in use in the city, or upon
the written complaint of any reputable citizen of the city, informing him of
the existence thereof, to make immediate search for same, and it is hereby made
his duty to prosecute all persons violating this chapter, or any section
hereof, by making proper complaint before any court having jurisdiction of the
matter as otherwise prescribed under the provisions of this code and the laws
of the state.
('71 Code, § 1-32-13)
CHAPTER 120: ENTERPRISE ZONE
Section
   
120.01   Establishment
   
120.02   Term of enterprise zone
   
120.03   Area of enterprise zone
   
120.04   Qualification for enterprise zone
   
120.05   Tax incentive
   
120.06   Abatement of ad valorem taxes, and exceptions
   
120.07   Permit fees; waiver
   
120.08   Designated zone organizations
   
120.09   Creation of Zone Administrator; duties and powers
   
120.10   Enterprise zone fee schedule
§ 120.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The city hereby establishes an enterprise zone, pursuant to authority
granted by the Illinois Enterprise Zone Act (the "Act"; PA 82-1019); as
amended, subject to the approval of the Illinois Department of Commerce and
Community Affairs, and subject to the provisions of the Act.
(Ord. 2651, passed 12-14-87)
§ 120.02 TERM OF ENTERPRISE ZONE.
   The term of the zone shall commence with the date the enterprise zone is
designated and certified by the Illinois Department of Commerce and Community
Affairs pursuant to Section 5.3 of the Act, and shall terminate at midnight of
December 31 of the 30th year after the year in which the enterprise zone area
is certified, unless otherwise stated herein.
(Ord. 2651, passed 12-14-87; Am. Ord. 3358, passed 8-12-02)
§ 120.03 AREA OF ENTERPRISE ZONE.
   As established by the units of government and approved by the Illinois
Department of Commerce and Community Affairs (DCCA), the area of the enterprise
zone shall be as described in Exhibit A, as attached to Ordinance No. 2651,
passed December 14, 1987, and as outlined in the map in Exhibit B, which is
held by the Zone Administrator, both made a part hereof.
(Ord. 2651, passed 12-14-87; Am. Ord. 2846, passed 8-23-93; Am. Ord. 2895,
passed 5-23-94; Am. Ord. 3113, passed 7-28-97; Am. Ord. 3182 passed 9-28-98;
Am. Ord. 3229, passed 11-8-99; Am. Ord. 3356, passed 8-12-02; Am. Ord. 3407,
passed 7-14-03)
§ 120.04 QUALIFICATION FOR ENTERPRISE ZONE.
   The city hereby declares and affirms that the zone area is qualified for
designation as an enterprise zone in accordance with the provisions of the
Illinois Enterprise Zone Act, and further affirms that:
   (A)   The zone area is a contiguous area;
   (B)   The zone area comprises a minimum of one-half square mile and not more
than ten square miles in total area;
   (C)   The zone area is a depressed area;
   (D)   The zone area satisfies any additional criteria established by the
Illinois Department of Commerce and Community Affairs; and,
   (E)   On November 12, 1987, the city conducted a public hearing within the
zone area on the question of whether to create the zone, what local plans, tax
incentives and other programs should be established in connection with the
zone, and what the boundaries of the zone should be, and that public notice was
given in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the zone area,
not more than 20 days nor less than five days before the hearing.
(Ord. 2651, passed 12-14-87)
§ 120.05 TAX INCENTIVE.
   Each retailer in Illinois who makes sales at retail of building materials to
be incorporated into real estate located in the enterprise zone of the city,
may deduct receipts from such sales from the Illinois Retailer's Occupation Tax
only to the extent that a building permit is issued for the construction, and
the project is approved by the enterprise zone administrator. A copy of the
zone administrator's certificate of approval must be provided to the retailer
at the time of purchase and maintained by the retailer in its books and records
to establish the exemption.
(Ord. 2651, passed 12-14-87; Am. Ord. 2918, passed 8-22-94; Am. Ord. 3357,
passed 8-12-02)
§ 120.06 ABATEMENT OF AD VALOREM TAXES, AND EXCEPTIONS.
   The city authorizes and directs the County Clerk to abate ad valorem taxes
imposed upon real property, located within the enterprise zone area, upon which
new improvements have been constructed or upon which existing improvements have
been renovated or rehabilitated, subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Any abatement of taxes on any parcel shall not exceed the amount
attributable to the construction of the improvements and the renovation or
rehabilitation of existing improvements on such parcel;
   (B)   Such abatement shall be allowed only for commercial, industrial,
manufacturing, or residential property located within the zone area; and the
abatement is allowed only for improvements, the nature and scope of which
building permits are required and have been obtained;
   (C)   Such abatement shall be at the rate of: 100% of the value of new
construction or improvements, for the assessment year in which the improvements
are made, and the four assessment years immediately following the year in which
the improvements are made;
   (D)   Such abatement shall continue and be in full force as set forth in
this section for any improvements which are completed within the term of the
enterprise zone as specified in §
120.02 of this chapter;
   (E)   As stipulated in the Illinois Enterprise Zone Act, at ILCS Ch. 20, Act
655, § 5.4.1(c), property that is located in both the enterprise zone area and
in any redevelopment project area, as defined in the Illinois Tax Increment
Allocation Redevelopment Act, shall not be eligible for any abatement of ad
valorem taxes under § 18-170 of the Illinois Property Tax Code for new
improvements or the renovation or rehabilitation of existing improvements.
   (F)   For commercial rehabilitation or renovation of buildings having a
minimum of four floors above ground level, and consisting of a minimum 30,000
square feet on all levels, excluding the basement, on January 1, 2005, and
including any new additions thereto, located wholly within the Kewanee Central
Business District, as defined in §
155.121(B)(4)(b); such abatement may be:
      (1)   At the rate established in division (C); or
      (2)   At the rate of 100% of the value of new construction or
improvements undertaken in the renovation and rehabilitation of the same, for
the assessment year in which the improvements are made, and the nine assessment
years immediately following the year in which the improvements are made.
(Ord. 2651, passed 12-14-87; Am. Ord. 2879, passed 2-14-94; Am. Ord. 3291,
passed 2-13-01; Am. Ord. 3462, passed 2-14-05)
§ 120.07 PERMIT FEES; WAIVER.
   In the case of any and all permit fees required and charged by the city for
the rehabilitation, expansion or new construction of any commercial,
industrial, manufacturing, residential or community development assisted
projects within the zone area, such permit fees (but not the permits
themselves) shall be waived in their entirety. The permit fee waiver herein
provided for shall include all fees charged for building, plumbing, electrical,
zoning, and excavation permits where a building permit is otherwise required
and has been obtained for such rehabilitation, expansion or new construction,
but shall not include such permit fees charged for the mere repair or
replacement of electrical, plumbing or mechanical systems not undertaken in
connection with such rehabilitation, expansion or new construction.
(Ord. 2651, passed 12-14-87)
§ 120.08 DESIGNATED ZONE ORGANIZATIONS. 
   The Zone Administrator may recommend to the City Council one or more
organizations that qualify as designated zone organizations under the
provisions of the Illinois Enterprise Zone Act. Upon approval of the City
Council, for a term of years set by the City Council, the organization may:
   (A)   Provide or contract for provision of services including, but not
limited to: crime watch patrols within zone neighborhoods; volunteer day care
centers; or, other types of public services as provided by ordinances or
regulation;
   (B)   Provide a forum for business, labor and government action on
enterprise zone innovations;
   (C)   Receive title to publicly-owned land;
   (D)   Solicit and receive contributions to improve the quality of life in
the zone area; and,
   (E)   Perform such other functions as the City Council may deem appropriate,
not inconsistent with the Illinois Enterprise Zone Act.
(Ord. 2651, passed 12-14-87)
§ 120.09 CREATION OF ZONE ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES AND POWERS.
   (A)   The position of Zone Administrator is hereby created. The Zone
Administrator shall be the City Manager as an officer and employee of the city.
The duties of the Zone Administrator shall be performed in addition to the
regular duties of the position of City Manager.
   (B)   It shall be the power and duty of the Zone Administrator to:
      (1)   Supervise the implementation of the provisions of this chapter and
the Illinois Enterprise Zone Act;
      (2)   Act as a liaison between the city, the Illinois Department of
Commerce and Community Affairs, designated zone organizations and other state,
federal, and local agencies, whether public or private;
      (3)   Conduct an ongoing evaluation of the enterprise zone program and
submit such evaluative reports on at least a quarterly basis to the City
Council and Illinois Department of Commerce and Community Affairs;
      (4)   Promote the coordination of other relevant programs, including, but
not limited to, housing, community and economic development, small business,
financial assistance and employment training with the enterprise zone;
      (5)   Recommend qualified designated zone organizations to the City
Council; and,
      (6)   Have such other duties as specified by the City Council.
(Ord. 2651, passed 12-14-87)
§ 120.10 ENTERPRISE ZONE FEE SCHEDULE.
   Effective March 25, 2013, there shall be no fees imposed nor collected by
the city arising from enterprise zone extensions, permits, sales tax exemptions
forms, property tax abatement forms, or similar documents and processes related
to the Kewanee Enterprise Zone. This section shall not affect any payments due
the city from any development agreements entered into between the city and any
developers involving extension of the Kewanee Enterprise Zone prior to the
effective date of this section.
(Ord. 3729, passed 3-25-13)
CHAPTER 121: KEWANEE REVOLVING LOAN FUND PROGRAM
Section
Revolving Loan Fund Program
   
121.01   Purpose
   
121.02   Eligible uses
   
121.03   Terms and conditions
   
121.04   Processing procedures
Recapture Strategy
   
121.10   Revolving loan fund goals and objectives
   
121.11   Revolving loan fund strategy
   
121.12   Revolving loan fund management plan
   
121.13   Assurances
REVOLVING LOAN FUND PROGRAM
§ 121.01 PURPOSE.
   The Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) is intended to assist in the creation of new
industrial and commercial businesses, meaning manufacturing, distribution, and
office based businesses and the retention and expansion of existing industrial
and commercial businesses in Kewanee. The following states the purposes of the
RLF program and sets forth administrative requirements concerning eligible
uses, terms, and conditions of usage, and processing procedures.
   (A)   To stabilize and strengthen the city’s economy by providing capital
for industrial and commercial start-ups and expansions.
   (B)   To retain and attract industry that will provide permanent jobs or
services needed within the community, especially those benefiting persons of
low and moderate income.
   (C)   To support potential gains in real estate, income and sales taxes to
the city.
   (D)   To stimulate private investment.
   (E)   To develop vacant or blighted land within the city and land, improved
or otherwise, to be annexed by the city.
   (F)   To provide financial assistance to industry that can reasonably
document its need for assistance or where the use of the funds will provide a
needed services to the community.
(Ord. 2986, passed 7-24-95; Am. Ord. 4241, passed 6-9-25)
§ 121.02 ELIGIBLE USES.
   (A)   Funds must be used to advance the previously outlined purposes of the
program.
   (B)   Funds must be used for facilities located within the city or to be
located (through new construction or annexation) within the city.
   (C)   Funds from the RLF can be used for the following: acquisition of land
and buildings, construction, expansion, renovation, modernization, machinery,
and equipment. Soft costs such as appraisal fees, accounting, and architectural
services, must be paid by the applicant from sources other than the RLF. Soft
costs may be considered as part of the total project costs.
   (D)   Funds must be used in a manner which emphasizes the use of lending
institutions and private investment. At a minimum, 50% of each project financed
in part by the RLF must come from other sources, including lending institutions
and private investment which includes the investment by the applicant.
(Ord. 2986, passed 7-24-95; Am. Ord. 4241, passed 6-9-25)
§ 121.03 TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No RLF funds shall be used if sufficient funds are available from
other sources to finance the project.
   (B)   No loan will be made where there is reasonable doubt as to the ability
of the applicant to repay the loan.
   (C)   The applicant may be required to provide and assign to the RLF life
insurance for the term of the loan.
   (D)   The applicant will be required to provide fire, hazard, and normal
business insurance on all assets for the term of the loan. Said insurance shall
be sufficient to secure the RLF loan and shall have a loss payable clause to
the city.
   (E)   The term of the loan shall not exceed five years when the loan is
$50,000 or less. The term of the loan shall not exceed seven years when the
loan is $50,001 or more. The rate may vary depending on need, term or duration
of loan, security and risk of the loan. Covenants such as acceleration of
payments, due on sale, balloon payments, variable rates, interest tied to net
profit or gross revenues, or other similar loan recapture methods may be
required. The minimum interest rate shall be 3%, and the maximum shall be at a
rate to be determined by the committee hereinafter defined, which committee
shall take into account such factors as risk, ability to pay, and all of the
other considerations specified in this document or otherwise being the subject
of consideration in the making this nature.
   (F)   The amount of any single loan from the RLF shall not be less than
$1,000 nor more than 95% of the then existing loanable RLF funds on hand.
   (G)   One job shall be created or retained for each $15,000 of RLF funds
used.
   (H)   Fifty-one percent of the permanent jobs created must be available to
low and moderate income persons. Every job shall be listed through job service.
   (I)   The applicant may not relocate the facilities or employment outside
the city during the term of the RLF note unless the outstanding balance is paid
in full.
   (J)   The applicant, through its owners or officers, will normally be
required to personally guarantee repayment of the RLF note, but the same may be
waived at the discretion of the committee hereinafter defined.
   (K)   The applicant will be required to submit quarterly financial
statements, including balance sheet and income statement, to the committee
during the term of the RLF loan.
   (L)   The applicant will be required to provide a minimum equity position
within the range of 10% - 20% depending on loan amount, loan security and loan
risk.
   (M)   All notes shall be made payable to the city and shall be serviced by a
committee as hereinafter defined. Any servicing fee shall be borne by the
borrower.
   (N)   An affirmative action plan for ensuring equal employment opportunity
for the jobs to be created shall be required of all borrowers.
   (O)   Any assignment of the loan by the borrower must be approved by the
city.
   (P)   Funds shall be paid to and held in an account under the accountability
of the city. Any payment of funds from said account shall require the
signatures of two designated officials.
(Ord. 2986, passed 7-24-95; Am. Ord. 3397, passed 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 4241,
passed 6-9-25)
§ 121.04 PROCESSING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Applications shall be submitted to a designated committee comprised of
the City Manager and City Attorney of the City of Kewanee and the Revolving
Loan Fund Committee of KEDC. This committee shall be responsible for the
administration of the loans and shall perform all functions and make all
determinations specified in this document except where the same shall be
specifically reserved to the city and the KEDC in total rather than the
committee herein established. The applicants shall include all information
required and may be requested to provide a cashier’s check or bank money order
for $50 to cover processing expenses. Upon receipt of an application, the
committee shall review the submittal and confirm that all information is in
order and is adequate to complete its review. Applicants will be advised if any
necessary material is inadequate and will be given a deadline for submitting
additional information.
   (B)   The committee shall make a recommendation as to the disposition of the
application to the city and KEDC. Said recommendation shall be based on the
extent to which the proposal meets the stated purposes of the RLF program and
upon credit analysis, collateral analysis, cash flow analysis, and a review of
any and all other information available. The recommendation shall include
proposed terms and conditions for the advance of funds from the RLF.
   (C)   The city and KEDC shall determine which, if any, of such applications
reviewed by the committee shall be funded.
   (D)   Information supplied by the applicant to the committee or the city and
KEDC shall be kept strictly confidential, and shall not be disseminated without
the proper written approval of the applicant. However, a summary of the
proposed project including the loan amounts, the nature of the business, the
jobs to be created and other benefits will be requested on a form which will be
available for public dissemination.
   (E)   The committee shall notify each applicant in writing if such
application will be funded, has been rejected, or is still under consideration.
Said notification shall be mailed within a timely manner after the established
deadline for application submittal.
   (F)   The city and KEDC shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the
RLF is properly serviced by the committee, and that the terms and conditions of
the RLF are properly enforced, including legal action to collect debts owed,
foreclose mortgages, and otherwise compel performances by the RLF recipient .
   (G)   The applicant of the RLF shall bear all expenses of the application
submitted and review requirements and processes. The said cashier’s check or
bank money order for $50 processing fee will be used for any expenses incurred
by the staff in application review including, but not limited to, credit
reports, recordings, appraisals, photocopying, etc. Review or processing
expenses incurred over this specified processing fee are payable by the
applicant at the time of their occurrence.
   (H)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the recommendation of
the committee to fund a project shall be subject to the final approval of the
KEDC and the city and no funds shall be dispersed until both of said
organizations shall have approved the same on terms that are mutually
agreeable. The city shall act by majority vote of the Kewanee City Council and
the KEDC by majority vote of its Board of Directors.
   (I)   KEDC and the city shall make no charge for the processing of loan
payments and other ordinary administrative expenses incurred subsequent to the
approval of the loan application and closing of the loan. In the event the KEDC
and the city decide at a later date to charge for the processing of loan
payments and other ordinary administrative expenses, the KEDC and the city
agree that those charges will not exceed 10% of the total loan proceeds.
(Ord. 2986, passed 7-24-95; Am. Ord. 4241, passed 6-9-25)
RECAPTURE STRATEGY
§ 121.10 REVOLVING LOAN FUND GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Stimulate economic growth in the city by assisting with the retention
and growth of existing industrial and commercial base, providing needed equity
to new start-up businesses, encouraging the development of minority and female
owned businesses and providing an incentive for established businesses to
relocate to Kewanee.
   (B)   Assist new or existing Kewanee businesses to create and retain jobs.
   (C)   Ensure that jobs created or retained by business applicants benefit a
minimum of 51% low to moderated income persons in the area.
   (D)   Increase the city property tax and sales tax base.
   (E)   Provide businesses with the opportunity to expand.
   (F)   Encourage and leverage loans to businesses by area private financial
institutions.
(Res. 4309, passed 5-27-03)
§ 121.11 REVOLVING LOAN FUND STRATEGY.
   (A)   Eligible uses of funds:
      (1)   Site development infrastructure extension costs;
      (2)   Construction of new facility or additions;
      (3)   Renovation of existing facilities;
      (4)   Leasehold improvements;
      (5)   Purchase of new or used machinery or equipment;
      (6)   Working capital;
      (7)   For every $15,000 of revolving loan funds provided, one full-time
equivalent (FTE) job should be created or retained. (FTE jobs are positions
consisting of a minimum of 1,950 hours worked a year). City participation will
not exceed 50% of the project cost, or 95% of available funds, subject to the
availability of funds; or
      (8)   Projects of a speculative nature are ineligible for funding.
   (B)   The geographic area served by the fund will be within the corporate
boundaries of the city.
   (C)   The funds will be targeted to assist existing industrial and
commercial base, start-up businesses, female and minority owned firms and
established businesses that will relocate to Kewanee, on a first come, first
served basis as the city expects to receive more applicants than available
annual funding will cover. Applications that demonstrate the greatest potential
for job creation and meeting the goals and objectives of the fund will be given
the highest priority.
   (D)   Applications will be generated by:
      (1)   Sending RLF information to the city's existing businesses;
      (2)   Including RLF information in the city's marketing package;
      (3)   Provide RLF information to area economic development commissions
and the Chamber of Commerce to include in their area marketing information;
      (4)   Staff participation in business related seminars or workshops held
in the area;
      (5)   Provide RLF information to local chapter of NAACP, Urban League and
other organizations representing minority groups and offer to speak at meetings
periodically;
      (6)   Provide information to area women's entrepreneur associations and
women's service organizations;
      (7)   Publicize approved loan projects by sending news releases to area
media and holding news conferences, ribbon cuttings and ground breakings to
encourage media coverage; and
      (8)   Area lending institutions will be provided with information about
the RLF and asked to inform potential borrowers of fund availability.
(Res. 4309, passed 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 4241, passed 6-9-25)
§ 121.12 REVOLVING LOAN FUND MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The city shall utilize the Kewanee Economic Development Corporation or
Chamber of Commerce, who shall appoint members as needed to the Business Loan
Committee. The committee shall consist of, but not be limited to the City
Manager, City Attorney, KEDC Economic Development Coordinator, and two
experienced area financial institution commercial lenders. The committee shall
review all applications to the revolving loan fund after the Economic
Development Coordinator has packaged the application and referred to the KEDC.
The committee will meet the applicant, meet with the representative of the
participating lending institution, visit the site if necessary, negotiate
terms, length, security of loans and ensure compliance with the RLF goals and
objectives. A recommendation will be prepared for the KEDC Board's review for
approval or denial which will include a description of the project, project
costs, source of funds, security required, special conditions and reasons for
approval or denial. All other application information is kept confidential. The
KEDC Board shall forward a recommendation to the City Council that will
formally approve or deny the application.
   (B)   The RLF will be staffed by the City Manager, KEDC Economic Development
Coordinator and the City Attorney, and may include the chamber executive if
commercial loans are being considered.
   (C)   The loan documents, including commitment agreements, liens, title
policies, security recordings, transfer tax declarations, amortization
schedules and security releases, shall be obtained and completed by the City
Attorney. The City Manager shall monitor repayments of the loan, and the KEDC
or chamber executive will monitor job creation and/or retention reports
required to be provided semi-annually until the commitment is met, monitor
other special conditions required by the loan.
   (D)   Delinquent loans. When an RLF payment becomes 15 days past due a
minimum 7% late fee is added to the delinquent amount, as established in the
loan agreement. The City Manager, or designee, may place a telephone call, but
will mail a formal letter requesting payment. At 30 days past due the city will
pursue payment through the KEDC Director's assistance, and will notify the City
Attorney of the status of the loan delinquency. Should the payment become 45
days past due the matter will be turned over to the City Attorney to pursue.
All legal rights will be exercised by the city to reclaim funds. Legal counsel
will be consulted during foreclosure and liquidation proceedings if events
warrant.
(Res. 4309, passed 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 4241, passed 6-9-25)
§ 121.13 ASSURANCES.
   (A)   No more than 10% of the annual revenue to the RLF will be used for
administration of the RLF fund. Administrative expenses will be documented via
receipts, bills, invoices and the like.
   (B)   Assistance provided from the RLF will result in at least 51% benefit
to low to moderate income persons and these benefits will be documented.
   (C)   The grantee shall agree to pursue legal remedy to recover delinquent
loans. Legal action shall include that authorized by federal and state law,
including, but not limited to, efforts to collect and pursue the interests of
the RLF through bankruptcy court.
   (D)   A minimum leverage ratio of $1 non-RLF funds to $1 RLF funds must be
obtained for each project. RLF funds may not compromise more than 50% of the
financing for any project.
   (E)   The grantee shall assure that environmental reviews will be completed
for each project funded, as well as prevailing wages paid if applicable.
(Res. 4309, passed 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 4241, passed 6-9-25)
CHAPTER 122: REGULATION OF CONTRACTORS
Section
   
122.01   Roofing contractors
§ 122.01 ROOFING CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   The Illinois Roofing Industry Licensing Act (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 335) is
adopted by reference.
   (B)   Permit. The City Clerk shall issue a permit to any person acting as a
roofing contractor within the City of Kewanee. The form of the permit shall be
determined by the City Manager and at a minimum shall contain the roofing
contractor's name, address, telephone number, State of Illinois Certified
roofing license number, the date of issue, and the fee paid.
   (C)   Qualification. Per ILCS Ch. 225, Act 335, § 11(7) the only
qualification that is required by the City Clerk prior to issuing a permit is
the exhibition of current evidence of a State of Illinois roofing license.
   (D)   Permit fee. To conform with the State of Illinois licensing fee, the
City of Kewanee permit fee will be due biennially. If an applicant for an
initial permit applies for the permit during the second half of the biennial
period, the applicant shall only be required to pay one-half of the amount for
the biennial permit fee. The biennial permit fee is $30, which is due on the
last day of every odd numbered year during the month of July, but no later than
July 30. Permits renewed after the due date shall be assessed a 10% late fee.
   (E)   Like the state statute, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
require a person who performs roofing or waterproofing work to their own
property, or for no consideration, to obtain a permit as a roofing contractor.
This applies to city employees who are conducting roofing work as city
employees on city property.
   (F)   Penalty. Any person, or firm, who performs any roofing work contrary
to the provisions of this section; or any person or firm, who performs any
roofing work without first obtaining a license from the State of Illinois as
specified in ILCS Ch. 225, Act 335; or any person or firm who performs any
roofing work without having first obtained a City of Kewanee Roofing Contractor
Permit, shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this section.
Violations of this section are punishable under §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 3012, passed 11-3-95; Am. Ord. 3146, passed 3-23-98; Am. Ord. 3219,
passed 7-12-99)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
   
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
131.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
   
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
   
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
   
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
   
135.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
   
136.   OFFENSES FACILITATING SUBSTANCE ABUSE
   
137.   WEAPONS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Intent
   
130.03   Knowledge
   
130.04   Recklessness
   
130.05   Negligence
   
130.06   Attempt
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this title the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ACT. Includes a failure or omission to take action.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-2)
   ANOTHER. A person or persons other than the offender.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-3)
   CONDUCT. An act or a series of acts, and the accompanying mental state.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-4)
   OFFENSE. A violation of any penal statute of this city or state.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-12)
§ 130.02 INTENT.
   A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish a
result or engage in conduct described by the section defining the offense, when
the person’s conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result or
engage in that conduct.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-4) (Am. Ord. 4264, passed 12-8-25)
§ 130.03 KNOWLEDGE.
   (A)   A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:
      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of a person’s conduct,
described by the section defining the offense, when the person is consciously
aware that his or her conduct is of that nature or that those circumstances
exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial
probability that the fact exists.
      (2)   The result of a person’s conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when the person is consciously aware that that result is
practically certain to be caused by their conduct.
   (B)   Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed willfully,
within the meaning of a statute using the term “willfully”, unless the section
clearly requires another meaning.
   (C)   When the law provides that acting knowingly suffices to establish an
element of an offense, that element also is established if a person acts
intentionally.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-5) (Am. Ord. 4264, passed 12-8-25)
§ 130.04 RECKLESSNESS.
   A person is reckless or acts recklessly, when that person consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense, and
that disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation. An act performed recklessly
is performed wantonly, within the meaning of a section using the term
"wantonly", unless the statute clearly requires another meaning.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-6)
§ 130.05 NEGLIGENCE.
   A person is negligent, or acts negligently, when that person fails to be
aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a
result will follow, described by the section defining the offense, and that
failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-7) (Am. Ord. 4264, passed 12-8-25)
§ 130.06 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits the offense of attempt when,
with intent to commit a specific offense, the person performs any act that
constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
          (B)   Impossibility. It is not a defense to a charge of attempt that
because of a misapprehension of the circumstances it would have been impossible
for the accused to commit the offense attempted.
   (C)   A person convicted of attempt may be fined or imprisoned or both not
to exceed the maximum provided for the offense attempted.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4) (‘64 Code, § 22-3) (Am. Ord. 4264, passed 12-8-25)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provisions of this title for which another penalty is
not specifically provided shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than the
maximum amount authorized by §
10.99.
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   (Reserved)
   
131.02   Trespass to land
   
131.03   Damaging city property
Loitering
   
131.10   Loitering on public property
   
131.11   Loitering on business parking lots
   
131.12   Obstruction of public right-of-way
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 (RESERVED).
§ 131.02 TRESPASS TO LAND.
   (A)    A person commits criminal trespass to real property when he or she:
      (1)   Knowingly and without lawful authority enter or remain within or on
a building;
      (2)   Enter upon the land of another, after receiving, prior to the
entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden;
      (3)   Remain upon the land of another, after receiving notice from the
owner or occupant to depart;
      (4)   Presents false documents or falsely represents his or her identity
orally to the owner or occupant of a building or land in order to obtain
permission from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in the building or on
the land; or
      (5)   Enters a field used or capable of being used for growing crops, an
enclosed area containing livestock, an agricultural building containing
livestock, or an orchard in or on a motor vehicle (including an off-road
vehicle, motorcycle, moped or other powered two-wheel vehicle) after receiving,
prior to the entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is
forbidden or remains upon or in the area after receiving notice from the owner
or occupant to depart.
      (5)   For purposes of division (1) above, this section shall not apply to
being in a building which is open to the public while the building is open to
the public during its normal hours of operation; nor shall this section apply
to a person who enters a public building under the reasonable belief that the
building is still open to the public.
   (B)   A person is deemed to have received notice from the owner or occupant
within the meaning of division (A) if he or she has been notified personally,
either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding an
entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the
land or the forbidden part thereof.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or
otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of his or her
agent having apparent authority to hire workers on the land and assign them
living quarters or a place of accommodation for living thereon, nor to anyone
living on the land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing, or other
agreement or arrangement with the owner or his agent, nor to anyone invited by
the migrant worker or other person so living on the land to visit him at the
place he is so living on the land.
   (D)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section if he or
she beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial properties
located within this city. For the purpose of this division, UNOCCUPIED AND
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY  means any real estate in which
the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least two years, and which has
been left unoccupied and abandoned for a period of at least one year.
BEAUTIFIES means to landscape, clean up litter, or to repair dilapidated
conditions on or to board up windows and doors.
   (E)   No person shall be liable in any civil action for money damages to the
owner of unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial property which
that person beautifies pursuant to division (D).
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or
upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of this division
(F), "emergency" means a condition or circumstance in which an individual is or
is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger of serious bodily
harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be in imminent danger
of damage or destruction.
   (G)   Division (A)(4) does not apply to a peace officer or other official of
a unit of government who enters a building or land in the performance of his or
her official duties.
   (H)   A person may be liable in any civil action for money damages to the
owner of the land he or she entered upon with a motor vehicle as prohibited
under division (A)(4).
      (1)   A person may also be liable to the owner for court costs and
reasonable attorney’s fees. The measure of damages shall be:
         (a)   The actual damages, but not less than $250, if the vehicle is
operated in a nature preserve or registered area as defined in sections 3.11
and 3.14 of the Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act;
         (b)   Twice the actual damages if the owner has previously notified
the person to cease trespassing; or
         (c)   In any other case, the actual damages, but not less than $50.
      (2)   If the person operating the vehicle is under the age of 16, the
owner of the vehicle and the parent or legal guardian of the minor are jointly
and severally liable. For the purposes of this division:
         LAND. Includes, but is not limited to, land used for crop land, fallow
land, orchard, pasture, feed lot, timber land, prairie land, mine spoil nature
preserves and registered areas. LAND does not include driveways or private
roadways upon which the owner allows the public to drive.
         OWNER. The person who has the right to possession of the land,
including the owner, operator or tenant.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning provided under Section 1-217 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 131.03 DAMAGING CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to:
      (1)   Knowingly damage any city property without the city's consent.
      (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosion, damage city property
without the city's consent.
      (3)   Knowingly start a fire on city land without the consent of the
city.
      (4)   Knowingly deposit on city land or in a city building any stink bomb
or any offensive-smelling compound which thereby tends to interfere with the
use by the city of its land or buildings.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, PROPERTY means anything of value
including, but not limited to real estate, money, commercial instruments,
written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of
value, labor, or services, things affixed to or found on land or part of or
affixed to any building, electricity, gas, or water.
Penalty, see § 130.99
LOITERING
§ 131.10 LOITERING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUSINESS PARKING LOT. Any privately owned parking lot providing free
parking during business hours adjacent to any store, office building,
commercial building or industrial building, for the convenience of employees
and customers or patrons.
      LOITERING. Remaining idle in one location, including walking around
aimlessly, and sitting or standing in or out of a motor vehicle.
      PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation or association.
   (B)   Loitering prohibited. No person shall loiter on private property that
is customarily used by the public as an integral part of a commercial venture
in such a manner as to:
      (1)   Disturb the peace as defined by state law or city ordinance;
      (2)   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
      (3)   Obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully seeking access or
the use of the commercial enterprise conducted on the property or adjacent or
continuous to said private property.
   (C)   Notice. No person shall be guilty of a violation of this subsection
unless:
      (1)   The property owner or tenant shall post the property with "NO
LOITERING" signs or other notices of like meaning at the entrance or entrances
to the property; and
      (2)   The person to be charged with loitering has been asked by the owner
or tenant of the property, by an employee of the owner or tenant, by a security
officer or by a law enforcement officer to leave the property and has failed to
leave.
(Ord. 3337, passed 1-28-02)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 131.11 LOITERING ON BUSINESS PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Trespassing after hours. No person shall enter or stay on any business
parking lot at any time that staying or entering the lot is prohibited by the
owner, as shown by a sign at the parking lot. No person shall place or leave
any vehicle on any business parking lot at any such time.
   (B)   Signs. The prohibition set out in division (A) shall be in effect at
any business parking lot where the owner or person lawfully in charge has
posted a sign or signs clearly stating the prohibition. Signs must be placed so
that they can be seen either at all entrances to the lot or at prominent
locations. Each sign may contain substantially the following language:
NO PARKING OR TRESPASSING BETWEEN 10:00 P.M. AND 6:00 A.M.
(Ord. 3337, passed 1-28-02)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 131.12 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to obstruct access to or encroach upon public
highways, sidewalks, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, or any public
place without written permission from the City Manager or his or her designate.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subsection the word "obstruct" encompasses,
but shall not necessarily be limited to, one or more of the following:
      (1)   Obstruction of the free unhampered passage of pedestrians or
vehicles;
      (2)   Obstruction, molesting, or interfering with any person lawfully
upon any public highways, sidewalks, private ways, streets, alleys, commons or
any public place;
      (3)   Obstructing or otherwise interfering with the free passage of
persons entering or occupying such buildings or premises;
      (4)   Engaging in any activity which tends to provoke a breach of peace;
      (5)   Refusing to move on when so requested by a peace officer, provided
that the peace officer has exercised his or her discretion reasonably under the
circumstances in order to preserve or promote public peace and order.
   (C)   For the purpose of this subsection, "public place" includes the quasi-
public area in front of or adjacent to any store, shop, restaurant,
luncheonette, or other place of business and also includes parking lots or
other vacant property not owned or under the control of the person charged with
a violation of this subsection.
(Ord. 3337, passed 1-28-02)
Penalty, see § 130.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
132.01   Disorderly conduct
   
132.02   Curfew
   
132.03   Provoking a disturbance
   
132.04   Disturbing the peace and noise control
   
132.05   Liquor in public place
   
132.06   Truancy
   
132.07   Use and possession of tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
and electronic cigarettes by persons under the age 21 on school properties
§ 132.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
      (1)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
      (2)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the fire
department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a false alarm
of fire, knowing at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that the fire exists;
      (3)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a
false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a
container holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or
radioactive substance is concealed in a place where its explosion or release
would endanger human life, knowing at the time of the transmission that there
is no reasonable ground for believing that the bomb, explosive or a container
holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive
substance is concealed in the place;
      (3.5)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a threat of
destruction of a school building or school property, or a threat of violence,
death, or bodily harm directed against persons at a school, school function, or
school event, whether or not school is in session;
      (4)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to any peace
officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing
at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that the offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been
committed;
      (5)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
to any public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe
that transmitting the report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public; or
      (6)   Calls the number "911" or transmits or causes to be transmitted in
any manner to a public safety agency for the purpose of making or transmitting
a false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency;
      (7)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
to the Department of Children and Family Services under Section 4 of the Abused
and Neglected Child Reporting Act;
      (8)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
to the Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act, the
Specialized Mental Health Rehabilitation Act of 2013, the ID/DD Community Care
Act, or the MC/DD Act;
      (9)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the police
department or fire department of any municipality or fire protection district,
or any privately owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an
ambulance, emergency medical technician-ambulance or emergency medical
technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no reasonable ground for
believing that the assistance is required;
      (10)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
under Article II of Public Act 83-1432;
      (11)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it; or
      (12)   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the Collection
Agency Act or as an employee of the collection agency, and while attempting to
collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is
designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor.
   (B)   Sentence. A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a Class C
misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(5) or (A)(11) of this section is a
Class A misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(8) or (A)(10) of this section
is a Class B misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(2), (A)(3.5), (A)(4), (A)
(6), (A)(7), or (A)(9) of this section is a Class 4 felony. A violation of
division (A)(3) of this section is a Class 3 felony, for which a fine of not
less than $3,000 and no more than $10,000 shall be assessed in addition to any
other penalty imposed. A violation of division (A)(12) of this section is a
business offense and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $3,000. A second
or subsequent violation of division (A)(7) or (A)(5) of this section is a Class
4 felony. A third or subsequent violation of division (A)(11) of this section
is a Class 4 felony.
   (C)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, a court shall
order any person convicted of disorderly conduct to perform community service
for not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours, if community service is
available in the jurisdiction and is funded and approved by the county board of
the county where the offense was committed. In addition, whenever any person is
placed on supervision for an alleged offense under this section, the
supervision shall be conditioned upon the performance of the community service.
This division does not apply when the court imposes a sentence of
incarceration.
   (D)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, the court shall
order any person convicted of disorderly conduct under division (A)(3) of this
section involving a false alarm of a threat that a bomb or explosive device has
been placed in a school that requires an emergency response to reimburse the
unit of government that employs the emergency response officer or officers that
were dispatched to the school for the cost of the response. If the court
determines that the person convicted of disorderly conduct that requires an
emergency response to a school is indigent, the provisions of this division (D)
do not apply.
   (E)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, the court shall
order any person convicted of disorderly conduct under division (A)(3.5) or (A)
(6) of this section to reimburse the public agency for the reasonable costs of
the emergency response by the public agency up to $10,000. If the court
determines that the person convicted of disorderly conduct under division (A)
(3.5) or (A)(6) of this section is indigent, the provisions of this division
(E) do not apply.
   (F)   For the purposes of this section, EMERGENCY RESPONSE means any
condition that results in, or could result in, the response of a public
official in an authorized emergency vehicle, any condition that  jeopardizes or
could jeopardize public safety and results in, or could result in, the
evacuation of any area, building, structure, vehicle, or of any other place
that any person may enter, or any incident requiring a response by a police
officer, a firefighter, a State Fire Marshal employee, or an ambulance.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 132.02 CURFEW.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at
or upon any public assembly, building, business, street, highway or other
public place or way at the following times;
      (1)   For persons less than 13 years, between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the
following day on any day of the week.
      (2)   For persons at least 13 years of age, but not yet 17 years of age:
         (a)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, inclusive, and 6:
00 a.m. the following day.
         (b)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday.
   (B)   It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the child
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the child's parent, legal guardian, custodian,
sibling, stepbrother or stepsister at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Accompanied by an adult at least 21 years of age approved by the
child's parent, guardian, or custodian;
      (3)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
         (a)   Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than 17 years of age to perform;
         (b)   A school recreational activity;
         (c)   A religious event;
         (d)   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
         (e)   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights
protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or
Article 1, Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois,
or both;
         (f)   An activity conducted by a non-profit or governmental entity
that provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the
supervision of one or more adult.
   (C)   A citation for violation of division (A) of this section may be issued
by a police officer only if he or she reasonably believes that a violation has
occurred and none of the defenses enumerated in division (B) apply.
   (D)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate the
provisions of division (A) of this section. It shall be a rebuttable
presumption that a person has violated this section if someone under 17 years
of age of whom such person has custody or control is present upon any public
assembly, building, business, street or highway or other public place or public
way in violation of division (A) of this section, and none of the defenses
enumerated in division (B) of this section apply.
(Am. Ord. 3061, passed 5-28-96; Am. Ord. 3185, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 3434,
passed 6-14-04; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose curfew, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-5
§ 132.03 PROVOKING A DISTURBANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to challenge another to fight, or to
threaten or traduce another, or to use any profane, obscene or offensive
language, or indulge in any conduct toward another tending to provoke a
disturbance or breach of the peace; and any person so violating the provisions
hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-36)
§ 132.04 DISTURBING THE PEACE AND NOISE CONTROL.
   (A)   Short title. This section may be known and cited as the "City of
Kewanee Disturbing the Peace and Noise Control Ordinance."
   (B)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   The Kewanee City Council finds that unreasonably excessive noise
degrades the environment of the city to a degree that such noise:
         (a)   Is harmful to the health, safety, and welfare of city residents
and visitors;
         (b)   Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property;
         (c)   Interferes with the well-being, tranquility, and privacy of
one's home; and
         (d)   Can cause and aggravate health problems.
      (2)   The effective control of unreasonably excessive noise is essential
to the health, safety, and welfare of city residents and visitors, and fosters
the comfortable enjoyment of life, including, but not limited to, recreation,
work, communication, and rest.
      (3)   This section is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the
health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of residents and visitors of the city
through the control, reduction, and prevention of unreasonably excessive noises
that unreasonably disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health,
peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities.
      (4)   Nothing contained in this section is intended to infringe upon the
constitutionally protected rights guaranteed by the Illinois Constitution and
the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. This section enacts
narrowly drawn, content-neutral regulations that are to be interpreted so as to
not unduly restrict constitutionally protected rights.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
      AMPLIFIED SOUND. Sound whose volume is increased by any electric,
electronic, mechanical, or motor-powered means.
      A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured
with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network as described in ANSI
S1.4-1983 issued by the American National Standards Institute. The unit of
measurement is the dBA.
      C-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured
with a sound level meter using the C-weighting network as described in ANSI
S1.4-1983 issued by the American National Standards Institute. The unit of
measurement is the dBC.
      DECIBEL (dB). A unit for measuring the amplitude of sound, equal to 20
times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons
per square meter).
      EMERGENCY. Any occurrence, or set of circumstances, involving actual,
threatened, or imminent physical trauma or injury, natural resource damage, or
property damage which demands immediate action.
      Leq (EQUIVALENT SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL). The constant sound level that, in
a given situation and time period, conveys the same sound energy as the actual
time-varying sound.
      OFFICER. Any designated employee or agent of the city whose duty it is to
enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the city and may include, but shall not
be limited to, law enforcement officers and code enforcement officers.
      PERSON(S). Means, but is not limited to, any individual, natural person,
firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate or other group, association,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, trustee, executor, administrator,
receiver, or other fiduciary, or any other entity whatsoever, or any
combination of such, jointly and severally.
      PERSON(S) RESPONSIBLE. Means, but is not limited to, any person who has
any manner of control over a property, premises, dwelling, structure, location,
business, vehicle, device, stereo, or source of sound and may include, but is
not limited to, any property owner, tenant, subtenant, business owner,
resident, operator or person having operational control, person(s) creating or
controlling the volume of sound, manager of a commercial property, or person(s)
in charge or otherwise authorized to make decisions regarding the use of sound
equipment, or any combination of such, jointly and severally.
      PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound that can be clearly heard by a reasonable
person using such person's ordinary auditory senses, so long as the person's
hearing is not enhanced by any device, such as a hearing aid. The person need
not determine the particular words or phrases being produced or the name of any
song or artist producing the sound for the sound to be considered plainly
audible. The detection of a rhythmic bass reverberating type sound is
sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound.
      PROPERTY. Any private property, public property, or public right-of-way
and includes the air space above.
      PROPERTY LINE. Either (i) an imaginary line along the ground surface, and
its vertical plane extension, which separates the real property owned, rented,
or leased by a person(s) or entity from that real property owned, rented or
leased by another person(s) or entity, or (ii) the vertical and horizontal
boundaries of a residential dwelling unit that is contained in a building
containing two or more residential units or any combination of separately
leased or owned spaces.
      RECEIVING PROPERTY. At or within the property line which is receiving
sound from another property, but does not include public rights-of-way.
      SOUND LEVEL. A sound pressure level obtained using a signal to which
standard weighting has been applied.
   (D)   Prohibition of unreasonably excessive noise from a property
entertainment area. It shall be unlawful for any person(s), including the
property owner(s), to permit, cause, allow, create, emit, or sustain
unreasonably excessive noise from a property, including air space thereof,
located in the city and within the below described entertainment area.
      (1)   Definitions. For purposes of this division (D), the following
additional definitions apply:
         (a)   ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Any property located in the area bounded on
the north by the southern boundary to the BNSF railroad right-of-way, on the
east by the east side of Burr Boulevard, on the west by Park Street, and on the
south by the north side of Central Boulevard.
         (b)   UNREASONABLY EXCESSIVE NOISE FROM A PROPERTY. Sound from any
property within the entertainment area, which meets or exceeds the following
maximum sound levels:
            1.   Seventy-five dBA or 77 dBC between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m., Sundays through Thursdays, or 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Fridays
and Saturdays.
            2.   Sixty-five dBA or 67 dBC between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., at all other times and days except as expressly provided for in
division (D)(1)(b)1. above.
      (2)   Determining dBA or dBC under this division (D). In determining the
dBA or dBC sound level under this division, a measurement shall be taken from
the property line of the property generating the sound, or from the individual
lease boundary of the property generating the sound in the case of property
which has been subdivided by the execution of individual leases. The equivalent
(Leq) decibel measurement taken at 30 seconds shall not exceed the maximum
sound levels set above.
      (3)   Sound level measurement standards. All sound level meters used to
enforce the provisions of this division (D) shall be calibrated and serviced in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. All sound level meters used to
enforce the provisions of this division (D) shall be operated in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
   (E)   Prohibition of unreasonably excessive noise from a property - all
other areas. It shall be unlawful for any person(s), including the property
owner(s), to permit, cause, allow, create, emit, or sustain unreasonably
excessive noise from a property, including air space thereof, located in the
city and not within the entertainment area described in division (D) of this
section.
      (1)   Definitions. For purposes of this division (E), the following
additional definitions apply:
         (a)   UNREASONABLY EXCESSIVE NOISE FROM A PROPERTY. Sound from any
property not located within the entertainment area described in division (D) of
this section, which is unreasonably loud and raucous as defined below.
         (b)   UNREASONABLY LOUD AND RAUCOUS. Any sound that, because of its
volume level or duration, jars, injures, or endangers the health, safety,
welfare, or well-being of a reasonable individual of ordinary sensibilities.
      (2)   Violation at any time. An officer may issue a civil citation or
notice of violation for unreasonably excessive noise from a property if the
officer has probable cause to believe the noise is unreasonably loud and
raucous after considering the following:
         (a)   Whether the sound is plainly audible within a fully enclosed
structure or residence located on the property of a person making a complaint;
         (b)   Whether the sound is causing vibration, rattles, thumping, or
pulsating within a fully enclosed structure or residence located on the
property of a person making a complaint;
         (c)   Whether the duration of the sound jars, injures, or endangers
the health, safety, welfare, or well-being of a reasonable individual of
ordinary sensibilities; and
         (d)   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or continuous in a
manner that jars, injures, or endangers the health, safety, welfare, or well-
being of a reasonable individual of ordinary sensibilities.
      (3)   Violation based upon sworn complaint. An officer may issue a civil
citation or notice of violation upon receiving a sworn complaint from a person
for unreasonably excessive noise from a property, if the officer has probable
cause to believe the noise is unreasonably loud and raucous based on the sworn
complaint and after considering any of the following:
         (a)   The time of day a complaint about unreasonably excessive noise
occurs;
         (b)   The duration of the sound;
         (c)   The number and history of relevant complaints from the same
residence or structure;
         (d)   The distance from the source of the sound;
         (e)   The number of person(s) affected by the sound;
         (f)   The proximity of the sound to residential sleeping facilities;
         (g)   The ability of a witness to hear the sound and testify about the
complaint;
         (h)   The corroboration by sworn statement(s) of witness(es) to the
sound other than, and in addition to, the primary affiant;
         (i)   The availability of audio/video recording of the sound;
         (j)   The totality of circumstances, including the factors delineated
in division (E)(2)(a) through (d) of this section; and
         (k)   Whether the sound is a listed exemption pursuant to division (G)
of this section.
      (4)   Prima facie evidence. For the purposes of this division (E) of this
section, the following shall constitute prima facie evidence that a sound
(whether recurrent, intermittent, or continuous) is unreasonably loud and
raucous if:
         (a)   Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the sound is
plainly audible a minimum of 100 feet from the property line of the source of
the sound at or within a fully enclosed structure or residence on any receiving
property; or
         (b)   The sound meets or exceeds 73 dBA or 75 dBC between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., or 65 dBA or 67 dBC between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. Sound level measurements shall be obtained in accordance with the
provisions of divisions (D)(2) and (D)(3) of this section.
   (G)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The operation of warning or emergency signal devices such as
sirens, horns, alarms, and bells, including those generated from railroad
crossings and trains as required by law, when utilized for their intended
purpose or in cases of emergency.
      (2)   Sounds resulting from equipment or operations incidental to the
installation, maintenance, or repair of facilities or restoration of services,
such as public utilities work or other emergency work in the public interest.
      (3)   The operation of equipment or conduction of activities common to
residential or agricultural communities, including, but not limited to, lawn
care; soil cultivation; lawn mowers; maintenance of trees, shrubs, hedges, and
gardens; tree trimming; limb chipping; domestic power tools; saws and tractors;
street sweepers; mosquito fogging; and other community operations, between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
      (4)   The operation of equipment or conduction of activities for city
approved refuse and recyclable waste collection, between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m.
      (5)   Construction activities between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., for which
building permits have been issued, or for construction activities not requiring
permits due to the scope of work or ownership of the project by a governmental
agency; provided all equipment is operated in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications and with all standard equipment, manufacturer's
mufflers, and noise-reducing equipment in use and in good operating condition.
      (6)   Sounds emanating from bona fide farm operations on land classified
as agricultural land, which is exempt from local regulation.
      (7)   Residential air conditioners and residential swimming pool
equipment.
      (8)   Sounds made by dogs, birds, and other animals, which are regulated
by Chapter 91 of the Kewanee City Code.
      (9)   Activities in the fields, grounds, or facilities of any schools,
sporting arena, stadium, or sports complex to which the public or community has
access.
      (10)   Sounds generated from any event, when a permit has been obtained
from the city prior to such event, and such sounds are in compliance with any
conditions imposed by that permit. This provision shall include, but not be
limited to, any parade, road festival, fireworks displays, or special event.
      (11)   Sounds generated from manufacturing districts as shall be enforced
pursuant to §§
155.070(E) and
155.071(E) of the Kewanee City Code.
   (H)   Waivers. The City Council may vote to temporarily suspend or modify
any and all of the prohibitions contained in this section when it finds that
emergency circumstances, including, but not limited to those resulting from
natural disaster(s), exist or when a permit has been granted for a special
event pursuant to division (G)(11) of this section.
   (I)   Enforcement and penalties. The authority to enforce the provisions of
this section shall be vested in the Kewanee Police Department. Nothing in this
section shall prohibit the Police Department from charging persons responsible
for acts, which affect the peace and quiet of other persons, for breach of the
peace or disorderly conduct under §
132.01, as may be amended from time to time. This section shall be enforced by
an officer as follows:
      (1)   Any person(s) responsible for a violation of divisions (D) or (E)
of this section may be given a citation of unreasonably excessive noise.
      (2)   Any person(s), including the property owner(s), who violates any of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of
$150 for a first violation, and $500 for any subsequent violation occurring
within one year after a finding of violation of the previous offense or a plea
of no contest or guilty. Each violation of this section shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense for which a civil citation or notice of violation
may be issued.
      (3)   Joint and several responsibility. Any person(s) responsible for
unreasonably excessive noise from a property or from a vehicle, as defined
herein, may be liable for the violation under this section. More than one
person may be found to be responsible for the violation.
      (4)   Unreasonably excessive noise is declared a public nuisance. The
prosecution of an offense under this section does not limit the city's right to
abate the public nuisance, or from seeking injunctive relief, by any means
provided by law. The City Attorney or designee(s) may bring suit on behalf of
the city against the person(s) responsible for causing, maintaining,
permitting, or allowing a public nuisance under this section. This section
shall not prohibit or otherwise restrict any person(s) from bringing suit
against a public nuisance for unreasonably excessive noise.
(‘71 Code, § 7-1-15) (Ord. 4051, passed 5-10-21)
§ 132.05 LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   (A)   Definition. As used in this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing
more than one-half of 1% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage
purposes or intended for beverage purposes.
   (B)   Consumption. No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor while in or
upon public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, or other public ways.
This subsection shall not be applicable to public property for which a valid
City of Kewanee Class H-2 public event liquor license has been authorized by
resolution of the Kewanee City Council per the provisions of §
111.30 of
Chapter 111 Alcoholic Liquor of the Kewanee City Code.
   (C)   Open container. No person shall be in possession of any glass, can or
open container containing alcoholic liquor on any thoroughfare, street,
sidewalk, alley, parking lots or any other public place. This subsection shall
not be applicable to public property for which a valid City of Kewanee Class H-
2 public event liquor license has been authorized by resolution of the Kewanee
City Council per the provisions of §
111.30 of
Chapter 111 Alcoholic Liquor of the Kewanee City Code.
   (D)   Open container in motor vehicles. No person shall have in his or her
possession an open container containing alcoholic liquor within or on a motor
vehicle, including motorcycles, while parked or standing on a public street or
public parking lot in the city, or while such vehicle is in motion.
   (E)   Sign required. All premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor
shall post a notice at each exit stating that “NO BEER, LIQUOR OR WINE MAY BE
CARRIED IN AN OPEN CONTAINER OUT OF THIS BUILDING.”
   (F)   Pedestrians under the influence of alcohol or drugs. Pedestrians under
the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree that it renders them a hazard
shall not walk or be upon any street, roadway, boulevard, alley, public parking
lot or sidewalk in the city.
   (G)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section may, without appearing in court, pay a fine of $100
for a first offense. Payment shall be made to the Clerk of the Circuit Court in
which a citation is issued. A second or subsequent offense will require the
offender to appear on a court date as stated in the citation alleging the
violation of this section. Those violating any of the provisions of this
section a second or subsequent time shall be fined not less than $100 nor more
than $750 for each offense.
(Ord. 3430, passed 5-10-04; Am. Ord. 3591, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. 3732,
passed 4-22-13; Am. Ord. 3801, passed 7-13-15)
§ 132.06 TRUANCY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years enrolled
in a public, private or parochial school within the corporate limits of the
city to absent himself or herself from attendance at school without parental
permission. Any person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty
of the offense of truancy and be subject to the penalties hereinafter set
forth. Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes beyond
the control of the person so absenting himself or herself from school without
parental permission shall not constitute truancy if permission for such absence
has substantially been obtained from the parent and such permission is granted
in writing to the proper school authorities within 24 hours after such an
absence.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years who
is suspended from a public, private or parochial school within the corporate
limits of the city to be anywhere within the city limits other than at home or
with their parents or guardians during normal school hours during the terms of
said suspension.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section as a first offense
shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $25. Any person violating this
section after the first offense shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $500. Each day during which or on which any person violates the
provisions of this section shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to
any fines imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any person violating
this chapter may also be subject to public service work as ordered by the
court.
(Ord. 3180, passed 9-14-98)
§ 132.07 USE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS,
AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE 21 ON SCHOOL PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
      TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or a leaf and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. Tobacco product includes any
component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold
separately.
      ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT. A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means.
      ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE. Includes, but is not limited to, any electronic
nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic
pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and any
components or parts that can be used to build the product or device.
      SCHOOL PROPERTY. School property means and includes a public or private
school building or bus, public or private school campus, grounds, recreational
area, athletic field or other property  owned, used or operated by any local
school board, school, board of trustees or for directors for the administration
of any public or private education institution within the city limits of
Kewanee.
   (B)   Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21
to use or possess tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
electronic cigarettes on any school property within the city limits of Kewanee.
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   A first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of
no less than $100, or up to 25 hours of community service.
      (2)   A second or subsequent violation of this section by the same
responsible person shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $250, or up to
50 hours of community service.
(Ord. 4076, passed 9-27-21)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
133.01   Resisting or obstructing a police officer
   
133.02   Refusing to aid an officer
   
133.03   Tampering with public notice
§ 133.01 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A POLICE OFFICER.
   A person who knowingly resists or obstructs the performance, or disobeys a
direct command by one known to the person to be a peace officer of any
authorized act within his official capacity, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
('71 Code, § 7-1-40)
§ 133.02 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
   No person, upon command, shall knowingly refuse or unreasonably fail to aid
a person known by him to be a police officer in:
   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-8) (Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 133.03 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
   A person commits tampering with public notice when he or she knowingly and
without lawful authority alter, destroy, deface, remove, or conceal any public
notice posted according to law, during the time for which the notice was to
remain posted.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9)
Penalty, see § 130.99
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
134.01   Public indecency
   
134.02   Obscenity
   
134.03   Harmful material
   
134.04   Prostitution; house of ill-fame
§ 134.01 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct, as defined in ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-0.1; or
      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
      (3)   Breastfeeding of infants is not an act of public indecency.
   (B)   PUBLIC PLACE. For purposes of this section, PUBLIC PLACE means any
place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-30) (Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 134.02 OBSCENITY.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he or she:
      (1)   Sells, delivers, or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver,
or provide any obscene writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene;
      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance, or other performance,
or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
      (3)   Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise makes available any obscene
material;
      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body for gain;
      (5)   Creates, buys, procures, or possesses obscene or material with
intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or
regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      (6)   Advertises or promotes the sale of material represented or held out
by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (B)   Obscene defined. Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest;
      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts, sadomasochistic sexual acts (whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated), masturbation, excretory functions, or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and
      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political,
or scientific value.
   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.
      (1)   Obsecenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults,
except when the material or its dissemination appears to be specially designed
for or directed to children or other specially susceptible audiences.
      (2)   If the production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution,
or publicity of material indicates commercial exploitation for its prurient
appeal, such evidence is probative regarding the nature of the material and may
justify concluding that it lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific value.
      (3)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence
shall be admissible to show:
         (a)   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or directed;
         (b)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of such people;
         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational, or other merits
of the material, or absence thereof;
         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material within
this state;
         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising
or other promotion of the material;
         (f)   The intent or purpose of the author, creator, publisher, or
disseminator.
   (D)   Permissive inference. The trier of fact may infer an intent to
disseminate from the creation, purchase, procurement, or possession of a mold,
engraved plate, or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for
reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than three copies of
obscene material.
   (E)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      (1)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under 18 years of age;
      (2)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
   (F)   Forfeiture of property. A person who has been convicted previously of
the offense of obscenity and who is convicted of a second or subsequent offense
of obscenity is subject to the property forfeiture provisions set forth in
Article 124B of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20) (Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 134.03 HARMFUL MATERIAL.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
       HARMFUL TO MINORS. That quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-
masochistic abuse, when, taken as a whole, it:
         (a)   Predominately appeals to the prurient interest in sex of minors;
         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community in the state as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for
minors; and
         (c)   Lacks serious literary, artistic, political; or scientific value
for minors.
      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the contents.
      MATERIAL.
         (a)   Any picture, photograph drawing, sculpture, film, video game,
computer game, video or similar visual depiction, including any such
representation or image which is stored electronically; or
         (b)   Any book, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or
recorded audio of any sort.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion below the top of
the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in under-garments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one clothed
for sexual gratification or stimulation.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or physical
contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or,
if such person be a female, breast.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   A person is guilty of distributing harmful material to a minor when he
or she:
      (1)   Knowingly sells, lends, distributes, exhibits to, depicts to, or
gives away to a minor, knowing that the minor is under the age of 18 or failing
to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the person's true age:
          (a)   Any material which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-
masochistic abuse, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions
or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic
abuse, and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors;
         (b)   A motion picture, show, or other presentation which depicts
nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and is harmful to minors; or
         (c)   An admission ticket or pass to premises where there is exhibited
or to be exhibited such a motion picture, show, or other presentation; or
       (2)   Admits a minor to premises where there is exhibited or to be
exhibited such a motion picture, show, or other presentation, knowing that the
minor is a person under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the person's true age.
   (C)   In any prosecution arising under this section, it is an affirmative
defense:
      (1)   That the minor as to whom the offense is alleged to have been
committed exhibited to the accused a draft card, driver's license, birth
certificate or other official or apparently official document purporting to
establish that the minor was 18 years of age or older, which was relied upon by
the accused;
      (2)   That the defendant was in a parental or guardianship relationship
with the minor or that the minor was accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
      (3)   That the defendant was a bona fide school, museum, or public
library, or was a person acting in the course of his or her employment as an
employee or official of such organization or retail outlet affiliated with and
serving the educational purpose of such organization;
      (4)   That the act charged was committed in aid of legitimate scientific
or educational purposes; or
      (5)   That an advertisement of harmful material as defined in this
section culminated in the sale or distribution of such harmful material to a
child under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the
child by the defendant, his or her employees, or agents, as where the order or
request for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, Internet
or similar means of communication, and delivery of such harmful material to the
child was by mail, freight, Internet or similar means of transport, which
advertisement contained the following statement, or a substantially similar
statement, and that the defendant required the purchaser to certify that he or
she was not under the age of 18 and that the purchaser falsely stated that he
or she was not under the age of 18:
      "NOTICE: It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase
the matter advertised. Any person under the age of 18 that falsely states that
he or she is not under the age of 18 for the purpose of obtaining the material
advertised is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor under the laws of the State."
   (D)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be
judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the child
to whom such material was sold, lent, distributed or given, unless it appears
from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination or
distribution that it is designed for specially susceptible groups, in which
case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged with reference to
its intended or probable recipient group.
   (E)   Distribution of harmful material in violation of this section is a
Class A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent offense is a Class 4 felony.
   (F)   Any person under the age of 18 who falsely states, either orally or in
writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18, or who presents or offers
to any person any evidence of age and identity that is false or not actually
his or her own with the intent of ordering, obtaining, viewing, or otherwise
procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material is guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 134.04 PROSTITUTION; HOUSE OF ILL-FAME.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any to commit the following acts:
      (1)   To keep or maintain, directly or indirectly, any bawdy or
disorderly house, house of ill-fame, or house of assignation, or place for the
practice of fornication or adultery within the city or within the limits over
which the jurisdiction of the city shall extend.
      (2)   To knowingly lease any building or premises owned by him or her or
under his or her control to be used in whole or in part as a house of ill-fame
or place for the practice of fornication or adultery, or to permit any building
owned or controlled by him to be so used.
      (3)   To be an inmate or occupant of, or to visit or frequent or be found
in any house of ill-fame, or place used for the practice of fornication or
adultery.
      (4)   To entice, influence or persuade any female or male to enter or
frequent any bawdy house, house of ill-fame or of assignation, or place used
for the practice of fornication or adultery; or to induce any minor to enter or
frequent, or to allow or permit any minor to remain in any such house or place.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of divisions (A)(1) through (4)
above shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-4).
   (C)   In any action or suit arising under any of the aforementioned
divisions (A)(1) through (4), evidence of the general reputation of such place,
of the inmates thereof and of those resorting thereto, shall be admissible for
the purpose of proving the place to be a house of ill-fame, or of assignation,
or that it is used for the purposes of fornication or adultery, and such
evidence of the general reputation thereof shall be sufficient to make out a
prima facie case.
   (D)   No person shall be subject to any fine or penalty for or on account of
any testimony which he may give as a witness in any police or other court
concerning his being an inmate or occupant of or being found in any bawdy
house, house of ill-fame or in any gambling house.
(‘71 Code, § 7-1-37) (Am. Ord. 2447, passed 1-27-25)
CHAPTER 135: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Gambling
   
135.03   Keeping a gambling place
   
135.04   Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine, or other machines or
device for the reception of money or other thing of value based on chance or
skill, or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked,
hazarded, bet, won, or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment,
or other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A GAMBLING
DEVICE does not include:
      (1)   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for amusement
which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical device, and
which device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of the
operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which returns
to the player thereof no money, property, or right to receive money or
property.
      (2)   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the
money invested and in which there is no element of chance of hazard.
      (3)    Crane game. For purposes of this section, an amusement device
involving skill that rewards the player exclusively with merchandise contained
within the amusement device proper and limited to toys, novelties and prizes
other than currency, each having a wholesale value not exceeding $25.
      (4)   Redemption machine. For purposes of this section a single-player or
multi-player amusement device involving a game, the object of which is
throwing, rolling, bowling, shooting, placing or propelling a ball or other
object into, upon or against a hole or other target, provided that all of the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   The outcome of the game is predominantly determined by the skill
of the player;
         (b)   The award of the prize is based solely upon the player’s
achieving the object of the game or otherwise upon the player’s score;
         (c)   Only merchandise prizes are awarded;
         (d)   The wholesale value of prizes awarded in lieu of tickets or
tokens for single play of the device does not exceed $25;
         (e)   The redemption value of tickets, tokens and other
representations of value, which may be accumulated by players to redeem prizes
of greater value, does not exceed the amount charged for a single play of the
device.
      (5)   Licensed video gaming terminal. Licensed video gaming terminals in
currently licensed establishments as put forth in the Illinois Video Gaming
Act, and in any rules promulgated by the Illinois Gaming Board.
   INTERNET. An interactive computer service or system or an information
service, system, or access software provider that provides or enables computer
access by multiple users to a computer server, and includes, but is not limited
to, an information service, system, or access software provider that provides
access to a network system commonly known as the Internet, or any comparable
system or service and also includes, but is not limited to, a World Wide Web
page, newsgroup, message board, mailing list, or chat area on any interactive
computer service or system or other online service.
   LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed
by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to
win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle,
gift, sale, or some other name, excluding savings promotion raffles authorized
under The Illinois Banking Act, ILCS Ch. 205, Act 5, § 5g, The Savings Bank
Act, ILCS Ch. 205, Act 205, § 7008, The Illinois Credit Union Act, ILCS Ch.
205, Act 305, § 42.7, § 5136B of the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 25a), or § 4
of the Home Owners’ Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).
   POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees
by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token, or other device that any
particular number, character, ticket, or certificate shall in the event of any
contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder to
receive money, property, or evidence of debt.
   SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICE. Any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical
device that, upon payment of consideration, uses a video display or other
mechanism to simulate games commonly associated with gambling, including but
not limited to spinning reels or video poker-style games, and that awards
credits, points, tokens, or other representations of value that may be
exchanged, directly or indirectly, for money, gift cards, merchandise, or
additional play. A simulated gambling device is not a licensed video gaming
terminal under the Illinois Video Gaming Act. SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICES are
prohibited in all locations within the city unless expressly authorized by
state law.
(Am. Ord. 3706, passed 6-11-12; Am. Ord. 4265, passed 12-8-25)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state statute, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2
§ 135.02 GAMBLING.
   (A)   A person commits gambling when, within the corporate limits of the
city, they:
      (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or any other thing of
value, unless excepted in division (B);
      (2)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any
political nomination, appointment, or election;
      (3)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells,
bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures, or distributes any gambling
device, with the exception of licensed video gaming terminals in currently
licensed establishments as put forth in the Illinois Video Gaming Act, and in
compliance with rules promulgated by the Illinois Gaming Board;
      (4)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument, or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which they have received in the courses of a bet
or wager;
      (5)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or
chance, political nomination, appointment, or election;
      (6)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell, or
transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
      (7)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell, or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document, or
other similar device;
      (8)   Knowingly drafts, prints, or publishes any lottery ticket or share,
or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state or foreign
government;
      (9)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state; or
      (10)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore, or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information; except that nothing in this division prohibits
transmission or receipt of such information for use in news-reporting of
sporting events or contests;
      (11)   Knowingly establishes, maintains, or operates an Internet site
that permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for money or other
thing of value by means of the Internet or to make a wager upon the result of
any game, contest, political nomination, appointment, or election by means of
the Internet. This subsection does not apply to activities referenced in
division (B)(6) and (7); or
      (12)   Games of skill or chance where money or other things of value can
be won but no payment or purchase is required to participate.
      (13)   Possesses, operates, installs, maintains, or places into use any
simulated gambling device, except as expressly authorized by state law.
   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted
of gambling:
      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance
including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life or
health or accident insurance;
      (2)   Offers of prizes, awards, or compensation to the actual contestants
in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength, or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest;
      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state;
      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law;
      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo,” when conducted in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 25, § 1 et seq.;
      (6)   Lotteries when conducted by the State of Illinois in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 20, Act 1605, § 1 et seq. or a third party pursuant to a
management agreement with the State of Illinois in accordance with the Illinois
Lottery law. This exemption includes any activity conducted by the Department
of Revenue to sell lottery tickets pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois
Lottery law and its rules;
      (7)   The purchase of lottery tickets through the Internet for a lottery
conducted by the state under the program established in Section 7.12 of the
Illinois Lottery law.
      (8)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division, an ANTIQUE SLOT
MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or more;
      (9)   Raffles and poker runs when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch.
230, Act 15, § 1 et seq.;
      (10)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 230,
Act 30, § 1 et seq.;
      (11)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under ILCS Ch. 230, Act 20,
§§ 1 et seq.;
      (12)   Gambling games conducted on riverboats when authorized by ILCS Ch.
230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.;
      (13)   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment, licensed
fraternal establishment, or licensed veterans establishment when conducted in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.;
      (14)   Games of skill or chance where money or other things of value can
be won but no payment or purchase is required to participate; or
      (15)   Savings promotion raffles under The Illinois Banking Act, ILCS Ch.
205, Act 5, § 5g, The Savings Bank Act, ILCS Ch. 205, Act 205, § 7008, The
Illinois Credit Union Act, ILCS Ch. 205, Act 305, § 42.7, § 5136B of the
National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 25a), or § 4 of the Home Owners’ Loan Act (12
U.S.C. 1463).
   (C)   Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under § 135.02 (A) (1)
through (10), circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight
as in any criminal prosecution.
(Am. Ord. 3706, passed 6-11-12; Am. Ord. 4265, passed 12-8-25) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state statute, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2
§ 135.03 KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate,
vehicle, boat, or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes of
gambling, with the exception of licensed video gaming terminals in currently
licensed establishments as put forth in the Illinois Video Gaming Act, and in
full compliance with rules promulgated by the Illinois Gaming Board. No person
shall knowingly permit any premises or property owned or occupied by them or
under their control to be used as a gambling place.
   (B)   When any premises are determined by the circuit court to be a gambling
place:
      (1)   Such premises are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may
be proceeded against as such; and
      (2)   Such premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for, and may be
sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied
fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.
(Am. Ord. 3706, passed 6-11-12; Am. Ord. 4265, passed 12-8-25) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state statute, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-3
§ 135.04 SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
   (A)   With the exception of licensed video gaming terminals in currently
licensed establishments as put forth in the Illinois Video Gaming Act, and in
full compliance with rules promulgated by the Illinois Gaming Board, every
device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use or every device
used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a gambling device and shall be
subject to seizure, confiscation, and destruction by city authorities. With the
exception of any device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use,
no gambling device shall be forfeited or destroyed unless an individual with a
property interest in the device knew of the unlawful use thereof. Simulated
gambling devices are hereby declared gambling devices for purposes of seizure,
forfeiture, and deconstruction under this section. Any premises containing a
simulated gambling device shall be deemed a gambling place for purposes of this
section.
   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to
the city. Any money or other thing of value integrally related to acts of
gambling shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to the city.
(Am. Ord. 3706, passed 6-11-12; Am. Ord. 4265, passed 12-8-25)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state statute, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-5
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES FACILITATING SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Section
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Regulations
 
   
136.99   Penalty
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which contains one-half
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
   CONVEYANCE. Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for the
transportation of persons or property.
   EVENT  or GATHERING. Any group of three or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
   HOST.  To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or
permit a gathering or event.
   ILLICIT DRUGS.  Any drug, substance or compound prohibited by law, including
drugs prescribed by a physician which are in the possession of or used by
someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
   PARENT.  Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
      (1)   As a natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
      (2)   As a legal guardian; or
      (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.
   REASONABLE STEPS. Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the event or
gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the event
or gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the event or gathering by
inspecting driver's licenses or other government-issued identification cards to
ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the event or
gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the event or gathering,
calling for police assistance in the event people under 21 are in possession of
alcohol at the event or gathering or advising law enforcement in advance of
departing one's residence that the owner will be away and no underage person is
authorized to be present and consume alcohol at the owner's residence.
   RELIGIOUS CEREMONY.  The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol
or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or
religious ceremony.
   RESIDENCE  or PREMISES.  Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park, or other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on
a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically
for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or
used with or without permission or compensation.
   RESPONSE COSTS. The costs associated with responses by law enforcement,
fire, and other emergency response providers to an event or gathering,
including but not limited to:
      (1)   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire,
or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding
to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with an event or gathering, and the
administrative costs attributable to such response(s);
      (2)   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of an event or gathering;
      (3)   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and
the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or
leaving the scene of an event or gathering.
   UNDERAGE PERSON.  Any individual under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 3759, passed 3-24-14)
§ 136.02 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person to
permit, allow, host or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent an event or
gathering at his or her place of residence or other private property, public
place, any other premises under his or her control, or in any conveyance over
which that person has control or a reasonable opportunity for control, where
illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages have been consumed by an underage person,
if such person either knows or reasonably should know that an underage person
has consumed any illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages.
   (B)   A person who permits, allows or hosts an event or gathering shall be
deemed to have known or should have known that an underage person has consumed
illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages if the person has not taken all reasonable
steps to prevent the consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages by
underage persons.
   (C)   A person who permits, allows or hosts an event or gathering shall be
rebuttably presumed to have known or should have known that underage persons
have consumed illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages if such person is present at
the premises of the event or gathering at the time any underage person consumes
illicit drugs or an alcoholic beverage.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic
beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or exclusively between an
underage person and his or her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by
Illinois state law.
   (E)   It is the duty of any person who permits, allows or hosts an event or
gathering at his or her place of residence or other private property, public
place, any other premises under his or her control, or in any conveyance, where
underage persons will be present, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the
consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages by any underage person at
the event or gathering.
   (F)   A person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in violation of
this chapter if he or she seeks the assistance from the Police Department or
other law enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by the
person's performance of duties imposed under this chapter, or terminate the
event or gathering because the person has been unable to prevent underage
persons from consuming illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages despite having
taken all reasonable steps to do so, as long as such request is made before any
other person makes a complaint about the event or gathering.
   (G)   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present
at the event or gathering to be liable under this chapter.
   (H)   Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be
responsible for any and all response costs incurred to investigate the event or
gathering.
(Ord. 3759, passed 3-24-14) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates or assists in the violations of any provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and shall be
fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such
violation. Each day on which, or during which, a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (A)   A first violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of no
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
   (B)   A second violation of this chapter by the same responsible person
shall be punishable by a fine of no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (C)   A third or subsequent violation of this chapter by the same
responsible person shall be punishable by a fine of no less than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (D)   A person charged with a first or second violation may plead guilty and
pay the minimum fines as imposed in divisions (A) and (B) above without a court
appearance. Fines should be payable to the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Henry
County, Illinois. Third and subsequent violations of this chapter shall require
a mandatory court appearance.
(Ord. 3759, passed 3-24-14)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS
Section
Deadly Weapons
   
137.01   Unlawful use of weapons
   
137.02   Exemptions
   
137.03   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition
   
137.04   Defacing identification marks of firearms
   
137.05   Confiscation and disposition of weapons
Statutory reference:
   Firearm owners identification card, ILCS Ch. 430, Act 65, §§ 1 through 16.3
DEADLY WEAPONS
§ 137.01 UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly:
      (1)   Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess, or carry any bludgeon, black-
jack, sling-shot, sand- club, sand-bag, metal knuckles or other knuckle weapon
regardless of its composition, throwing star, or any knife, commonly referred
to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand
pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle of the
knife, or a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels a knifelike blade
as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material, or compressed gas;
      (2)   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser, any firearm in a chuch, synagogue,
mosque, or other building, structure, or place used for religious worship, or
any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character;
      (3)   Carry on or about their person or in any vehicle, a tear gas gun
projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance,
other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas or substance
designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18 years of age or
older;
      (4)   Carry or possess in any vehicle or concealed on or about their
person, except when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place of business,
any pistol, revolver, stun gun, taser, or other firearm, except that this
subsection does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one
of the following conditions:
         (a)   Broken down in a non-functioning state, or
         (b)   Not immediately accessible, or
         (c)   Unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box, shipping
box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently valid
Firearm Owner’s Identification Card; or
         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the Firearm
Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid license
under the Act;
      (5)   Set a spring gun;
      (6)   Carry or possess any firearm, stun gun or taser or other deadly
weapon in any place which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages, or at any
public gathering held pursuant to a license issued by any governmental body or
any public gathering at which an admission is charged, excluding a place where
a showing, demonstration, or lecture involving the exhibition of unloaded
firearms is conducted. This subsection does not apply to any auction or raffle
of a firearm held pursuant to a license or permit issued by a governmental
body, nor does it apply to persons engaged in firearm safety training courses;
      (7)   Carry or possess on or about their person on any public street,
alley, or other public lands within this city, except when an invitee thereon
or therein for the purpose of display of the weapon or the lawful commerce in
weapons, or except when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place of
business, any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser, or other firearm, except
that this subsection does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that
meet one of the following conditions:
         (a)   Broken down in a non-functioning state,
         (b)   Not immediately accessible, or
         (c)   Unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box, shipping
box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently valid
Firearm Owner’s Identification Card; or
         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the Firearm
Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid license
under the Act;
      (8)   Sell, manufacture, or purchase any explosive bullet. EXPLOSIVE
BULLET shall mean the projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge which
contains or carries an explosive charge which will explode upon contact with
the flesh of a human or an animal. CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case having
a projectile affixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end
thereof, with the propellant contained in the tube between the projectile and
the cap.
      (9)   Carry or possess on or about his or her person while in a building
occupied by a unit of government, a billy club, other weapon of like character,
or other instrument of like character intended for use as a weapon. For the
purposes of this section, BILLY CLUB means a short stick or club commonly
carried by police officers, which is either telescopic or constructed of a
solid piece of wood or other man- made material.
      (10)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or
weapon within or into the corporate limits of the city, except for firearms
firing blank ammunition during military funerals, other patriotic observances
or school sporting events, and except when discharged by a peace officer in the
performance of their duties.
   (B)   A STUN GUN or TASER, as used in division (A), means:
      (1)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of wire
and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting
the person’s nervous system in such a manner as to render them incapable of
normal functioning; or
      (2)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human,
can send out a current capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in
such a manner as to render him incapable of normal functioning.
(Am. Ord. 2859, passed 10-25-93; Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful use of weapons, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1
§ 137.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(10), and (A)(13) of this section and 720
ILCS 5/24-1.6 do not apply to or affect any of the following:
      (1)   Peace officers, and any person summoned by a peace officer to
assist in making arrests or preserving the peace, while actually engaged in
assisting such officer.
      (2)   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense, while in the performance of their official duty, or while
commuting between their homes and places of employment.
      (3)   Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard or the Reserve Officers Training Corps,
while in the performance of their official duty.
      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public utility to
perform police functions, and guards of armored car companies, while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or commuting
between their homes and places of employment; and watchmen while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment.
      (5)   Persons licensed as private security contractors, private
detectives, or private alarm contractors, or employed by a private security
contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor agency licensed by
the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, if their duties
include the carrying of a weapon under the provisions of the Private Detective,
Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004,
while actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or
commuting between their homes and places of employment. A person shall be
considered eligible for this exemption if he or she has completed the required
20 hours of training for a private security contractor, private detective, or
private alarm contractor, or employee of a licensed private security
contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor agency and 28 hours
of required firearm training, and has been issued a firearm control card by the
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. Conditions for the renewal
of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this section shall be
the same as for those cards issued under the provisions of the Private
Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith
Act of 2004. The firearm control card shall be carried by the private security
contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor, or employee of the
licensed private security contractor, private detective, or private alarm
contractor agency at all times when he or she is in possession of a concealable
weapon permitted by his or her firearm control card.
      (6)   Any person regularly employed in a commercial or industrial
operation as a security guard for the protection of persons employed and
private property related to such commercial or industrial operation, while
actually engaged in the performance of his or her duty or traveling between
sites or properties belonging to the employer, and who, as a security guard, is
a member of a security force registered with the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation; provided that such security guard has successfully
completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation, consisting of not less than 48 hours of
training that includes the theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and
the handling of weapons. A person shall be considered eligible for this
exemption if he or she has completed the required 20 hours of training for a
security officer and 28 hours of required firearm training, and has been issued
a firearm control card by the Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation. Conditions for the renewal of firearm control cards issued under
the provisions of this Section shall be the same as for those cards issued
under the provisions of the Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security,
Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004. The firearm control card shall
be carried by the security guard at all times when he or she is in possession
of a concealable weapon permitted by his or her firearm control card.
      (7)   Agents and investigators of the Illinois Legislative Investigating
Commission authorized by the Commission to carry the weapons specified in
divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) of this section, while on duty in the course of any
investigation for the Commission.
      (8)   Persons employed by a financial institution as a security guard for
the protection of other employees and property related to such financial
institution, while actually engaged in the performance of their duties,
commuting between their homes and places of employment, or traveling between
sites or properties owned or operated by such financial institution, and who,
as a security guard, is a member of a security force registered with the
Department; provided that any person so employed has successfully completed a
course of study, approved by and supervised by the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation, consisting of not less than 48 hours of training which
includes theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and the handling of
weapons. A person shall be considered to be eligible for this exemption if he
or she has completed the required 20 hours of training for a security officer
and 28 hours of required firearm training, and has been issued a firearm
control card by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation.
Conditions for renewal of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of
this section shall be the same as for those issued under the provisions of the
Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and
Locksmith Act of 2004. The firearm control card shall be carried by the
security guard at all times when he or she is in possession of a concealable
weapon permitted by his or her firearm control card. For purposes of this
division, FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank, savings and loan association,
credit union or company providing armored car services.
      (9)   Any person employed by an armored car company to drive an armored
car, while actually engaged in the performance of his duties.
      (10)   Persons who have been classified as peace officers pursuant to the
Peace Officer Fire Investigation Act.
      (11)   Investigators of the Office of the State's Attorneys Appellate
Prosecutor authorized by the Board of Governors of the Office of the State's
Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor to carry weapons pursuant to Section 7.06 of the
State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor's Act.
      (12)   Special investigators appointed by a State's Attorney under
Section 3-9005 of the Counties Code.
      (12.5)   Probation officers while in the performance of their duties, or
while commuting between their homes, places of employment or specific locations
that are part of their assigned duties, with the consent of the chief judge of
the circuit for which they are employed, if they have received weapons training
according to requirements of the Peace Officer and Probation Officer Firearm
Training Act.
      (13)   Court security officers while in the performance of their official
duties, or while commuting between their homes and places of employment, with
the consent of the Sheriff.
      (13.5)   A person employed as an armed security guard at a nuclear
energy, storage, weapons or development site or facility regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission who has completed the background screening and
training mandated by the rules and regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
      (14)   Manufacture, transportation, or sale of weapons to persons
authorized under division (A)(1) through (A)(13.5) of this section to possess
those weapons.
   (A-5)   Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(10) of this section do not apply to or
affect any person carrying a concealed pistol, revolver, or handgun and the
person has been issued a currently valid license under the Firearm Concealed
Carry Act at the time of the commission of the offense.
   (A-6)   Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(10) of this section do not apply to or
affect a qualified current or retired law enforcement officer or a current or
retired deputy, county correctional officer, or correctional officer of the
Department of Corrections qualified under the laws of this state or under the
federal Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(10) of this section and 720 ILCS 5/24-1.6 do
not apply to or affect any of the following:
      (1)   Members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of
practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges, whether public
or private, and patrons of such ranges, while such members or patrons are using
their firearms on those target ranges.
      (2)   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading,
with the special permission of the Governor.
      (3)   Hunters, trappers or fishermen with a license or permit while
engaged in hunting, trapping or fishing.
      (4)   Transportation of weapons that are broken down in a non-functioning
state or are not immediately accessible.
      (5)   Carrying or possessing any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or
other firearm on the land or in the legal dwelling of another person as an
invitee with that person's permission.
   (C)   Division (A)(7) of this section does not apply to or affect any of the
following:
      (1)   Peace officers while in performance of their official duties.
      (2)   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense.
      (3)   Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard, while in the performance of their
official duty.
      (4)   Manufacture, transportation, or sale of machine guns to persons
authorized under divisions (C)(1) through (C)(3) of this section to possess
machine guns, if the machine guns are broken down in a non-functioning state or
are not immediately accessible.
      (5)   Persons licensed under federal law to manufacture any weapon from
which eight or more shots or bullets can be discharged by a single function of
the firing device, or ammunition for such weapons, and actually engaged in the
business of manufacturing such weapons or ammunition, but only with respect to
activities which are within the lawful scope of such business, such as the
manufacture, transportation, or testing of such weapons or ammunition. This
exemption does not authorize the general private possession of any weapon from
which eight or more shots or bullets can be discharged by a single function of
the firing device, but only such possession and activities as are within the
lawful scope of a licensed manufacturing business described in this division.
During transportation, such weapons shall be broken down in a non-functioning
state or not immediately accessible.
      (6)   The manufacture, transport, testing, delivery, transfer or sale,
and all lawful commercial or experimental activities necessary thereto, of
rifles, shotguns, and weapons made from rifles or shotguns, or ammunition for
such rifles, shotguns or weapons, where engaged in by a person operating as a
contractor or subcontractor pursuant to a contract or subcontract for the
development and supply of such rifles, shotguns, weapons or ammunition to the
United States government or any branch of the armed forces of the United
States, when such activities are necessary and incident to fulfilling the terms
of such contract. The exemption granted under this division (C)(6) shall also
apply to any authorized agent of any such contractor or subcontractor who is
operating within the scope of his employment, where such activities involving
such weapon, weapons or ammunition are necessary and incident to fulfilling the
terms of such contract.
      (7)   A person possessing a rifle with a barrel or barrels less than 16
inches in length if:
         (a)   The person has been issued a curios and relics license from the
U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives; or
         (b)   The person is an active member of a bona fide, nationally
recognized military re-enacting group and the modification is required and
necessary to accurately portray the weapon for historical re-enactment
purposes; the re-enactor is in possession of a valid and current re-enacting
group membership credential; and the overall length of the weapon as modified
is not less than 26 inches.
   (D)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to the purchase,
possession or carrying of a black-jack or slung-shot by a peace officer.
   (E)   Division (A)(8) of this section does not apply to any owner, manager
or authorized employee of any place specified in that division nor to any law
enforcement officer.
   (F)   Division (A)(4) and (A)(10) of this section and 720 ILCS 5/24-1.6 do
not apply to members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of
practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges, whether public
or private, while using their firearms on those target ranges.
   (G)   Divisions (A)(11) of this section and 720 ILCS 5/24-3.1(a)(6) do not
apply to:
      (1)   Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard, while in the performance of their
official duty.
      (2)   Bonafide collectors of antique or surplus military ordnance.
      (3)   Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics, or
specializing in the development of ammunition or explosive ordnance.
      (4)   Commerce, preparation, assembly or possession of explosive bullets
by manufacturers of ammunition licensed by the federal government, in
connection with the supply of those organizations and persons exempted by
division (G)(1) of this section, or like organizations and persons outside this
state, or the transportation of explosive bullets to any organization or person
exempted in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle owned or leased by
an exempted manufacturer.
   (G-5)   Division (A)(6) of this section does not apply to or affect persons
licensed under federal law to manufacture any device or attachment of any kind
designed, used, or intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm,
firearms, or ammunition for those firearms equipped with those devices, and
actually engaged in the business of manufacturing those devices, firearms, or
ammunition, but only with respect to activities that are within the lawful
scope of that business, such as the manufacture, transportation, or testing of
those devices, firearms, or ammunition. This exemption does not authorize the
general private possession of any device or attachment of any kind designed,
used, or intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm, but only such
possession and activities as are within the lawful scope of a licensed
manufacturing business described in this division (G-5). During transportation,
these devices shall be detached from any weapon or not immediately accessible.
   (G-6)   Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(10) of this section and 720 ILCS 5/24-1.6
do not apply to or affect any parole agent or parole supervisor who meets the
qualifications and conditions prescribed in Section 3-14-1.5 of the Unified
Code of Corrections.
   (G-7)   Division (A)(6) of this section does not apply to a peace officer
while serving as a member of a tactical response team or special operations
team. A peace officer may not personally own or apply for ownership of a device
or attachment of any kind designed, used, or intended for use in silencing the
report of any firearm. These devices shall be owned and maintained by lawfully
recognized units of government whose duties include the investigation of
criminal acts.
   (H)   Any information or indictment based upon a violation of any division
of this section need not negate any exemptions contained in this section. The
defendant shall have the burden of proving such an exemption.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit, apply to, or affect the
transportation, carrying, or possession, of any pistol or revolver, stun gun,
taser, or other firearm consigned to a common carrier operating under license
of the State of Illinois or the federal government, where such transportation,
carrying, or possession is incident to the lawful transportation in which such
common carrier is engaged; and nothing in this chapter shall prohibit, apply
to, or affect the transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol,
revolver, stun gun, taser, or other firearm, not the subject of and regulated
by division (A)(7) or division (C) of this section, which is unloaded and
enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box, shipping box, or other container, by
the possessor of a valid Firearm Owners Identification Card.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2)
§ 137.03 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.
   A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of firearms or firearm
ammunition when:
   (A)   They are 18 years of age and has in his possession any fiream of a
size which may be concealed upon the person, except when participating when
participating in lawful recreational activities under the direct supervision of
an adult as permitted by state law.
   (B)   They are under 21 years of age, has been convicted of a misdemeanor
other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent, and has any firearms or
firearm ammunition in his possession;
   (C)   They have been convicted of a felony under the laws of this or any
other jurisdiction, or a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence as defined by
federal law, and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his possession.
   (D)   They are a narcotic addict and has any firearms or firearm ammunition
in his possession;
   (E)   They have been a patient in a mental hospital within the past five
years and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his possession; or
   (F)   They are a person with an intellectual disability and has any firearms
or firearm ammunition in his possession.
   (G)   They have in their possession any explosive bullet. For the purposes
of this section, EXPLOSIVE BULLET means the projectile portion of an ammunition
cartridge that contains or carries an explosive charge designed to explode upon
impact with any target, including flesh or hard surfaces. CARTRIDGE means a
tubular metal case having a projectile fixed at the front thereof and a cap or
primer at the rear end thereof with the propellent contained in the tube
between the projectile and the cap.
   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person under 18 years of age from
participating in any lawful recreational activity with a firearm, such as, but
not limited to, practice shooting at targets upon established public or private
target ranges or hunting, trapping, or fishing in accordance with the Wildlife
Code or the Fish and Aquatic Life Code.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1) (Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 137.04 DEFACING IDENTIFICATION MARKS OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   Any person who shall knowingly or intentionally change, alter, remove,
or obliterate the name of the importer's or manufacturer's serial number of any
firearm commits a Class 2 felony.
   (B)   A person who possesses any firearm upon which any such importer's or
manufacturer's serial number has been changed, altered, removed, or obliterated
commits a Class 3 felony.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-5)
§ 137.05 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed
by the offender, any weapon seized shall be confiscated by the trial court.
   (B)   Any stolen weapon so confiscated, when no longer needed for
evidentiary purposes, shall be returned to the person entitled to possession,
if known, provided that person is not prohibited from possessing firearms under
state or federal law. After the disposition of a criminal case or in any
criminal case where a final judgment in the case was not entered due to the
death of the defendant, and when a confiscated weapon is no longer needed for
evidentiary purposes, and when in due course no legitimate claim has been made
for the weapon, the court may transfer the weapon to the sheriff of the county
who may proceed to destroy it, or may in its discretion order the weapon
preserved as property of the governmental body whose police agency seized the
weapon, or may in its discretion order the weapon to be transferred to the
Illinois State Police for use by the crime laboratory system, for training
purposes, or for any other application as deemed appropriate by the Department.
If, after the disposition of a criminal case, a need still exists for the use
of the confiscated weapon for evidentiary purposes, the court may transfer the
weapon to the custody of the State Department of Corrections for preservation.
The court may not order the transfer of the weapon to any private individual or
private organization other than to return a stolen weapon to its rightful
owner. The provisions of this section shall not apply to violations of the Fish
and Aquatic Life Code or the Wildlife Code. Confiscation of weapons for Fish
and Aquatic Life Code and Wildlife Code violations shall be only as provided in
those Codes.
   (C)   Any mental hospital that admits a person as an inpatient pursuant to
any of the provisions of the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Code
shall confiscate any firearms in the possession of that person at the time of
admission, or at any time the firearms are discovered in the person's
possession during the course of hospitalization. The hospital shall, as soon as
possible following confiscation, transfer custody of the firearms to the
appropriate law enforcement agency. The hospital shall give written notice to
the person from whom the firearm was confiscated of the identity and address of
the law enforcement agency to which it has given the firearm. The law
enforcement agency shall maintain possession of any firearm it obtains pursuant
to this division for a minimum of 90 days. Thereafter, the firearm may be
disposed of pursuant to the provisions of division (B) of this section.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-6) (Am. Ord. 4227, passed 1-27-25)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
   
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
   
151.   ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
   
152.   MOBILE HOME PARKS
   
153.   SIGN REGULATIONS
   
154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   
155.   ZONING CODE
   
156.   WELL HEAD SETBACK ZONES
   
157.   STORM WATER, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL REGULATIONS
   
158.   FENCE REGULATIONS
   
159.   SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS
   
160.   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Fire limits established
Building Code
   
150.015   Adoption of Building Code
   
150.016   Permits and permit fees established
   
150.017   Amendments; modifications
Plumbing Code
   
150.030   Adoption of code by reference
   
150.031   Plumbing code administration
Property Maintenance Code
   
150.040   Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
   
150.041   Additions, insertions and changes
Mechanical Code
   
150.050   Adoption of Mechanical Code
   
150.051   Additions, insertions, and changes to the BOCA Mechanical Code
Demolition of Buildings
   
150.075   Permits and fees
   
150.076   Bond and insurance
   
150.077   (Reserved)
   
150.078   Cleaning premises
   
150.079   Temporary sidewalks
   
150.080   Utilities and materials
   
150.081   Right to stop wrecking
Moving Buildings
   
150.095   Permits required; compliance with codes
   
150.096   Bond or cash requirements
   
150.097   (Reserved)
   
150.098   Route to be described in permit
   
150.099   Work done diligently; guarding of building
   
150.100   Obstruction prohibited
   
150.101   Notice given railroads
   
150.102   Repairs to public property
Construction on Public Property
   
150.130   Definition
   
150.131   Estimate of costs required
   
150.132   Cost restricted
   
150.133   Encroachment on public property
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.
   Any property, with a business use or a building intended for a business use,
located in the area bounded on the north by the southern boundary to the BNSF
railroad right-of-way, on the east by the east side of Burr Boulevard, on the
west by Lexington Avenue, and on the south by the north side of First Street.
(Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.015 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
    A certain document which is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the
city being marked and designated as the “International Building Code”, 2021
edition, and the “International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings”, 2021 edition, both as published by the International Code Council,
and both are hereby adopted as the Building Code of the city; for the control
of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International
Building Code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in the City Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.017.
(Ord. 3001, passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 3321, passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 4153,
passed 10-23-23)
§ 150.016 PERMITS AND PERMIT FEES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Any work requiring a permit, being performed without an approved
permit, shall be assessed a fee of double that of the normal permit fee
calculation for said work pursuant to this code. In cases where the work being
performed exists within an enterprise zone, the waiver of the permit fee shall
be forfeited and the permit fee shall be double that of the normal permit fee
calculation for the work pursuant to this code.
   (B)   If the Building Official determines that construction plans must be
sent to a licensed design or engineering professional, or any other appropriate
firm or organization for a technical review prior to plan approval, the actual
cost of the technical review shall be paid by the permittee.
   (C)   If the Building Official determines at any time during the
construction process that an inspection must be performed by a licensed design
or engineering professional, or any other appropriate firm or organization for
construction, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or any other technical fields,
the actual cost of the inspection(s) shall be paid by the permittee in addition
to any other fees prescribed in this chapter.
   (D)   There are hereby established the following permits and fees for the
issuance of permits:
      (1)   Filing fees. The filing fee for one application shall be $20, which
is in addition to all other fees charged.
      (2)   New construction.
         (a)   Buildings:
            1.   For the first 200 square feet: Filing fee for permit only.
            2.   For 201 to 2,000 square feet: $40 plus $6.50 per 100 square
feet or any fractional part thereof.
            3.   For more than 2,000 square feet: $350 plus $2.20 per 100
square feet or any fractional part thereof.
         (b)   All other new construction:
            1.   Electrical.
               a.   Residential: $50. This fee shall include two inspections
(rough-in and final). For additional inspections required because of
incomplete, faulty, or defective work, or for any other reason, the permit
holder shall pay an additional fee of $25 per inspection.
               b.   Commercial: $100. This fee shall include two inspections
(rough-in and final). For additional inspections required because of
incomplete, faulty, or defective work, or for any other reason, the permit
holder shall pay an additional fee of $50 per inspection.
            2.   Mechanical (heating and air conditioning): $3.20 per 100
square feet or any fractional part thereof.
            3.   Plumbing: $6.30 per fixture.
      (3)   Permit fees for alterations, additions, changes, modifications and
repairs performed on existing buildings.
         (a)   Building, electrical, mechanical, or plumbing: Same as divisions
(D)(2)(a) and (D)(2)(b) of this section.
         (b)   Siding. For the installation of metal siding only: $40.00.
         (c)   Wrecking buildings: As specified in §
150.075.
         (d)   Moving buildings:
            1.   Accessory buildings (garages, sheds, and the like): $20.00.
            2.   Houses or commercial buildings: $170.00.
            3.   Obtaining a moving permit does not relieve the applicant from
the duty to obtain a building permit to allow the erecting of the moved
building on land in the city limits of Kewanee.
         (e)   Sign permit fees.
Nonilluminated signs. All nonilluminated wall, pole-mounted, marquee,
projecting, billboard, ground, legal nonconforming, swinging freestanding
and rooftop signs, but specifically excluding public interest signs. The
square footage for double faced signs shall be calculated using only the
larger of the sign faces. Each sign on a structure shall be calculated
separately.
   50 square feet of area or less                                       $25
   51 to 100 square feet of area                                        $50
   101 to 200 square feet of area                                       $100
   201 or more square feet of area                                      $200
Illuminated signs. All illuminated wall, pole-mounted, marquee,
projecting, billboard, ground, legal nonconforming, swinging freestanding
and rooftop signs, but specifically excluding public interest signs, shall
be as follows. The square footage for double faced signs shall be
calculated using only the larger of the sign faces. Each sign on a
structure shall be calculated separately.
   25 square feet of area or less                                       $50
   26 to 50 square feet of area                                         $75
   51 to 150 square feet of area                                        $150
   151 to 300 square feet of area                                       $200
The permit fee to alter a sign                                             $50
The annual permit fee for a portable sign                                  $25
 
         (f)   Fences: $20.00.
         (g)   Swimming pools:
            1.   In-ground and permanent above ground pools shall be calculated
by square footage for building, electrical and plumbing as new construction in
division (D)(2).
            2.   Portable, storable and temporary swimming pools not exempt
pursuant to §
159.05(C): $20.00.
         (h)   Driveways: $20.00.
      (4)   Improvements not otherwise covered.
         (a)    Permit fees for all improvements to buildings or structures not
otherwise covered under the above fee schedule shall pay a fee based on the
estimated cost value of construction. The Building Official shall have the
right to verify or correct the estimated cost of any building, structure,
alteration or addition. In the event that a correction is needed the Building
Official shall use the following documents as released by the Illinois
Department of Revenue: Publication 123 for residential or Publication 126 for
commercial.
         Cost of Construction   Permit Fee
          Filing fee         $20 plus the following valuation fees
         Up to $100          $ 10.00
         $101 to $1,000       $ 25.00
         $1,001 to $25,000       $ 20 plus $6 per 1,000 or fractional part
thereof
         Over $25,000       $ 240 plus $2 per 1,000 or fractional part thereof
         (b)   The term ESTIMATED COST as used herein means the reasonable
value of all services, labor, materials, cost of excavation or grading, and the
use of scaffolding and other appliances or devices entering into and necessary
to the prosecution and completion of the work.
   (E)   Fee refunds.
      (1)   The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than
75% of the permit fee paid not including the filing fee of $20.
      (2)   The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of the
filing fee of $20 nor shall the Building Official authorize the refunding of a
permit fee having the minimum permit fee of $20.
      (3)   No refund shall be made on any permit having had any inspections
made.
      (4)   No refund shall be made on any permit past the expiration date on
said permit.
      (5)   No refund shall be made on any permit over one year old.
(Ord. 3001, passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 3637, passed 5-24-10; Am. Ord. 3822,
passed 1-11-16; Am. Ord. 3852, passed 10-24-16; Am. Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17;
Am. Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 3918, passed 2-12-18; Am. Ord. 3929,
passed 5-29-18; Am. Ord. 4094, passed 3-28- 22; Am. Ord. 4194, passed 8-12-24;
Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
§ 150.017 AMENDMENTS; MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   For plumbing matters, the Plumbing Code, as specified in this Code
book, will govern.
   (B)   Depth of footings for accessory buildings. The Building Official or
designee may approve slab-on-grade foundation designs for wood or metal frames,
detached accessory structures for residential use, in residential zoned
districts only, constructed under the provisions of the International
Residential Code (IRC) and 1,250 square feet in floor area or less without
additional engineering, providing the design meets all of the following
conditions OR shall comply with IRC Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection OR
constructed in accordance with ASCE 32 Design and Construction of Frost-
Protected Shallow Foundations:
      (1)   The entire perimeter of the foundation shall be provided with a
thickened portion of slab with cross section dimensions of 12 inches minimum
width and 12 inches minimum thickness measured from top of concrete. The
perimeter shall be reinforced with two number four (1/2" inch) rods.
      (2)   Slab, floor, and thickened edge shall be one continuous pour with a
minimum strength of 4,000 psi. with no cold joints.
      (3)   The slab floor shall be a minimum of four inches thick reinforced
concrete. Reinforcement shall be 6" x 6" wire mesh, grid of reinforcing bars
throughout the floor running front-to-back and side-to-side or fiber integrated
reinforcement mixed into the concrete from the concrete plant.
      (4)   No fill over 18 inches in depth shall be allowed.
      (5)   All fill material must be thoroughly compacted in maximum of four-
inch lifts.
      (6)   No water or sewer lines serve the structure.
      (7)   No more than one story shall be permitted.
      (8)   Accessory structure shall not be attached to any other structure.
      (9)   Accessory structure shall comply with all setbacks, height, and lot
coverage percentage as required in the applicable residential zoning district.
      (10)   For additions to existing accessory buildings, construction
techniques shall be compatible with the existing structure.
   (C)   Means of appeal. Refer to Chapter 33, §
33.061, of the Kewanee Code of Ordinances.
   (D)   In section 101.1 of the International Building code insert for [Name
of Jurisdiction] the words “City of Kewanee.”
   (E)   In section R101.1 of the International Residential Code for One- and
Two-Family Dwellings insert for [Name of Jurisdiction] the words "City of
Kewanee."
   (F)   Replace section 114.4 of the International Building code with the
following:
   114.4 Violation penalties: Any person who shall be found guilty of violating
a provision of this building code or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter, or repair a building
or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code
official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $750 for any one offense. The
minimum fine for any violation of this building code shall be $50, such sum to
be in addition to any court costs that the court shall apply. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (G)   Replace section 113.4 of the International Residential Code for One-
and Two-Family Dwelling with the following:
   113.4  Violation penalties:  Any person who violates a provision of this
building code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or
of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
fined in a sum not to exceed $750 for any one offense. The minimum fine for any
violation of this building code shall be $50, such sum to be in addition to any
court costs that the court shall apply. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (H)   Replace Table R301.2(1) with the table shown below.
   CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
 
GROUND WIND DESIGN                         SEISMIC  SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM WINTER ICE BARRIER           AIR      MEAN
SNOW   Speed Topographic Special Windborne DESIGN   Weather Frost          DESIGN UNDERLAYMENT FLOOD    FREEZING ANNUAL
LOAD   (MPH) effects     wind    debris    CATEGORY ing     line   Termite TEMP   REQUIRED     HAZARDS  INDEX    TEMP
                         region  zone                       depth
                                                                                               9/13/196
                                                                                               0
                                                                                               17073CD5
20 ps                                                       42     Moder                       35E,              49 .9°
f      107   No          No      No        A        Sev ere Inches ate to  -4° F Yes          17073C03 2000     F
                                                                   Heavy                       95E,
                                                                                               17073C05
                                                                                               30E,
                                                                                               6/2/2011
 
   (I)   Delete section R309.5 Fire sprinklers and all references thereto and
replace with:
   R309.5 Opening Protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a
room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between
the garage and residence shall be equipped with self closing, tight fitting
solid wood doors not less than 1-3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or
honeycomb steel doors not less than 1-3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, or 20
minute fire rated doors.
   (J)   Delete section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
(Ord. 2826, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 2851, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 2853,
passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord.3001, passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord 3321, passed 10-6-01; Am.
Ord. 3881, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. 4072, passed 8-23-21; Am. Ord. 4154, passed
10-23-23)
PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.030 ADOPTION OF CODE BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the City Council for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life, property and
otherwise, that certain code known as the Illinois State Plumbing Code, current
edition, a copy of which shall be on file with the City Clerk.
   (B)   The city’s Plumbing Inspector or a state certified plumber acting as
an agent for the city and assigned by the Health, Building, and Zoning Officer
shall conduct the inspections necessary to ascertain that the code is adhered
to within the limits of the city. (Ord. 1695, passed 9-13-71; Am. Ord. 2957,
passed 1-23-95)
   (C)   Whenever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in this code hereby adopted, it
be held to mean the City of Kewanee.
(‘71 Code, § 5-3-1) (Am. Ord. 3921, passed 2-26-18)
§ 150.031 PLUMBING CODE ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Permit for plumbing work required.
      (1)   Issuance of permit. No plumbing work shall be undertaken prior to
the issuance of a permit by the city. Permits shall be issued only to a state-
licensed plumber. A plumbing permit may be issued to an owner of property who
is also occupying the property or to a lessee who is also occupying the
property of a single-family residence. Such owner-occupant or lessee-occupant
is authorized per the State of Illinois Plumbing License Law to install, alter,
or repair the plumbing system of such single-family residence, provided that
such plumbing shall comply with all plumbing laws, rules and regulations of the
Illinois Plumbing Code and shall be subject to such inspections as may be
provided by the city and, provided further, that any such owner-occupant or
lessee-occupant shall not employ any person other than a state-licensed plumber
to assist him in such work.
      (2)   Application for permit. Application for a plumbing permit shall be
made on forms provided by the city. The application shall be accompanied by
fees per the schedule of fees adopted by the city.
      (3)   Plans and specifications. No plumbing permit shall be issued until
after plans and specifications showing the proposed plumbing work have been
submitted, reviewed and approved by the city. If a plumbing permit is denied,
the applicant shall submit revised plans and specifications. When it is found
necessary to make any change in the plumbing from the plans and specifications
on which a permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications shall be
submitted to the city for approval prior to making changes in the plumbing
system.
      (4)   Minor repairs. A plumbing permit is not required for minor repairs
that do not require changes in the piping to or from plumbing fixtures or
involve the removal, replacement, installation, or reinstallation of any pipe
or plumbing fixtures.
      (5)   Permit fees. No permit shall be valid until the fees prescribed by
the city have been paid; nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until
the additional fees, if any, have been paid to the city.
      (6)   Failure to obtain permit. Any person who installs any plumbing
before obtaining a required plumbing permit from the city shall pay a fee twice
the amount shown in the fee schedule in §
150.016 and be subject to the penalties prescribed by §
150.999.
   (B)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Inspection and tests. It is the responsibility of the city to
enforce provisions of any adopted code regulating plumbing and plumbers.
      (2)   Right of entry. The authorized representative of the city shall,
after proper identification, have the right, subject to constitutional
limitations, to enter any premises for the purpose of enforcing any ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation, or code adopted to regulate plumbing and
plumbers.
      (3)   Violations. Violators of the Plumbing Code shall be informed of any
violation at the time of inspection, followed by a formal notice in writing,
including a deadline date for correction of the violation(s).
      (4)   Reinspection. Upon receipt of information from the violator
indicating correction of violations or upon expiration of the established
deadline date, a reinspection shall be made.
(Ord. 2957, passed 1-23-95)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 150.040 ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   A certain document, which is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the
Kewanee, being marked and designated as the “International Property Maintenance
Code, 2021 edition,” as published by International Code Council, Inc., be and
is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Kewanee, in
the State of Illinois; for the control of existing buildings and structures as
herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said International Property Maintenance Code are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in the City
Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed
in §
150.041 of the City Code.
(Ord. 3002, passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 3322, passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 4155,
passed 10-23-23)
§ 150.041 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES TO THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   (A)   In section 101.1 of the International Property Maintenance code insert
for [Name of Jurisdiction] the words "City of Kewanee".
   (B)   Replace section 109.4 of the International Property Maintenance code
with the following:
   106.4 Violation penalties: Any person who shall be found guilty of violating
a provision of this property maintenance code or who shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter, or repair
a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the
code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
this code, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $750 for any one offense. The
minimum fine for any violation of this building code shall be $50, such sum to
be in addition to any court costs that the court shall apply. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (C)   In section 304.14 of the International Property Maintenance code
insert for [Date] to [Date] the words “May through September”
   (D)   In section 602.3 of the International Property Maintenance code insert
for [Date] to [Date] the words “September through May”.
   (E)   In section 602.4 of the International Property Maintenance code insert
for [Date] to [Date] the words “September through May”.
(Ord. 3002, passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 3322, passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 4156,
passed 10-23-23)
MECHANICAL CODE
§ 150.050 ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Kewanee, being marked and designated as “The
International Mechanical Code” 2021 edition, as published by the International
Code Council (ICC), be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City
of Kewanee in the State of Illinois; for the control of mechanical equipment as
herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the said International Mechanical Code are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
150.051 of the City Code.
(Ord. 3000, passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 3323, passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 4221,
passed 12-9-24)
§ 150.051 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE MECHANICAL CODE.
   (A)   In section 101.1 of the International Mechanical code insert for [Name
of Jurisdiction] the words “City of Kewanee.”
   (B)   Replace section 115.4 Violation Penalties with the following:
   115.4 Violation penalties: Any person who violates a provision of this
mechanical code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
installs, constructs, alters, or repairs a mechanical system in violation of
this code, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $750 for any one offense. The
minimum fine for any violation of this mechanical code shall be $50, such sum
to be in addition to any court costs that the court shall apply. Each day that
a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. 3002, passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 3323, passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 4221,
passed 12-9-24)
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
§ 150.075 PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   Prior to the beginning of demolition of existing buildings or parts of
buildings, application for a demolition permit must be made to the Building
Official. The application for permit shall be in writing and must comply with
the International Building Code or the International Residential Code adopted
by the city in § 150.015 of this chapter.
   (B)   Demolition work covered by the permit must be completed within 90 days
of issuance. Delays caused by equipment failures, weather, or other unforeseen
circumstances may result in the Building Official granting a 30-day extension.
There are hereby established the following fees for the issuance of such
permits.
 
Wrecking Buildings
Accessory buildings                                      $25.00
One story commercial building/One or two family dwelling $75.00
Commercial building                                      $150.00
 
   (C)   If a building has been condemned by the city and ordered wrecked,
there shall be no fee charged, but a permit shall be necessary.
(‘71 Code, § 4-20-1) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-14-65; Am. Ord. 2827, passed 5-24-93;
Am. Ord. 3637, passed 5-24-10; Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
§ 150.076 BOND AND INSURANCE.
   Before said permit is granted by the Building Official, the party applying
therefor shall file with the Building Official a surety bond in the sum of
$2,000, conditioned on the faithful performance of all safety laws of the City
Building Code, or the state safety laws issued by the State Safety Inspector.
Further, any person engaged in wrecking a building shall first obtain and
provide a copy of a Certificate of Insurance in the amount of: $300,000 -
property damage, and $500,000 - personal injury.
(‘71 Code, § 4-20-2) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-14-65; Am. Ord. 2827, passed 5-24-93;
Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
§ 150.077 (RESERVED)
§ 150.078 CLEANING PREMISES.
   Every part of a building or structure shall be wrecked, including the
foundation walls. All rubbish and material shall be removed from the site
unless the person wrecking the structure desires to leave solid wrecking
material such as bricks or plaster. This may be done, providing such person
fills the excavation with one foot of solid dirt fill.
('71 Code, § 4-20-4) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-14-65; Am. Ord. 2827, passed 5-24-93)
§ 150.079 TEMPORARY SIDEWALKS.
   For the protection of pedestrians, the Building Official may require the
building of a temporary sidewalk for use during the wrecking of a building or
structure. If it is deemed necessary to build part or all of said temporary
sidewalk in the street, permission shall first be obtained from said Building
Official. The temporary sidewalk shall meet the following specifications:
   (A)   Width of not less than five feet and shall be at least six inches
above the pavement or ground.
   (B)   Designed to carry 200 pounds live load.
   (C)   Be provided with suitable ramps and hand rails (no steps) for each
side.
   (D)   If necessary, a roof shall be built to protect the public from falling
material. Such roof over the walkway shall be so constructed as to carry heavy
import loads and be supported by heavy framing.
   (E)   In all cases the excavation walls shall so slope for the greatest
safety of the public, and all sidewalks and handrails shall be kept in good
repair.
   (F)   Walkways shall be kept well lighted between sunset and sunrise or as
otherwise deemed necessary, and red lights shall be placed on the outer edge
and kept burning continuously.
(‘71 Code, § 4-20-5) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-14-65; Am. Ord. 2827, passed 5-24-93;
Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
§ 150.080 UTILITIES AND MATERIALS.
   Before a structure can be demolished or removed the owner or his agent must
obtain a release from all utilities having service connections at the structure
stating that their respective service connections and appurtenant equipment
have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. The water service
line and the sewer service line to the site must be disconnected at their
respective mains unless a written waiver is obtained from the Operations
Manager or his agent. If the owner or his agent certifies in writing to the
city that the demolished structure will be replaced with a structure requiring
one or both of these utility services within six months, then the Operations
Manager shall issue such a written waiver, which will be good for only six
months. However, a waiver will not be granted if for any reason the Operations
Manager has reason to believe that the existing service line is not in
compliance with this code or is in a deteriorated condition. If a replacement
structure is not installed within six months the owner or his agent must carry
out the disconnection as previously stated. The reuse of any building
materials, piping, plumbing fixtures, electrical wire and equipment, or other
items from a building to be demolished shall comply with the particular code
which governs the items to be reused.
(Ord. 2827, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 2958, passed 1-23-95; Am. Ord. 4221,
passed 12-9-24)
§ 150.081 RIGHT TO STOP WRECKING.
   The Building Official shall have all rights to stop the wrecking or tearing
down of any building or structure within the city when such is being done in a
reckless or careless manner, or in violation of any provision of this code, or
in such a manner as to endanger life or property. He may order any and all
persons engaged in said work to stop and desist therefrom. When such work has
been stopped by the Building Official, it shall not start again until adequate
precaution for the protection of life and property has been taken. The said
work shall then be performed with care and in conformity with the provisions of
this code.
(‘71 Code, § 4-20-7) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-14-65; Am. Ord. 2827, passed 5-24-93;
Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
MOVING BUILDINGS
§ 150.095 PERMITS REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.
   (A)   No person shall move, or cause to be moved, any building into, along
or across any street, avenue, alley or public ground in the city without first
obtaining from the Building Official a permit in writing to do so. After a
building has been moved and before it is occupied, such building shall be
inspected and made to comply with the current editions of the following codes:
      (1)   National Electrical Code.
      (2)   Illinois State Plumbing Code.
      (3)   International Building Code or International Residential Code.
      (4)   International Property Maintenance Code.
   (B)   In addition, the exterior of the building, if deemed necessary by the
Building Official, shall be painted, sided or covered by other means to cause
the building to be compatible with structures in the surrounding neighborhood.
All such work shall be completed within six months from the date of such
moving.
(‘71 Code, § 4-21-1) (Ord. 1977, passed 7-25-77; Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.096 BOND OR CASH REQUIREMENTS.
   Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of
the property upon which the building is to be located shall file with the
Building Official or other authorized representative of the city, a corporate
surety bond, conditioned as follows:
   (A)   That all of the work required to be done to complete the relocation,
alteration and reconstruction of the building pursuant to the conditions of the
permit shall be fully performed and completed within a reasonable time to be
specified in the permit by the Building Official, or other authorized
representative of the city. Such bond shall be in principal amount equal to the
estimated cost of the work proposed to be done, plus 10% thereof, and shall
name the city as obligee, and shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney.
   (B)   In lieu of furnishing such a corporate surety bond, the owner or
lessee may post a cash deposit in the amount of said bond.
   (C)   An extension of time for the completion may be granted in writing by
the Building Official or other authorized representative of the city when, in
his or her discretion, circumstances shall so justify, but no such extension
shall release any surety or other security.
(‘71 Code, § 4-21-2) (Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
§ 150.097 (RESERVED)
§ 150.098 ROUTE TO BE DESCRIBED IN PERMIT.
   Such permit shall particularly set forth the route to be taken in moving
such building and the route shall be such as to cause the least interference
with the use of the streets and the least danger of injury to public and
private property. No variation from the route so fixed shall be made without
further written permission from the City Clerk.
('71 Code, § 4-21-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.099 WORK DONE DILIGENTLY; GUARDING OF BUILDING.
   The person in charge of the work of moving such building shall diligently
and continuously prosecute such work in the daytime until completion and, for
the protection of the public, shall put red lights upon such building at night
and shall at all times provide a competent person to guard the same against
causing accidents or fire.
('71 Code, § 4-21-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.100 OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.
   Such building shall at no time be left standing where it may cause any
obstruction to streets at intersections, to railroad or streetcar tracks or to
any electric, telephone or other wires occupying the streets or any public
property.
('71 Code, § 4-21-6)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.101 NOTICE GIVEN RAILROADS.
   The person in charge of the moving of such building shall give 12 hours’
notice in writing to the managers of all railroad lines and to the managers of
all systems of telephone, electric light and other wires of the route assigned
to him and the time when the building will approach such lines or wires and
arrange for the passage of such building so as to cause the least possible
interference with the operation of such lines and wires and the least possible
damage thereto.
(‘71 Code, § 4-21-7) (Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
§ 150.102 REPAIRS TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have
been granted hereunder causes damage to the public streets or other public
property, in addition to any other remedies the city may have, the Operations
Manager may cause such damage to be repaired, and the cost thereof shall be
deducted from the deposit required herein, or he or she may require the person
to whom such a permit has been granted, or his or her authorized
representative, upon written notification from the Street Superintendent, to
make all necessary repairs to such streets or property; provided, however, that
should the person to whom the permit has been granted and to whom the notice
has been given, or his or her authorized representative, fails to make the
necessary repairs within the period of time designated in the written notice,
the Operations Manager may cause such necessary repairs to be made and the cost
thereof deducted from the deposit required herein.
(‘71 Code, § 4-21-8) (Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
Penalty, see § 150.999
CONSTRUCTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 150.130 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION WORK. All construction and repair work to sidewalks, sewers,
culverts, drains, pavements, buildings and streets within the city.
CONSTRUCTION WORK shall not include minor repair work done in the ordinary care
of the pavements, streets, sidewalks and buildings.
('71 Code, § 9-11-1) (Ord. 2683, passed 9-12-88)
§ 150.131 ESTIMATE OF COSTS REQUIRED.
   Before any construction work shall be commenced, hereafter, by the city, an
estimate of the cost of said construction work shall be made by the City
Engineer, which estimate shall be presented to and approved following the
city’s normal procurement policies and procedures.
(‘71 Code, § 9-11-2) (Ord. 2683, passed 9-12-88; Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
§ 150.132 COST RESTRICTED.
   The cost of any of the construction work heretofore mentioned shall not
exceed the estimate of the City Engineer as herein set forth.
('71 Code, § 9-11-3) (Ord. 2683, passed 9-12-88)
§ 150.133 ENCROACHMENT ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Encroachments prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect
or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment as
defined in division (B) below, except as provided.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or required a different
meaning.
   ENCROACHMENT. Any building, fence, sign, or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located or maintained, in, on, under or over any portion of the public
right of way.
   PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT. Any approved awning, marquee, advertising sign or
similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to
the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the
building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on
the highway; the permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be
construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed
outside the public right-of-way line and not confined by adjacent buildings.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by
fee simple for highway or utility purposes; also, the areas acquired by
temporary easement during the time the easement is in effect.
   (C)   Existing encroachments. Any revocable permits for existing
encroachments issued by the city will continue to be in effect.
   (D)   Provisions are additional. This section is intended to and shall be in
addition to all other ordinances, rules and regulations concerning
encroachments and shall not be construed as repealing or rescinding any other
ordinance or part of any ordinance unless in direct conflict therewith.
(‘71 Code, § 9-11-4) (Ord. 2683, passed 9-12-88; Am. Ord. 4221, passed 12-9-24)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   The provisions of §
10.99 shall apply to this chapter.
(Ord. 2957, passed 1-23-95)
   (B)   Any person violating §
150.133 shall be fined in a sum of not less than $50 and not to exceed $500 for
any one offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and
every day during which a violation continues or exists.
('71 Code, § 9-11-4(E)) (Ord. 2683, passed 9-12-88)
CHAPTER 151: ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Definition
   
151.02   Adoption of electrical code by reference
Permits; Fees; Standards
   
151.15   Wiring only by registered electrical contractors
   
151.16   Application for permit
   
151.17   Fees
   
151.18   Emergency wiring
   
151.19   Temporary wiring
   
151.20   Standards and specifications
Electrical Contractors
   
151.35   Application for registration
   
151.36   Proof of qualifications for electrical contractor
   
151.37   Certificate of registration
   
151.38   Revocation of certificate of registration
   
151.39   Administrative hearing
Administration and Enforcement
   
151.50   Requisites of Electrical Inspector; authority
   
151.51   Electrical Inspector established
   
151.52   Permits and inspections
   
151.53   Inspection of electrical equipment
   
151.54   Liability
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPRENTICE ELECTRICIAN. A person who works for and under the supervision of
a Electrical Contractor in order to learn the trade of an electrician. Nothing
contained within this chapter shall prohibit any individual from being employed
as an apprentice by a licensed electrical contractor, or from engaging in
electrical work under the employ of an electrical contractor, provided that
such apprentice shall at all times be under the direct supervision and control
of the licensed electrical contractor, and provided that the licensed
electrical contractor shall be fully and completely responsible for all work or
activities of that person in the performance of electrical work.
   APPRENTICE ELECTRICIAN. A person who works for and under the supervision of
an electrical contractor in order to learn the trade of an electrician. Nothing
contained within this chapter shall prohibit any individual from being employed
as an apprentice by a licensed electrical contractor, or from engaging in
electrical work under the employ of an electrical contractor, provided that
such apprentice shall at all times be under the direct supervision and control
of the licensed electrical contractor, and provided that the licensed
electrical contractor shall be fully and completely responsible for all work or
activities of that person in the performance of electrical work.
   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT. Materials, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures,
apparatus and the like used as a part of, or in connection with, an electrical
installation. Such items shall be installed in accordance with the rules and
regulations prescribed in the National Electric Code and in accordance with
city ordinances. The term ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT as used herein shall not include
conductors, equipment and apparatus installed for or by public utilities,
including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois
Commerce Commission, nor shall it include equipment and apparatus installed for
the city.
   PLANT ELECTRICIAN. Plant electrician means any electrician regularly
employed by a person and whose electrical work for such employer is limited
exclusively to the plant or shop of his employer.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-1) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.02 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the City Council for purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life, property and otherwise,
that certain code known as the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition of NFPA
No. 70; for the control of electrical work performed within buildings and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said National Electrical Code, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in the City
Code, and on file with the City Clerk in their office. (Ord. 1695, passed 9-13-
71; Am. Ord. 4200, passed 9-9-24)
   (B)   Whenever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the code hereby adopted, it
shall be held to mean the City of Kewanee.
(Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68)
('71 Code, § 5-2-28)
PERMITS; FEES; STANDARDS
§ 151.15 WIRING ONLY BY REGISTERED ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS.
   No wiring, apparatus or fixtures for the use of electricity shall be
installed, altered or changed in any building or structure without a permit for
that purpose having first been obtained from the Building Official. No such
permit shall be issued to any person except a registered electrical contractor
in accordance with the provision of §§
151.35 through
151.37, with the following exceptions:
   (A)   A plant electrician need not obtain a permit, except for new
construction work.
   (B)   The Building Official may issue to an individual a permit authorizing
the individual to install, alter or change electrical equipment in or about a
dwelling which such person resides in. Work done under such permit shall be
done by the person individually or by a member of his immediate family only.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-18) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.16 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Prior to the beginning of installation, application must be made to the
Building Official for a permit. Such permit must be obtained by a person, firm
or corporation registered as an electrical contractor, or by the residential
property owner for work within their own residence. The Building Official shall
require drawings and specifications of the proposed installation if, in their
opinion, the installation is of sufficient magnitude to necessitate the same. A
permit shall not be necessary for the performance of minor repair work required
for the proper maintenance of all existing equipment.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-19) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.17 FEES.
   The fees for permits and inspections shall be paid to the city, as set forth
in § 150.16.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-20) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.18 EMERGENCY WIRING.
   In an emergency, when the situation demands immediate action and the
obtaining of a permit prior to the installing or altering of any electrical
installation or equipment is impossible, then and in that event one may start
such installation or repair work without first obtaining such permit; provided,
however, that application shall be made for, and be obtained as soon as
possible thereafter.
('71 Code, § 5-2-21) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68)
§ 151.19 TEMPORARY WIRING.
   Any applicant applying for a permit for installation of temporary wiring
shall specify the time such wiring is to remain in service and such permit
shall become null and void at the expiration of such time. At the time of
expiration of such permit, the Building Official may notify the electrical
utility company furnishing current for such wiring that service shall be
discontinued.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-22) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.20 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   When a temporary service is required in a new building before the
plumbing and heating systems are completed, complete service entrance equipment
and meter installation shall be installed in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the electrical utility company supplying power. All permanent
services shall be installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
electrical utility company supplying power, which rules are on file at the
office of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Ord. 1887, passed 8-11-75)
   (B)   Any building which can be classified wholly or in part as being in
International Building Code Use Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, or S must
have all wiring contained in a complete conduit system. This conduit system is
to provide the same, or higher, level of protection from penetration, as that
of BX type armored cable. This provision applies to all new construction and to
any additions, renovations, extensions, or alterations to existing building or
structures. Exceptions to this rule may be made by the Electrical Inspector
where the installation of conduit is impossible or impracticable, and the
National Electrical Code shall prevail in the resolution of any dispute in
regard to the interpretation of this section.
(Ord. 2160, passed 10-13-80; Am. Ord. 2890, passed 5-9-94; Am. Ord. 3284,
passed 12-11-00)
   (C)   Grounding. Metallic siding on all structures is to be electrically
continuous and is to be grounded to the neutral bar in the electric
distribution panel with a minimum No. 8 aluminum wire, or other method approved
by the Electrical Inspector. When a distribution panel is not present,
sufficient ground rods are to be driven to establish a resistance to ground of
not less than 25 Ohms.
(Ord. 1887, passed 8-11-75)
   (D)   Use of aluminum wiring.
      (1)   The use of aluminum wiring AWG 8, 10 and 12 for any branch circuit
is prohibited.
      (2)   The use of aluminum service wire from the weatherhead on in shall
be prohibited in all single-family and multiple-family dwellings.
      (3)   The installation of aluminum wiring or copper-clad aluminum wiring
in all commercial and industrial uses shall be permitted, provided approved
crimp fittings and no wire smaller than number four AWG is utilized.
(Ord. 2010, passed 3-27-78)
   (E)   Wire size and use.
      (1)   The use of number 14 AWG wire is limited to switched lighting
circuits only. It shall not be used for circuits serving a socket or other
receptacle.
      (2)   No wire smaller than number 12 AWG shall be used for any
convenience outlet in any building.
   (F)   Service entrance and equipment minimum capacity. Any existing
electrical service with a capacity of less than 100 amperes which becomes de-
energized for any reason, shall not be re-energized until said service has been
upgraded to a minimum of 100 amperes. Said 100 ampere minimum capacity service
shall have its conductors installed continuously in conduit from the
weatherhead to the meter base and to the new service panel box. The ground
field and related conductors and equipment must also be upgraded to current NEC
and local utility company standards before such disconnected service will be
approved for re-energizing by the Electrical Inspector.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-23) (Ord. 2691, passed 2-27-88; Am. Ord. 3264, passed 7-24-00;
Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)  
Penalty, see § 10.99
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
§ 151.35 APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of
electrical contractor, shall apply for registration to the Building Official
and pay the fee initial application fee of $50. Subsequent applications shall
be a fee of $25 annually and provide proof of electrical qualifications as set
forth in § 151.36.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-14) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.36 PROOF OF QUALIFICATIONS FOR ELECTRICAL CONTACTOR.
   All applications for a certificate of registration shall be reviewed by the
Building Official or his designee. No certificate of registration shall be
issued until the following qualifications of the applicant are verified.
   (A)   Proof of testing.
      (1)   The applicant shall have obtained a satisfactory passing score upon
a test based upon the latest issue of the National Electrical Code in force at
the time of the test;
      (2)   Proof of license from any city where the applicant obtained a
satisfactory passing score upon a test based upon the latest issue of the
National Electrical Code in force at the time of the test; or
      (3)   Proof of apprenticeship for a period of not less than five years
under the supervision of a city registered electrician in good standing. This
proof must be in the form of a notarized affidavit signed by both parties. The
affidavit must state the apprentice and electrician full name, address, and the
dates of the apprenticeship.
   (B)   Application; application fee and insurance.
      (1)   Application for registration as an electrical contractor shall be
made to the Building Official and shall state the name and address of the
applicant. Said application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state
that by signing said application that such person will perform all electrical
work in full and complete compliance with this chapter and all codes adopted by
the city, and if any work done by such person shall not be in full and complete
compliance with the ordinances of the city that such person will, upon notice
from the Building Official, complete such work in accordance with the
ordinances of the city. Such application shall also be accompanied by a
certificate from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state,
certifying that such applicant has in full force a public liability and
property damage insurance policy with limits of not less than $300,000 public
liability; and $50,000 property damage. Such certificates shall be maintained
in current status at all times, and if the certificate of insurance should
lapse the applicant shall receive no more permits for electrical work until
such certificate is restored in full force.
      (2)   Initial registration applications shall be accompanied by an
application fee of $50. Such application shall be valid so long as the
applicant is registered, provided his certificates of insurance are kept on
file with the City Clerk. Subsequent applications shall be accompanied by a fee
of $25 due annually pursuant to §
151.37.
(Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.37 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   Upon receipt of an application for electrical contractor, verification of
qualifications and the presentation of proof of financial responsibility in the
form of a certificate of liability insurance, the Building Official shall
register the applicant as an electrical contractor, and shall issue to such
applicant a certificate of registration authorizing such applicant to engage in
such business for a period from the date of issuance of such certificate of
registration to and including December 31 of the year in which such certificate
is issued. Such certificate of registration shall be renewable from year to
year and must be accompanied by proof of insurance and fee as outlined in §
151.36. Such certificate shall not be transferable. The Building Department
shall keep a suitable record of such registration.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-16) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
  
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.38 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   Should the holder of an electrical contractor registration violate any
ordinance of the city relating to the installation of electrical wiring,
material or equipment, or is responsible for any electrical installation which
is a hazard to life or property, such registration may be revoked after an
administrative hearing scheduled and conducted by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.39 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   The system of administrative hearings for the determination of
revocation of the certificate of registration of an electrical contractor shall
be initiated by the Building Official after a thorough investigation of a
complaint received by a resident or the electrical inspector.
      (2)   The electrical inspector shall provide the Building Official with a
written report outlining the complaint and section of the Electrical Code that
the electrical contractor has allegedly violated.
   (B)   The Building Official shall notify the contractor at fault and said
contractor shall immediately cease all electrical contractor operations until
an administrative hearing is held to determine if such certificate should be
revoked.
   (C)   An administrative hearing shall be scheduled and conducted by the
Mayor and City Council to adjudicate whether the electrical contractor’s
certificate of registration should or should not be revoked; and, what testing,
if any, shall be required prior to the electrical contractor’s registration
being reinstated. Such revocation shall extend for a period not to exceed 30
days, and thereafter the certificate of registration may be reinstated upon
application made for that purpose and after satisfying any requirements
resulting from the administrative hearing.
      (1)   Record. The City Clerk shall keep a transcript of all proceedings
and a copy shall be provided to the electrical contractor within 28 days of the
date of the administrative hearing.
      (2)   Procedures. The city and the electrical contractor shall be
entitled to representation by counsel at said administrative hearing and
present witnesses, testimony, documents, and evidence.
      (3)   Burden of proof. At any administrative hearing, the city shall have
the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the certificate of
registration of the electrical contractor should be revoked. The standard of
proof in all hearing conducted under this section shall be by the preponderance
of the evidence.
      (4)   Final determination. A written determination by the City Council of
whether the certificate of registration of the electrical contractor shall be
revoked or not; and, what testing, if any, shall be required prior to the
electrical contractor’s registration being reinstated, upon application made
for that purpose, shall be provided to the electrical contractor within 72
hours of the final determination made at the administrative hearing.
      (5)   Administrative records. All records pertaining to the
administrative process shall be held in a separate file under the electrical
contractor’s name with the city.
(Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.50 REQUISITES OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   No person shall be appointed to the office of Electrical Inspector who
is not reasonably well skilled in the various departments of electricity, and
who is not thoroughly informed in the rules and regulations of the National
Electrical Code. The Electrical Inspector shall not engage in, nor be
financially interested in, directly or indirectly, any phase of electrical
contracting or electrical material supplying in the city. (‘71 Code, § 5-2-4)
(Ord. 2158, passed 10-13-80)
   (B)   The Electrical Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours
to enter any building in the discharge of his official duties, or for the
purpose of making any inspection or test of the electrical installation
contained therein, and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all
electrical power when wiring is defective, and to cut or disconnect in cases of
emergency, any wire where such electrical power is dangerous to life or
property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department. The Electrical
Inspector shall report to the Building Official all willful violations of the
National Electrical Code and all other applicable local electrical ordinances.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-5) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.51 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established an Electrical Inspector for the regulation of
the installation, alteration and use of all electrical equipment as herein
provided. The Electrical Inspector and other employees so appointed shall be
charged with the duty of enforcing the rules and regulations relating to the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment, as hereinafter
provided for, and shall function under the immediate supervision and control of
the Building Official.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-6) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.52 PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.
   The adoption of this chapter or any subsequent ordinance relating to such
standards and specifications, rules and regulations, and fees, the provisions
hereof or thereof shall at once become operative and thereafter no electrical
equipment shall be installed or altered except upon a permit first issued by
the Building Official. The Building Official shall issue permits for the
installation and alteration of electrical equipment in all cases where
application shall have been made in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or any amendments thereto. The Electrical Inspector shall inspect all
such electrical equipment installed or altered in this city, and shall require
that it conform to the standards and specifications applicable thereto, except
that where an industrial or manufacturing concern regularly maintains an
electrical department for the construction and maintenance of electrical
facilities within their properties, and where the work of such electrical
department is under the supervision of qualified personnel, the Electrical
Inspector shall have no jurisdiction.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-7) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.53 INSPECTION OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.
   Upon the completion of the installation or alteration of electrical
equipment in any building, except industrial manufacturing concerns, it shall
be the duty of the person, firm or corporation installing or altering the same
to notify the Electrical Inspector, who shall inspect or cause the work to be
inspected within a reasonable time after such notice is given; and if such
electrical equipment is found to be fully in compliance with this chapter and
does not constitute a hazard to life and property, he shall notify the Building
Oficial who shall update the inspection records accordingly. All wiring which
is concealed in partitions, floors, ceilings, slabs or underground, shall be
subject to inspection at such time as work is roughed in, and any person, firm
or corporation installing such wires shall notify the Electrical Inspector,
giving him a reasonable time in which to make the required inspection before
such wires are concealed, except as provided in §
151.53.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-8) (Ord. 1531, passed 1-22-68; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.54 LIABILITY.
   This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from, or lessen, the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating or controlling any
electric wiring, electrical devices or electric material, for damages to person
or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as
assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein.
(‘71 Code, § 5-2-27) (Ord. 1887, passed 8-11-75; Am. Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   The provisions of §
10.99 shall apply to this chapter.
(Ord. 4228, passed 1-27-25)
CHAPTER 152: MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
   
152.01   Adoption of state statute by reference
   
152.02   Mobile home park license
   
152.03   Location outside mobile home park
   
152.04   Zoning of mobile home parks
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTE BY REFERENCE.
   As authorized by Illinois Compiled Statutes (50 ILCS 220/2) the Mobile Home
Park Act (210 ILCS 115) and the State of Illinois Department of Public Health
Division of Environmental Health Code 77 ILL. CODE 860 are adopted by
reference.
(Ord. 2828, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 4266, passed 12-8-25)
§ 152.02 MOBILE HOME PARK LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain
upon any property owned or controlled by that person, a mobile home park within
the zoning limits of the city, without having first secured a license therefor
from the city, granted and existing in compliance with the terms of this
chapter. Such license shall expire on May 1 of each year, but may be renewed
under the provisions of this chapter for additional periods of one year.
   (B)   The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed
with the Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee of $250. Renewal fees paid
after the May 1 renewal date will be subject to a 10% late fee in addition to
penalties imposed by this code.
   (C)   The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be
accompanied by proof of current license, in good standing, through the Illinois
Department of Public Health.
(Ord. 2828, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 4266, passed 12-8-25) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.03 LOCATION OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home on any
street or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person,
occupied or unoccupied within the city except as provided by the an approved
special use permit for operation of a mobile home park.
   (B)   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street
for no longer than three hours, subject to any other and further prohibitions,
regulations, or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulation for
that street; subject to the ordinances and parking regulation of the city.
(Ord. 2828, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 4266, passed 12-8-25) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 ZONING OF MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   No mobile home park or extension thereof shall be allowed until and unless a
special use permit has been granted therefor, per the zoning regulation of the
city.
(Ord. 2828, passed 5-24-93)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating this chapter shall be fined not less than $50 nor more
than $500 for each offense and in addition, such violation is hereby determined
to be a nuisance which may be abated or enjoined by the city.
(Ord. 2828, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 4266, passed 12-8-25)
CHAPTER 153: SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Title
   
153.02   Purpose and intent
   
153.03   Modifications to the IBC
   
153.04   Definitions
General Regulations
   
153.15   Permits required
   
153.16   Maintenance
   
153.17   Abandoned and prohibited signs
   
153.18   Permitted signs in residential districts
   
153.19   Permitted signs in business districts
   
153.20   Permitted signs in manufactured district
   
153.21   Signs on marquees, canopies and awnings
   
153.22   Signs on pylons, standards, clocks and supports
   
153.23   Signs on masonry pylons
   
153.24   Sign construction
   
153.25   Signs located upon lots having lawful nonconforming use located within
a residential district
   
153.26   Regulations for accessory signs
   
153.27   Regulations for temporary signs
   
153.28   Regulations for off-premises signs
   
153.29   Regulations for portable signs
   
153.30   Fees
   
153.31   Location of signs prohibited above or on public property
   
153.32   Signs prohibited on fire escapes
   
153.33   Cloth banners over street
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.50   Duties of Building Director
   
153.51   Failure to comply with standards
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 TITLE.
    This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Sign Regulations
of the City of Kewanee.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   To protect and enhance the character, property values and stability of
new and existing residential neighborhoods and business and manufacturing
districts in the city;
   (B)   To establish a regulatory framework for the use of signs as an adjunct
to economic and social activities of the residents, institutions and businesses
of the community;
   (C)   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings;
   (D)   To reduce sign clutter and the potential for the distraction of
motorists and the degradation of the appearance of the community that results
from an excessive number of signs;
   (E)   To protect aesthetic values and to establish and maintain standards of
community appearance with respect to signs, canopies and awnings;
   (F)   To provide standards and procedures for the removal, elimination or
relocation of signs, which fail to conform to those standards as established
herein;
   (G)   To establish an administrative framework for the enforcement of the
standards and regulations established herein;
   (H)   To further accomplish the general purpose and intent of the codified
ordinances of the city; and
   (I)   To promote and protect the health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience and general welfare of the people of the city.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.03 MODIFICATIONS TO THE IBC.
   The following are modifications to sections H101.1 through H115, inclusive,
of the IBC International Building Code.
   Omit the following subparagraph to § H101.2 Permit exemptions:
      H101.2.1 Painted non-illuminated signs.
         Painted non-illuminated signs do require an approved building permit
application per this code.
   Add the following subparagraphs to § H101.2 Permit exemptions:
      H101.2.6 Yard/Garage Sale Signs on Private Property. A permit shall not
be required for a sign erected on private property that announces a yard or
garage sale by the person or persons that occupy a residence on the property.
Nor is a permit required for a yard or garage sale sign erected on the property
of another person; however, such provision does not relieve the person placing
the sign from getting the permission of the property owner to place the sign on
the private property. In all cases signs announcing a yard or garage sale shall
be in place for only 24 hours.
      H101.2.7 Contractor Signs on Private Property. A permit shall not be
required for a sign erected on private property that announces that a
contractor is doing work on the piece of private property or within or on a
structure on private property. In all cases signs announcing a contractor's
work on private property shall be in place only during the period of the
contractor's work.
      H101.2.8 Auction Direction Signs on Private Property. A permit shall not
be required for a sign erected on private property that indicates the direction
to a public auction being held by an auctioneer that has obtained a license to
conduct the auction - such provision does not relieve the person placing the
directional sign from getting the permission of the property owner to place the
directional sign on the private property.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.04 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meaning indicated in this chapter. Words used in the present
tense include the future. Words used in the masculine gender include the
feminine and neuter. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular. Where terms are not defined herein, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings or such as the context shall imply.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign no longer correctly advertising a bona fide business,
institution, lessor, owner, product or activity available or located on the
premises where the sign is displayed.
   ACCESSORY SIGN. All other permanent signs, including on-site directional
signs for vehicles and pedestrians, parking restrictions, warnings and other
similar signs.
   A-FRAME. A temporary sign, otherwise known as a sandwich board, which is not
generally mounted to the ground. It is a double-sided sign connected at the top
and separated at the bottom.
   AWNING. An architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity or decoration and is wholly supported by the building to which it is
attached. An AWNING is comprised of a lightweight frame structure over which a
covering is attached. AWNINGS shall comply with Section 3105 of the IBC.
   BACKLIGHTED LETTER. An illuminated reverse channel letter (open or
translucent back) configured so light from the letter is directed against the
surface behind the letter producing a halo lighting effect around the letter.
   BANNER SIGN. A sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no
enclosing framework. A BANNER SIGN shall be a temporary sign as regulated by
this chapter.
   BENCH. Any bench, chair, seat or structure upon which a person may sit and
which directs attention to a business, commodity service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered for sale. BENCH signs are prohibited in the city.
   BILLBOARD. A structure typically having square footage of more than 200
square feet, and not exceeding 300 square feet, directing attention to or
advertising a business, commodity, service, product or property. BILLBOARDS are
typically an “off-premises sign” and require an approved special use permit.
   BUILDING DIRECTOR. Building Director, Neighborhood Services Coordinator or
designee thereof.
   CABINET SIGN. A lettered glass or plastic panel lit by fluorescent lighting
behind.
   CANOPY. A permanent structure or architectural projection of rigid
construction over which a covering is attached that provides weather
protection, identity or decoration, and shall be structurally independent or
supported by attachment to a building on one end. CANOPIES must comply with
Section 3105 of the IBC.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. Any sign on which the message, letters, characters,
illustrations or other symbols can be changed, replaced or rearranged on the
surface of the sign. CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN includes LED signs.
   CITY. The City of Kewanee, Illinois.
   COMBINATION SIGN. A sign incorporating any combination of the features of
pole, projecting and roof signs.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A sign identifying the designers, contractor and
financiers and other information regarding a project on the site where the sign
is located.
   CORNERSTONE. A ceremonial masonry stone, or replica, set in a prominent
location on the outside of a building, with an inscription on the stone
indicating the construction dates of the building and the names of architect,
builder, or other significant information.
   DETERIORATED. When applied to a sign or sign face, a sign, including any
components of the sign, that has become structurally weakened or any pmi of the
sign showing wear, damage or missing parts or has become illegible in.
   DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A monument sign placed at the entrance to a residential,
commercial or industrial subdivision, indicating the name of the subdivision.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign designating the location or direction of any place
or area.
   DIRECTORY.  Any permanent, enclosed changeable copy sign used to identify
the occupants of a building or group of buildings and their location within the
same.
   EYE CATCHER. A temporary sign or device which flutters or moves in the wind,
which revolves, moves or changes shape, or which reflects light in a startling
or unusual way or which emits light, changes color, or turns on and off in such
a way as to attract or capture the attention of a passerby. For the purposes of
this definition, it shall not be a requirement that EYE CATCHERS contain or put
forth any particular message or other information. However, the presence of a
message or other information attached to or incorporated into the design of the
EYE CATCHER as defined herein shall not serve to classify it as any type of
sign other than an eye catcher. Included here are strings of flags, pennants,
whirlygigs, balloons or other inflatable items, or other wind-driven devices,
flashing lights, search lights, novelty items or similar devices but without
limitation to their being specifically included herein.
   FACADE. All window and wall area in the front plane or elevation of a
building or storefront. In the case of a two-stor1y building, only the first
level shall be used in calculating the FACADE area. For purposes of calculating
wall signage, if the FACADE is not a straight line, the FACADE shall be the
lineal distance measured from corner to corner at grade level.
   FLAG. A lightweight fabric, or other material with patterns and colors,
which is meant to move in the wind.
   GROUND SIGN. A freestanding sign permanently attached to or supported by a
foundation. Not attached to any building. Some examples of GROUND SIGNS include
but are not limited to pole signs and monument signs.
   MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the
building and may project into the public right-of-way. MARQUEES must comply
with Section 3106 of the IBC. MARQUEES that project into the public right-of-
way require an approved special use permit.
   MEASURED SIGN.  All permanent signs for which this chapter establishes
restrictions upon the area of the sign or upon the total area of the signage to
be displayed upon a lot.
   MEASURED SIGN AREA. The area of the sign face determined in one of the
following ways and upon which the regulations of the amount of signage
permitted by this chapter is based:
      (1)   The MEASURED SIGN AREA shall be taken as the area inside a
perimeter determined by connecting with straight line segments the extreme
outside corners or edges of the sign face. When individual letters are used,
the sign area shall be determined by the above procedure and shall include all
of the blank space, as well as the individual letters, in the square foot area
thus determined;
      (2)   Where the sign contains more than one face facing in the same
direction, the perimeter shall enclose all faces;
      (3)   Where the sign contains identical faces facing in opposite
directions, the MEASURED SIGN AREA shall only be counted once; and
      (4)   All measurements shall be made from the actual sign or from scaled
drawings and shall be accurate within one square foot. All MEASURED SIGN AREAS
are expressed in square feet.
   NAME PLATE. A sign containing the name or street address and occupation or
profession of the occupant of a building.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign which refers to a place of business or event at a
location other than the lot upon which the sign is erected. An OFF-PREMISES
SIGN shall require an approved special use permit.
   PAINTED WALL SIGN. Any wall sign that is applied directly to the wall or
other surface of any existing building or other structure without any support
or surface preparation other than paint, primer, or similar products or
materials.
   PENNANT. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
   POLE SIGN. A sign wholly supported by a sign structure in the ground.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any temporary ground sign or any other ground sign that does
not conform to the regulations for sign construction and erection. PORTABLE
SIGNS include but are not limited to those on trailers or other framed base not
attached to the ground in conformance with the adopted building code and may be
illuminated or non-illuminated and may have changeable copy characteristics.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign other than a wall sign, which projects from and is
supported by a wall of a building or structure. PROJECTING SIGNS must comply
with § H112 of the IBC.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any sign indicating that the premises upon which it is
located is available for sale or lease. A REAL ESTATE SIGN may be either a
ground sign or a wall sign.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building or
structure. ROOF SIGNS must comply with § H110 of the IBC.
   ROTATING OR MOVING SIGN. Any sign which revolves, rotates, swings, undulates
or otherwise attracts attention by moving parts, whether operated by mechanical
equipment or by natural sources, but not including flags or banners.
   SIGN. Any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, marquee sign,
design, poster, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading
matter or illuminated service, which shall be constructed, placed, attached,
painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever, so that
the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject,
person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise,
whatsoever, which is displayed in any manner outdoors. Every SIGN shall be
classified and conform to the requirements of that classification as set forth
in this chapter. Any SIGN classification not set forth in this chapter shall
conform to the requirements of that classification as set forth in appendix H
of the IBC, § 3105, § 3106 and/or any other section of the IBC that applies to
said sign classification.
   SNIPE SIGN. A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence and the
like.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A temporary sign is any sign irrespective of the type of
sign or the materials used for its construction which is restricted by the
terms of this chapter as to the length of time that it may be erected,
maintained, used or displayed. In addition, the term TEMPORARY SIGN shall
include any sign constructed of temporary, unsubstantial or inherently fragile
materials such as paper, cardboard, water soluble paints and other materials.
See also §
153.27.
   WALL SIGN. Any sign which is attached to and supported by the wall of a
building or other structure provided the sign face is parallel to the wall to
which the sign is attached.
   WINDOW SIGN. Any permanent sign displayed inside the window or a dootway of
a building or upon the interior wall of a building opposite a window in a way
as to be clearly visible from the outside.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 153.15 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The standards, regulations and procedures established by this chapter
shall apply to all signs erected, displayed or maintained in the city,
including all exterior signs and all interior signs located in windows,
doorways or other building openings which are clearly visible from the building
exterior, except for exempt signs as provided in §
153.15(D).
   (B)   Permits for signs will be required when specified by this code and/or
§ H101 of the International Building Code or any other section of the
International Building Code. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
modify or maintain any measured sign or any tempora1y sign for which a permit
is expressly required without first obtaining a sign permit from the Building
Department and making payment of the fee required. In addition, all electrical
signs, electrical access signs and electrical temporary signs subject to the
regulations of the Electrical Code of the city shall be subject to the permit
and fee requirements established therein.
   (C)   Permits for signs may require engineered and stamped plans at the
discretion of the Building Official.
   (D)   Exempt signs.
      (1)   Traffic control signs, warning signs and temporary construction and
routing signs erected, maintained or operated by a governmental agency in
conformance with the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices;
      (2)   Signs authorized and erected by the city, including public notices
posted by public officials or employees in the performance of their duties;
      (3)   The signs of any other governmental agency erected and maintained
in the furtherance of agency's official mission, duties and responsibilities;
      (4)   Warning signs placed by utility companies or others in areas of
danger that are accessible to the public;
      (5)   Identification tags, labels, plaques and signs used by utility
companies and other organizations to identify fixed operating equipment and for
similar purposes;
      (6)   Signs on poles which indicate towing regulations or restrictions;
      (7)   Homeowner's signs indicating items of personal property "for sale,"
"beware of dog," "no trespassing" and similar signs may be displayed upon
residential property provided the signs pertain to an actual offering for sale
or announce an actual warning and provided further that the signs do not exceed
two square feet in area;
      (9)   Political signs as permitted and allowed by state or federal laws;
      (10)   Religious signs may be displayed without permit provided that the
signs are not located in the public right-of-way or attached to utility poles
or trees. Not included in this exempt section are signs identifying places of
religious worship, which are considered measured signs;
      (11)   Real estate signs in conformance with the requirements of §
153.18(A)(2);
      (12)   Seasonal decorations, including items of a primarily decorative
nature associated with national, local or religious holidays. Seasonal
decorations visible from the public right-of-way shall be removed within 60
days after the event;
      (13)   Snipe signs and temporary signs advertising garage sales, estate
sales, bazaars and rummage sales and similar events may be displayed during the
time of the event. The signs shall not be attached to any utility poles, light
standard, tree or placed in any right-of-way; and
      (14)   Construction signs. See §
153.02(B).
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.16 MAINTENANCE.
    All signs shall be maintained in a safe, legible and good condition.
   (A)   Safety. All signs shall be maintained to the same structural standards
by which they were approved or, in the case of nonconforming signs, the
standard by which they would have otherwise been approved. All metal patis
which are subject to rust or corrosion shall be painted at all times, all
anchors and other fastenings shall be maintained in a secure and functioning
condition capable of sustaining the loads for which they were designed. All
sign faces shall be smooth and free from nails, tacks, wires, splinters and
other hazards.
   (B)   Legibility. All signs shall be maintained in a legible condition.
Painted signs shall be repainted at times as the deterioration of the paint
results in illegibility or disfiguration.
   (C)   Condition. All glass panes or panes of other materials that comprise
the sign face shall be immediately replaced if broken. All electrical
components, switches, lamps, relays, fuses and similar devices shall be
maintained in good working order.
   (D)   Any sign that becomes a danger to the public, because of damage to or
deterioration of the structure, must be removed immediately. Where the owner
cannot be immediately contacted, the Building Director may order the sign
removed. Where the owner of the property on which an abandoned sign is located
fails to remove the sign in a timely manner, the Building Director may remove
the sign. Any expense directly incurred in the removal of the sign shall be
charged to the owner of the property. Where the owner fails to pay, the city
may file a lien upon the property for the purpose of recovering all reasonable
costs associated with the removal of the sign.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.17 ABANDONED AND PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   Abandoned signs. The following regulations shall govern abandoned
signs.
      (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following signs shall be
deemed abandoned:
         (a)   Any sign, which is located on property which becomes vacant and
which remains vacant for a period of 30 days except that real estate signs in
accordance with §
153.18(A)(2) may be displayed thereon;
         (b)   Any sign, wherever located, which refers to a business or other
activity, which has become vacant and remains vacant for a period of 30 days;
         (c)   Any sign announcing an event or the date or dates of an event
which has passed, except permanent signs announcing the opening of a new
business or activity provided that the references to the dates of the opening
are removed upon opening.
         (d)   Any dilapidated, deteriorated, unreadable, illegible,
structurally unsound or unsafe sign.
      (2)   Removal of abandoned signs. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of any property upon, which an abandoned sign is located, to remove the
sign within 30 days after a sign meets the aforementioned abandoned sign
criteria.
   (B   Prohibited signs. The following signs, parts of signs, characteristics
of signs and sign-like objects are prohibited and may not be erected,
maintained, continued or used in the city:
      (1)   Any sign or similar object, color, light, shape or combination
thereof which resembles an official traffic control device or sign, or is a
representation of a traffic control device or sign;
      (2)   Any obscene language or graphic material or other representation of
an obscenity or obscene act;
      (3)   Any sign, signal or similar device which emits music, speech,
simulated speech or any other sound on a regular or intermittent basis;
      (4)   Any sign affixed to a tree;
      (5)   Any sign affixed to a utility pole, public light or street light,
traffic control device or similar standard used for lighting;
      (6)   Any sign or similar device, which contains a strobe light or any
other high intensity light, which is emitted on a periodic or intermittent
basis, or any light used as an eye catcher;
      (7)   Bench signs as defined herein;
      (8)   Cross-street banners. Banners strung across the public right-of-way
are prohibited except as permitted by §
153.33; or
      (9)   Any otherwise exempt sign, which exceeds the regulations or
restrictions for size, location or time of display.
   (C)   Removal of prohibited signs. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of any property, upon which a prohibited sign is located, to remove the
sign within 30 days after a sign meets the aforementioned abandoned sign
criteria. Where the owner of the property on which a prohibited sign is located
fails to remove the sign in a timely manner, the Building Director may remove
the sign. Any expense directly incurred in the removal of the sign shall be
charged to the owner of the property. Where the owner fails to pay, the city
may file a lien upon the property for the purpose of recovering all reasonable
costs associated with the removal of the sign.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.18 PERMITTED SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   In all residential districts, the following classes of signs are permitted
per the regulations set forth hereinafter:
   (A)   Nonflashing, nonilluminated accessory business signs, as follows:
      (1)   Nameplates and identification signs, subject to the following:
         (a)   For one- and two-family dwellings, there shall be not more than
one nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area, for each dwelling unit,
indicating the name or address of the occupant or a permitted occupation.
         (b)   For multiple-family dwellings, for apartment hotels, and for
buildings other than dwellings, a single identification sign not exceeding 32
square feet in area and indicating only the name and address of the building
and the name of the management thereof may be displayed.
         (c)   Height. No sign shall project higher than one story, or 20 feet
above the curb level, whichever is lower.
      (2)   "For sale," "to rent" signs, subject to the following:
         (a)   There shall be not more than one such sign per lot except that
on a corner lot, two signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. No sign
shall exceed eight square feet in area nor be closer than eight feet to any
other zoning lot.
         (b)   Projection. No sign shall project beyond the property line into
the public way.
         (c)   Height. No sign shall project higher than one story or 20 feet
above curb level, whichever is lower.
      (3)   Signs accessory to parking areas, subject to the following:
         (a)   Signs designating entrances or exits to or from a parking area
and limited to one sign for each such exit or entrance and to a maximum size of
three square feet each shall be permitted. One sign per parking area
designating the conditions of use or identity of such parking area and limited
to a maximum size of eight square feet shall be permitted, provided that on a
corner lot two such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
         (b)   Height. No sign shall project higher than seven feet above curb
level.
   (B)   Nonflashing, accessory business signs, as follows: church bulletins,
subject to the following:
      (1)   There shall be not more than one sign per lot except that on a
corner lot, two signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. No sign
shall exceed 18 square feet in area nor be closer than eight feet to any other
zoning lot.
      (2)   Projection. No sign shall project beyond the property line into the
public way.
      (3)   Height. No sign shall project higher than one story or 20 feet
above the curb level, whichever is lower.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.19 PERMITTED SIGNS IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Permitted signs in B-1 Districts. In the B-1 Districts, business signs
are permitted, subject to the following:
      (1)   All signs and nameplates permitted in the R-1 to R-5 Districts,
inclusive.
      (2)   The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall
not exceed three times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot. The
gross area of all flashing signs shall not exceed two times the lineal frontage
of such lot.
      (3)   Location. The sign or signs shall front the principal street, a
parking area, or in the case of a corner building, on that portion of the side
street wall within 50 feet of the principal street.
      (4)   Projection. No sign shall project more than two inches across the
property line into the public way, except as provided for awnings, marquees and
canopies in this subchapter.
      (5)   Height. No sign shall project higher than 30 feet above curb level.
   (B)   Permitted signs in B-2, B-3, and B-4 Districts. In the B-2, B-3, and
B-4 Districts, inclusive, business and advertising signs are permitted, subject
to the following:
      (1)   All signs and nameplates permitted in the B-1 Districts.
      (2)   The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall
not exceed three times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot, provided
that the gross area of flashing signs shall not exceed two times the lineal
feet of frontage of such lot.
      (3)   Location. The sign or signs shall front the principal street,
parking area, or in the case of a corner building, on that portion of the side
street wall within 50 feet of the principal street.
      (4)   Projection.
         (a)   Signs suspended from any building shall not project more than 72
inches beyond the building line and the bottom of such sign shall not be less
than eight feet above the finished grade of the sidewalk.
         (b)   Any sign projecting or suspended from a building shall not
exceed 12 feet in height and its location and arrangement shall be subject to
approval by the Health, Building and Zoning Officer.
      (5)   Height. No sign shall project higher than 30 feet above curb level.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.20 PERMITTED SIGNS IN MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted signs, M-1 Districts. In the M-1 Districts, the regulations
governing signs in the B-2 Districts shall apply.
   (B)   Billboards and poster panels having a sign area not exceeding 300
square feet, provided the location of their sites and the limitations of the
time of their use and all other terms and conditions thereof are first approved
as provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.21 SIGNS ON MARQUEES, CANOPIES AND AWNINGS.
   (A)   Restrictions imposed by this subchapter on the projection of signs
across property lines into the public way shall not apply, except in residence
districts, to signs located on a marquee or canopy shall be affixed flat to the
surface thereof, and further, that no such sign shall extend vertically or
horizontally beyond the limits of said marquee or canopy, except that
individual, free-standing letters may project to a height not exceeding 24
inches above same.
   (B)   Restrictions imposed by this subchapter on the projection of signs
across property lines into the public way shall not apply except in residence
districts, to signs located on awnings, provided that any sign located on an
awning shall be affixed flat to the surface thereof, shall be nonilluminated
and nonflashing, and shall indicate only the name and address of the
establishment on the premises. Further, no such sign shall exceed vertically or
horizontally beyond the limits of said awning.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.22 SIGNS ON PYLONS, STANDARDS, CLOCKS AND SUPPORTS.
   Signs, clocks or other advertising devices erected upon standard separate
supports shall be placed so as to be entirely within the property lines of the
premises upon which it is located, and no part of the sign or standard shall
have a total height greater than 20 feet above the level of the street upon
which the sign faces or above the adjoining ground level if such ground level
is above the street level, nor shall the surface of any such sign exceed an
area of 100 square feet.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.23 SIGNS ON MASONRY PYLONS.
   Signs may be placed on the face of a masonry pylon when the pylon is
constructed as an integral part of the building and such pylon does not project
above the roofline more than 12 feet and the type, design, and construction of
the pylon complies with all of the requirements of this chapter and the
building code.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.24 SIGN CONSTRUCTION.
   All signs other than temporary signs shall be constructed in conformance
with appendix H and or all other applicable sections of the International
Building Code, International Residential Code and the Kewanee City Code.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.25 SIGNS LOCATED UPON LOTS HAVING LAWFUL NONCONFORMING USE LOCATED WITHIN
A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted signs.
      (1)   Wall signs are permitted under 12 square feet in gross sign area.
Illuminated, animated, and flashing wall signs are prohibited.
      (2)   Window signs are permitted. Illuminated, animated, and flashing
window signs are prohibited.
      (3)   All other signs are prohibited.
   (B)   Sign construction and design.
      (1)   Sign construction must be constructed in conformance with Appendix
H and or all other applicable sections of the International Building Code.
      (2)   Color scheme, lettering and design of all signs located upon the
building must complement the building upon which it is located as well as the
surrounding buildings within the surrounding residential district.
   (C)   Applications for permits.
      (1)   Applications for permits for signs located upon lawful
nonconforming buildings and properties located inside a residential district
must be accompanied by full color scale drawings and/or photos as required by
the Building Director.
      (2)   Applications may be denied by the Building Director if the drawings
and/or photos of the proposed sign are found to not be complementary to the
surrounding buildings and environment.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.26 REGULATIONS FOR ACCESSORY SIGNS.
   (A)   General regulations. Accessory signs as defined in §
153.04 shall be erected and maintained only in conformance with the following
regulations.
      (1)   Permits and fees. Permits are required and fees are charged for the
erection and maintenance of accessory signs that the signs shall conform to the
regulations herein except that any electrical accessory sign shall conform to
the Electrical Code of the city.
      (2)   Accessory signs. Shall not block the view of traffic at
intersections or at the entrance or exit to the property or neighboring
property for which the signs is erected and shall conform to the requirements
established within the International Building Code and the Kewanee City Code.
   (B)   Regulations for particular accessory signs.
      (1)   Nameplates. Signs displaying the name of the occupant, the business
or profession, and the street name and number may be displayed near the
entrance to the building, provided the sign does not exceed a measured area of
two square feet.
      (2)   Window signs. Signs painted on windows and indicating the name of
the occupant and the business or profession conducted therein are permitted
accessory signs provided the signs are limited to one per street frontage and
that each sign does not exceed two and one-half square feet of measured sign
area.
      (3)   Warning signs. Signs posting private property against trespassing,
hunting or similar prohibitions, provided the signs do not exceed two square
feet of measured sign area.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.27 REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   Temporary signs may be erected and maintained only in accordance with the
following regulations.
   (A)   General regulations.
      (1)   Permits. Temporary signs as provided in division (B), below, shall
only be erected pursuant to the issuance of a temporary sign permit. Any
electrical temporary sign shall be subject to the Electrical Code of the city.
      (2)   Fees. Temporary signs for which permits are required shall only be
erected and maintained after the payment of a fee as provided in §
150.016, including any electrical fee, except that no fee shall be required for
any construction sign for a project for which a building permit has been
issued.
      (3)   Size of signs. The measured sign area of temporary signs, the
number of signs, or the aggregate area of the signs shall not exceed the area
or size limitation imposed in division (B) herein.
      (4)   Location of signs. No temporary sign shall be located in the public
right-of-way or in any required yard within ten feet of the public right-of-
way.
      (5)   Time of display. The erection and maintenance of all temporary
signs shall be limited to the time period specified in division (B) herein, or
to the time period specified in the permit, whichever is less.
      (6)   Removal of temporary signs. All temporary signs shall be removed by
the owner as follows:
         (a)   Upon the expiration of the permit;
         (b)   Upon the expiration of the time period established in division
(B) herein;
         (c)   When any sign becomes damaged, deteriorated or illegible; and
         (d)   Further, any temporary sign that does not contain the
identification required above, is displayed before or after the time period
established by permit, or otherwise does not display the time period as
provided above may be immediately removed by an inspector of the Building
Department or any other person.
   (B)   Regulations for particular temporary signs. The following regulations
are established for particular temporary signs.
      (1)   Construction signs. One sign identifying a construction project,
the owner, architect, general contractor, subcontractors, financiers and other
information relating to a construction project may be erected at the
construction site in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Size. Not to exceed 64 square feet.
         (b)   Locations. Within the property lines subject to the requirements
for safety and clear view of intersections.
         (c)   Height. Not to exceed 14 feet.
         (d)   Period of display. From two weeks before ground breaking until
occupancy.
         (e)   Permit. No permit shall be required for a construction sign
placed upon property for which a valid building permit as been issued.
      (2)   Point of sale signs. The use of temporary, intermittent,
freestanding signs to advertise products or sale items, prices or for similar
purposes shall only be used in accordance with the following.
         (a)   Size. No individual sign shall exceed four square feet.
         (b)   Location.
            1.   No point of sale sign shall be located on the public right-of-
way and shall not be placed such that it causes an obstruction of view of
traffic causing a safety hazard.
            2.   Exception: one point of sale sign of the A-frame type will be
allowed per store front on the public right-of-way in the following uptown
locations provided that the sign meets the sign specifications herein, the sign
is placed directly in front of the effected business, the sign is placed either
directly adjacent to the store front or at the furthest point on the sidewalk
next to the roadway directly in front of the effected business, such that the
sign is not in the direct walking path on said sidewalk.
               100-300 W. First St.
               100-400 W. Second St.
               100 E. Second St.
               100-200 W. Third St.
               100-200 E. Third St.
               100 W. Fifth St.
               100-300 N. Tremont St.
               100-200 N. Chestnut St.
               100 N. Lexington Ave.
               100 S. Main St.
               100-300 N. Main St.
         (c)   Height. No point of sale sign shall exceed a height of five
feet.
         (d)   Period of display. A point of sale sign shall be promptly
removed immediately after the advertised event or sale has expired.
         (e)   Permit. Point of sale signs shall not require a permit so long
as the point of sale sign conforms with this code.
         (f)   Removal. Point of sale signs shall be removed immediately if it
becomes deteriorated or illegible.
         (g)   Allowable quantity. One point of sale sign shall be allowed for
every 20 linear feet of lot frontage and signs shall be spaced/installed with
this 20 foot spacing.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.28 REGULATIONS FOR OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
   Off-premises signs are prohibited in the city unless a special use permit
has been granted by the Planning Commission of the city. An off-premises sign
along a state highway must conform to the State Highway Adve1iising Control Act
as permitted by the State of Illinois and shall also require a special use
permit granted by the Planning Commission of the city. Off-premises signs must
conform to all applicable sections of this code.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.29 REGULATIONS FOR PORTABLE SIGNS.
   Portable signs are prohibited within the city without an approved permit.
Permits for portable signs in the city may be granted by the Director of
Community Development. The fee for portable signs will be $25 annually.
   (A)   Permit required. For all portable signs, the owner or tenant must
contact the Director of Community Development and apply for a portable sign
permit by providing the name and address of the applicant, and the description
and location of the sign to be erected on a sign permit application prior to
actual installation.
   (B)   Number. Only one portable sign may be displayed on a property at any
one time.
   (C)   Term of use. Any one lot is permitted to display a portable sign, with
an approved permit, for a maximum of 90 days within any 12-month period. Signs
may be displayed for a maximum of 15 consecutive days, and must be removed for
a minimum of 15 consecutive days. Portable signs in use for more than 90 days
of any 12-month period will no longer be defined as portable under this chapter
and will be required to conform to the regulations for signs other than
temporary or portable in this chapter.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.30 FEES.
   A permit fee for each sign erected under this chapter shall be paid to the
city as set forth in §
150.016.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.31 LOCATIONS OF SIGN PROHIBITED ABOVE OR ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No signboard or billboard shall be erected on or over public property unless
so permitted by the City Council.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.32 SIGNS PROHIBITED ON FIRE ESCAPES.
   No part of any sign shall be attached to a fire escape or placed to
interfere with the ingress or egress from windows in case of fire.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.33 CLOTH BANNERS OVER STREET.
   Special permits for cloth banners to overhang streets in the city may be
granted with the consent of the City Council. Such banners shall be securely
fastened and holes put in the banners to relieve wind pressure. These banners
cannot be located over or near any power lines.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25) Penalty, see §
153.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.50 DUTIES OF BUILDING DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Building Director. This chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Building Director who shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Receive all applications for sign permits;
      (2)   Perform the review and inspections required by this chapter;
      (3)   Enforce, as appropriate, the other laws and ordinances of the city
as the same apply to the erection and maintenance of signs;
      (4)   Issue all permits in conformance with this chapter;
      (5)   Issue all citations or notices of violations required by this
chapter;
      (6)   Maintain accurate records of all permits, inspections, citations,
violations and fees and make the records available for public inspection during
normal business hours;
      (7)   Make all determinations required of the City Council as provided by
this chapter;
      (8)   Review and resolve any conflicts in standards, regulations,
requirements or procedures arising from the application of this chapter and
other laws or ordinances of the city regulating the erection and maintenance of
signs or the licensing of sign contractors;
      (9)   Make all determinations, requirements, conditions or agreements
necessary to affect the removal of nonconforming signs and signs subject to the
amortization provisions of this chapter;
      (10)   Interpret the various provisions of this chapter as requested by
either the City Council, City Manager, the applicant for or holder of a sign
permit or the public;
      (11)   Review all requests for variations from the regulations
established by this chapter and issue an order in accordance with the standards
established below; and
      (12)   Make rules governing the administration and enforcement of this
chapter in accordance with the provisions of the Kewanee City Code.
   (B)   Enforcement. The Building Director shall be authorized to enforce all
provisions of this chapter. If the Building Director shall find that any sign
has been erected or is being maintained in violation with the provisions of the
chapter, the Building Director shall issue any citation which is necessary or
take any action necessary as provided by the Kewanee City Code.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.51 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH STANDARDS.
   Any sign which is not brought up to the standards of this chapter within a
reasonable time after being so ordered by the Building Director, said time
limit being determined by the Building Director, shall be ordered razed or
removed, said order being given by the Building Director. The expense of said
razing or removal is to be recovered from the person owning or controlling said
sign.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates, fails to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation, failure to comply or
resisting of enforcement occurs or continues.
(Ord. 4229, passed 2-10-25)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Title
   
154.002   Official status
   
154.003   Intent and purpose
   
154.004   Definitions
   
154.005   Application of regulations
   
154.006   Interpretation
   
154.007   Submission of plats and plans; compliance with regulations
   
154.008   Approval required before land subdivided, sold or improved
   
154.009   Lands offered to city
   
154.010   Plan to subdivide tract of land from larger subdivision unit
   
154.011   Resubdivision
   
154.012   Disclaimer of liability
Procedure for Approval
   
154.025   Pre-application procedure
   
154.026   Procedure for conditional approval of preliminary plat
   
154.027   Procedure for approval of final plat
Plats and Data
   
154.040   Preapplication plans and data
   
154.041   Plats and data for conditional approval
   
154.042   Improvement plans, plats and data for final approval
   154.043 through 154.049   Reserved
   
154.050   Improvements inspections
   
154.051   Assurance for completion of required improvements
Design Standards
   
154.055   Streets
   
154.056   Alleys
   
154.057   Easements
   
154.058   Blocks
   
154.059   Lots
   
154.060   Building setback lines
   
154.061   Parks, schools and public areas
Required Land Improvements
   
154.075   Monuments and markers
   
154.076   Utility and street improvements
   154.077 through 154.079   Reserved
   
154.080   Utilities
   
154.081   Water facilities
   
154.082   Fire hydrants
   
154.083   Drainage and storm sewers
   
154.084   Soil erosion and sedimentation control
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.090   Building permits
   
154.091   Certifications and disclosures on plats
   
154.092   Inspection at subdividers' expense
   
154.093   Variances
   
154.094   Acceptance and maintenance of improvements
   
154.095   Sample forms
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
Subdivision Regulations for the city.
('71 Code, § 12-1-1) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
§ 154.002 OFFICIAL STATUS.
   This chapter is hereby made a part of the Official Plan of the city.
('71 Code, § 12-1-2) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
§ 154.003 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To insure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community
growth, and to safeguard the interests of the home owner, the subdivider, the
investor, and the city.
   (B)   To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the city.
   (C)   To prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and
prevent excessive development costs.
   (D)   To assure the development of land for the highest possible use with
all the necessary protection against deterioration and obsolescence.
   (E)   To provide common grounds of understanding and sound working
relationship between the city and the developer.
   (F)   To avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land be
properly monumented and recorded;
   (G)   To protect against injury or damage caused by fire, pollution,
flooding, storm water runoff, or erosion and sedimentation;
   (H)   To reduce the cost of installing and maintaining adequate water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm water sewers, and other utilities and services; and
   (I)   To provide for the acceptance of lands for public rights-of-way.
('71 Code, § 12-1-3) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
§ 154.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public right of way primarily for vehicular traffic along the side
or in the rear of properties, which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting properties.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore
lines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the city.
   BUILDING. Any structure designed, built or intended for the shelter,
enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of
any kind.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line within a lot or other parcel of land, so
designated on the plats of the proposed subdivision, between which and the
adjacent boundary of the street upon which the lot abuts, the erection of a
building is prohibited.
   COMMISSION, PLAN COMMISSION or CITY PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of
the city.
   CROSSWALK. A public right-of-way of land located across a block to provide
pedestrian access to adjacent streets or areas.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having one open end and being permanently
terminated by a vehicle turn-around.
   DEDICATE. To transfer ownership of a right-of-way, parcel of land, or
improvement to the City of Kewanee or other public entity without compensation.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the
general public, a corporation, or a certain person for a specific purpose or
purposes.
   ESCROW DEPOSIT. A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure the
completion of improvements within a subdivision.
   IMPROVEMENT PLANS. The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for the structures and facilities to be installed in, or
in conjunction with, a subdivision.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Any street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, sewer,
catch basin, newly planted tree, off-street parking area, or other facility
necessary for the general use of property owners in a subdivision.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership or building development.
   PARKWAY. A route intended to be used primarily by passenger vehicles which
may have a varying width of right of way and which right of way is or is
intended to be developed with a park-like character.
   PLAT. A plan, map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of the
subdivision is presented and which he submits for approval and intends to
record in final form.
   PLAT, FINAL. The drawings and documents presented or final approval and as
described in §§ 154.25 through 154.27.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY (GENERAL PLAN). The drawings and documents presented for
conditional approval and as described in §§ 154.25 through 154.27.
   PRE-FILING CONFERENCE. A conference held between the developer and
appropriate city staff prior to submission of a preliminary or final plat.
   ROADWAY. The paved area for vehicular traffic existing on a street right of
way and not the street right of way width
   STREET. Any area which primarily serves or is intended to serve as a
vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands or to other streets. The word
STREET refers to the width of the street right-of-way or easement, whether
public or private, and shall not be considered as the width of the roadway or
paving or other improvement on the street right-of-way.
   STREET, APPROVED. Any street, whether public or private meeting standards
and specifications of the city.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which is used to carry traffic from minor
streets to primary and secondary streets.
   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to
primary streets and expressways, and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection to local traffic from fast, through-moving traffic on
the primary streets and expressways.
   STREET, MINOR. A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
   STREET, PRIMARY. A street of considerable continuity which serves or is
intended to serve as a major traffic artery between the various sections of the
city area, as shown on the General Development Plan.
   STREET, PRIVATE. Any street which is under the jurisdiction of an
individual, corporation, or trustee, or any street which is privately owned or
established.
   STREET, PUBLIC. All primary, secondary, collector, and minor streets which
are shown on the subdivision plat and are to be dedicated for public use.
   STREET, SECONDARY. A street which carries traffic from minor and collector
streets to the primary street system, and designated as secondary streets on
the General Development Plan.
   SUBDIVIDER. The person responsible for preparing and recording the plats of
the subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements outlined in
this chapter.
   SUBDIVISION. A subdivision shall be deemed the following for the purpose of
these regulations and said subdivision shall be subject to the requirements of
this chapter. A subdivision is either:
      (1)   The division of land into two or more lots, sites, or parcels for
the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, provided,
however, that a subdivision of land for agricultural purposes, in parcels of
more than five acres, land for industrial parks not involving any new or
additional street or new or additional easement of access, or the sale,
exchange, or division of a lot, site, or parcel between owners of adjoining and
contiguous property not involving any new or additional street or any new or
additional easement of access, shall be exempted;
      (2)   The establishment or dedication of public or private roads,
expressways, streets or alleys through a tract of land;
      (3)   The resubdivision of land heretofore divided or platted into lots,
sites, or parcels; or
      (4)   Any multiple family, commercial, business, planned business center,
or industrial district except industrial parks.
('71 Code, § 12-2-2)
   USED FOR. Shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for,"
"intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for."
('71 Code, § 12-2-1(D))
(Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 2521, passed 7-8-85; Am. Ord. 3265,
passed 8-14-00)
§ 154.005 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located in the
city or in any unincorporated area which is located entirely or in part within
1½ miles of the nearest limits of the city except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The subdivision plans and plats, proposed improvement to be installed,
and all procedures relating thereto, shall in all respects in full compliance
with the regulations herein.
('71 Code, § 12-1-4) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.006 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the
use of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or of any other law,
ordinance, resolution, rules or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or requirements, shall
govern.
   (C)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this chapter
are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such
easements, covenants or other private agreements, then the requirements of this
chapter shall govern.
   (D)   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.
('71 Code, § 12-1-5(F)) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-
14-00)
§ 154.007 SUBMISSION OF PLATS AND PLANS; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out within the
incorporated limits of the city or within contiguous territory not more than 1½
miles beyond the incorporated boundary of the city, the subdivider thereof or
his agent, shall submit a preliminary and a final subdivision plat to the Plan
Commission. Said plats and plans of proposed improvements, and all procedure
relating thereto, shall in all respects be in full compliance with these
regulations.
('71 Code, § 12-1-5(A)) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-
14-00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.008 APPROVAL REQUIRED BEFORE LAND SUBDIVIDED, SOLD OR IMPROVED.
   Until plats and plans for the subdivision are approved:
   (A)   No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any
improvements made to the natural land;
   (B)   No lot, tract, or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be
offered for sale nor shall any sale, contractor sale or option be made or
given; and
   (C)   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water
drainage, sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service or
lighting, grading, paving or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be made by
any owner or owners or agents thereof, or by any public service corporation at
the request of such owner or his agent.
('71 Code, § 12-1-5(B)) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-
14-00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.009 LANDS OFFERED TO CITY.
   All lands offered to the city for use as streets, highways, alleys, schools,
parks, playgrounds, and other public uses shall be referred to the Plan
Commission for review and recommendation before being accepted by the City
Council or by any other governing authority of the city.
('71 Code, § 12-1-5(C)) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-
14-00)
§ 154.010 PLAN TO SUBDIVIDE TRACT OF LAND FROM LARGER SUBDIVISION UNIT.
   Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger, logical
subdivision unit in relation to the city as a whole, the Plan Commission may,
before approval, cause to be used by the Plan Commission an aid in judging the
proposed plat. The City Engineer shall cooperate with the Plan Commission in
the preparation of this plan and shall furnish such surveys and data as may be
necessary.
('71 Code, § 12-1-5(D)) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-
14-00)
§ 154.011 RESUBDIVISION.
   Whenever an area is subdivided into lots of 30,000 square feet or more and
there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into
smaller building lots, consideration shall be given to the street and lot
arrangement of the original subdivision so that additional minor streets can be
located which will permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots.
('71 Code, § 12-1-5(E)) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-
14-00)
§ 154.012 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
officer, board member, agent, or employee of the City of Kewanee shall render
himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this chapter. (See "Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort
Immunity Act," ILCS Ch. 745, Act 10, §§ 1-101 et seq.)
   (B)   Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee
of the city, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the City Attorney until the
final determination of the legal proceedings.
('71 Code, § 12-1-5(E)) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-
14-00)
PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL
§ 154.025 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Prior to the submission of the preliminary plat, a pre-filing
conference shall be held between the developer and the appropriate city staff.
The developer shall present a concept sketch of the proposed development. City
staff shall use a standardized checklist to review the proposed development for
conformance to this chapter.
   (B)   Previous to the filing of an application for conditional approval of
the preliminary plat (general or preliminary subdivision plan), the subdivider
may submit to the Plan Commission, plans and data as specified in §§ 154.40
through 154.42. This step does not require formal application fee or filing of
plat with the Plan Commission.
   (C)   Within 30 days the Plan Commission shall inform the subdivider that
the plans and data as submitted or as modified do or do not meet the objectives
of these regulations. When the Plan Commission finds the plans and data do not
meet the objectives of these regulations it shall express its reasons therefor.
   (D)   Land subject to flooding or poor drainage. No plat will be approved
for a subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains poor
drainage facilities and which would make adequate drainage of the lots and
streets impossible. However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements
which will, in the opinion of the City Engineer, make the area completely safe
for residential occupancy and provide adequate lot and street drainage, the
preliminary plat of the subdivision may be approved.
('71 Code, § 12-3-1) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
§ 154.026 PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   On reaching conclusions, informally as recommended in § 154.25,
regarding his general program and objectives, the subdivider shall cause to be
prepared a preliminary plat, together with improvement plans and other
supplementary material as specified in §§ 154.40 through 154.42.
   (B)   Twelve copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material
specified shall be submitted to the Plan Commission with written application
for conditional approval at least 15 days prior to the meeting at which it is
to be considered.
   (C)   At the time of filing an application for conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the application shall be accompanied by a certified check or
money order payable to the city in the amount of $100, plus $40 for each lot in
excess of two lots in the proposed subdivision to cover the cost of checking
and verifying the proposed plat. Upon the acceptance of the application by the
Plan Commission, the Secretary shall surrender the check or money order to the
City Treasurer for deposit in the General Fund of the city. The Plan Commission
Secretary shall cause a public notice to be published in the local newspaper
advising the public of the pending hearing to review the proposed plat. Said
public notice shall be published at least ten days prior to the hearing. The
Plan Commission Secretary shall cause a direct mailing notice to be sent to all
owners of property within 300 feet of the boundary of the land proposed to be
subdivided. Said direct mailing notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior
to the hearing.
   (D)   Following review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted
for conformity thereof to these regulations and negotiations with the
subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements
to be made by him, the Plan Commission shall, within 30 days, act thereon as
submitted or modified, and if approved, the Plan Commission shall express its
approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if
any or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor.
   (E)   The action of the Plan Commission shall be noted on two copies of the
preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One
copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the Plan
Commission.
   (F)   Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of the final plat. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval
to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation
of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the Plan Commission
and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and
the conditions of the conditional approval, if any.
('71 Code, § 12-3-2) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 1935, passed 9-27-
76; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
§ 154.027 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Improvement plans. After the City Council has approved the preliminary
plat, but prior to submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish
four copies of the plans and specifications for all improvements to be
installed within or in conjunction with the proposed subdivision to the City
Engineer for review. These plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed
by the registered professional engineer responsible for their preparation.
Until the City Engineer certifies in writing that the proposed improvements
conform to generally-accepted engineering practices and to the standards
imposed in this chapter:
      (1)   The HBZ Officer shall not issue any permit to allow construction of
said improvements.
      (2)   The City Council shall not act upon the application for final plat
approval.
   (B)   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposed to record and
develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all
requirements of these regulations.
   (C)   Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in
writing to the Plan Commission at least 21 days prior to the meeting at which
it is to be considered. The Plan Commission Secretary shall cause a public
notice to be published in the local newspaper advising the public of the
pending hearing to review the proposed plat. Said public notice shall be
published at least ten days prior to the hearing. The Plan Commission Secretary
shall cause a direct mailing notice to be sent to all owners of property within
300 feet of the boundary of the land proposed to be subdivided. Said direct
mailing notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing.
   (D)   Twelve copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for
approval shall be prepared as specified in §§ 154.40 through 154.42, and shall
be submitted to the Plan Commission within six months after approval of the
preliminary plat; unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
Plan Commission.
   (E)   The final plat submitted to the Plan Commission for approval shall be
accompanied by a notice from the City Manager stating that there has been filed
with and approved by the City Council, one of the following:
      (1)   A certificate by the City Engineer that all improvements and
installations to the subdivision required for its approval have been made or
installed in accordance with the specifications; or
      (2)   Legal assurance to guarantee completion of the improvements in a
form complying with §
154.051.
      (3)   Within 30 days after application for approval of the final plat,
the Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove it. If the Plan Commission
approves, it shall affix its seal upon the plat together with the certifying
signature of its Chairperson and Secretary. If it disapproves, it shall set
forth its reasons in its own records and provide the applicant with a copy.
   (F)   After approval of the final plat by the Plan Commission and the
fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, six original copies of
the final plat of the subdivision, two of which are executed on Mylar, shall be
submitted to the Council for approval.
      (1)   Action must be taken by the Council within 30 days after the final
plat has been submitted for approval.
      (2)   Upon approval of the Council, the developer shall record the plat
with the Recorder or Registrar of Titles within four months. If not recorded
within this time, the approval shall be null and void. Immediately after
recording, the original or a duly certified copy shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
('71 Code, § 12-3-3) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
PLATS AND DATA
§ 154.040 PREAPPLICATION PLANS AND DATA.
   (A)   General subdivision information shall describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to supplement
the drawings required below. This information may include data on existing
covenants, land characteristics, and available community facilities and
utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number
of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas,
school, playground, park areas, and other public areas, proposed protective
covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
   (B)   Sketch plan on topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form the
proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing
conditions. The sketch plan may be a free-hand sketch made directly on a print
of the topographic survey. The sketch plan shall include the existing
topographic data listed in § 154.41.
('71 Code, § 12-6-1) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
§ 154.041 PLATS AND DATA FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.
   (A)   Topographic data required as a basis for the preliminary plat, in
division (B) below, shall include existing conditions as follows except when
otherwise specified by the Plan Commission:
      (1)   Boundary lines. Bearing and distances.
      (2)   Easements. Location, width and purpose.
      (3)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract. Name and right of way width
and location; type, width and elevation of surfacing; any legally established
center line elevations; walks, curbs, gutters and culverts.
      (4)   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract. Location, size, and invert
elevation of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water
mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles, and
street lights; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract,
indicate the direction and distance to, and size of nearest ones, showing
invert elevation of sewers.
      (5)   Ground elevations on the tract, based on the city datum plane: For
land that slopes less than .5%, show not less than one foot contours; and for
land that slopes more than 2%, show not less than five foot contours.
      (6)   Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Plan
Commission. Location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil,
rock and ground water conditions; depth to ground water unless test pits are
dry at a depth of five feet location; and results of soil percolation tests if
individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
      (7)   Other conditions on the tract, natural or man-made, such as water
courses, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, agricultural land, pasture,
isolated preservable trees six inches or more in diameter, houses, barns,
accessory buildings, and other significant features.
      (8)   Other conditions on adjacent land. Approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other
nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent
unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name,
recording date and number, and show approximate percent built-up, typical lot
size and dwelling type.
      (9)   Photographs, if required by the Plan Commission. Camera locations,
directions of views and key numbers.
      (10)    Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
      (11)    Proposed public improvements. Highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract.
      (12)    Key plan showing location of the tract.
      (13)    Title and certificates. Present tract designation according to
official records in offices of the County Recorder; title under which proposed
subdivision is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, notation
stating station acreage, scales and north arrow.
   (B)   Preliminary plat (general or preliminary subdivision plan) shall be at
a scale of 100 feet to one-inch or 200 feet in one-inch if the area of the
subdivision is more than 200 acres. It shall show all existing conditions
required above in division (A) herein, topographic data, and shall show all
proposals including the following:
      (1)   Streets. Names, right of way and roadway widths, approximate grades
and gradients, similar data for alleys if any.
      (2)   Other rights of way or easements. Location, width and purpose.
      (3)   Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits.
      (4)   Lot lines, lot dimensions, lot numbers and block numbers.
      (5)   Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks,
playgrounds or other public uses.
      (6)   Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single family
dwellings.
      (7)   Proposed building setback lines.
      (8)   Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size,
and acres in parks, in table format.
      (9)   Proposed name of the subdivision.
      (10)    Location by section, township and range.
      (11)    Name and address of the developer.
      (12)    Name and address of the planner and/or engineer.
      (13)    Title, scale, north point and date.
   (C)   Other preliminary plans. When required by the Plan Commission, the
preliminary plat shall be accompanied by profiles showing existing ground
surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable
distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision; typical cross-sections
of the proposed grading, roadway and sidewalks; and preliminary plan of
proposed sanitary and storm water sewers with grades and sizes indicated. All
elevations shall be based on the city datum plane.
   (D)   Draft of protective covenants, whereby the subdivider proposes to
regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development.
   (E)   It is the subdivider's responsibility to notify the appropriate public
and private utilities of the proposed subdivision. Proof of notification shall
be submitted with the preliminary plat.
('71 Code, § 12-6-2) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
§ 154.042 IMPROVEMENT PLANS, PLATS AND DATA FOR FINAL APPROVAL.
   (A)   Improvement plans shall consist of black or blue line prints not
larger than 36 inches by 24 inches. These plans and the related specifications
shall provide all of the following information:
      (1)   Topography of the tract, both before and after development at the
same scale as required in the preliminary plat;
      (2)   Existing and proposed elevations along the centerlines of all
streets;
      (3)   Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
      (4)   Locations and typical cross-section of street pavements including
curbs/gutters and catch basins;
      (5)   Locations and typical cross-section of sidewalks and driveway
aprons;
      (6)   Locations, sizes, and invert elevations of all existing and
proposed sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and fire hydrants, showing connections
to any existing or proposed utility systems;
      (7)   Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric, and other
utilities;
      (8)   Locate area(s) for removal of trees six inches or larger;
      (9)   All proposed measures to control erosion and sedimentation;
      (10)   High water elevations of all lakes/streams adjoining or within the
tract; and
      (11)   Such other information as the City Engineer or HBZ Officer may
reasonably require to perform their duties under this section.
   (B)   Final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth on sheets not to
exceed 29 inches wide by 34 inches long and shall be at a scale of 100 feet to
one-inch. Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an
index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions the final
plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections
satisfactory to the Plan Commission. The final plat shall show the following:
      (1)   Primary control points, approved by the City Engineer or
descriptions and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
      (2)   Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements and
other rights of way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites;
with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and
central angles of all curves.
      (3)   Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right of way.
      (4)   Location, dimensions and purpose of any easement.
      (5)   Number to identify each lot or site and block.
      (6)   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated
or reserved.
      (7)   Proposed building setback line on all lots and other sites.
      (8)   Location and description of monuments.
      (9)   Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
      (10)    Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to accuracy of
survey and plat.
      (11)    Certification of title showing that applicant is land owner.
      (12)    Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any
sites for public uses.
      (13)    Certification of approval by the Plan Commission.
      (14)    Name of subdivision.
      (15)    Location by section, township and range.
      (16)   Title, scale, north arrow and date.
   (C)   Cross-sections and profiles of streets showing grades approved by the
City Engineer. The profiles shall be drawn to the city standard scales and
elevations and shall be based on the city datum plane.
   (D)   A certificate by the City Engineer certifying that the subdivider has
complied with one of the following alternatives:
      (1)   All improvements have been installed in accord with the
requirements of these regulations and with the action of the Plan Commission
giving conditional approval of the preliminary plat; or
      (2)   An approved letter of credit or escrow agreement has been posted,
which is available to the city, and in sufficient amount to assure such
completion of all required improvements.
   (E)   Protective covenants in form for recording.
   (F)   Other data. Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or
deductions as may be required by the Plan Commission in the enforcement of
these regulations.
('71 Code, § 12-6-3) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
§ 154.043 through 154.049 Reserved.
§ 154.050 IMPROVEMENTS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The subdivider/developer shall notify the City Engineer of both the
start and completion of construction of approved improvements.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall inspect said improvements while they are under
construction. If he determines that they are being built in violation of these
regulations, or any applicable local, state or federal regulations, he shall
promptly notify the HBZ Officer who, in turn, shall issue a stop order. All
public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions of this article
shall be inspected during the course of construction by a duly designated,
qualified, independent inspector selected and retained by the subdivider and
approved by the city. All fees and costs connected with such inspection and in
reviewing the plans and specifications for such improvements shall be paid by
the subdivider. The fees and cost shall be set at the prevailing rate.
   (C)   In addition to the detailed requirements listed below, the inspector
shall maintain a daily diary in a standard format acceptable to the City
Engineer. Copies of the daily diary entries shall be provided to the City
Engineer on a weekly basis during construction.
      (1)   Content. The daily entries shall include at least the following
information:
         (a)   Weather conditions.
         (b)   Site conditions.
         (c)   Contractor's working hours.
         (d)   Inspector's hours on the site.
         (e)   An explanation of the actual work performed by the contractor
that day.
         (f)   Specific information about material tests taken.
         (g)   Description of any problems.
      (2)   Purpose. The purpose of the diary is to provide backup information
for the developer's engineer and the City Engineer to recommend acceptance of
the improvements by the City Council and provide actual construction records of
any problems that may develop.
      (3)   Format. The general format of the diary must be approved by the
City Engineer before construction begins.
   (D)   The inspector shall make and document the following inspections:
      (1)   Storm and sanitary sewer and water main improvements.
         (a)   Inspect all materials and document pertinent items such as pipe
manufacturer, class and size.
         (b)   Reject any defective material and insure that it is not used on
the job.
         (c)   Observe the actual pipe laying operation to insure that all
joints are properly made, the pipes are true to line and grade, and the bedding
and backfill are done according to the specifications.
         (d)   Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions,
location of all service laterals, backfilling, and location of all utilities
installed and encountered. Location measurements shall be of the accuracy and
type required by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Street improvements.
         (a)   Perform and document subgrade, subbase, base, and embankment
compaction tests.
         (b)   Inspect the alignment and condition of the paving forms.
         (c)   Check and document subgrade depth checks.
         (d)   Check and document the paving machine adjustments.
         (e)   Furnish the asphalt or PC concrete mix design to the City
Engineer for approval prior to commencing paving operations.
         (f)   Inspect all concrete pours.
         (g)   Perform and document an appropriate number of air content and
slump measurements.
         (h)   Cast compression cylinders or beams and document the results of
the tests.
         (i)   Inspect the placement of all asphalts.
         (j)   Perform and record asphalt compaction tests.
         (k)   Perform at least one asphalt extraction test and one sieve
analysis from an asphalt sample taken on the job site.
   (E)   The City Engineer shall also inspect required improvements upon their
completion. The city shall not accept any improvement until the City Engineer
has certified in writing that it complies with this chapter.
   (F)   Filing "as built" records. The improvements will not be recommended
for acceptance until the following is provided for review by the City Engineer:
         (a)   Copies of all daily diary entries.
         (b)   Copies of all material test results.
         (c)   Detailed reproducible cloth or polyester reproducible "as-built"
improvements construction plans of all public improvements.
         (d)   Certification by the developer's engineer that all construction
was accomplished within reasonably close conformance to the plans and
specifications, and that the "as-built" plans accurately reflect actual field
conditions.
         (e)   A maintenance letter of credit or escrow agreement posted prior
to construction by the contractor of a subdivider for the installation of all
public improvements, using forms provided by the HBZ Officer.
         (f)   Accurate triangular measurements for sewer and water laterals to
permanent items, e.g. fire hydrants or manholes. The sewer and water services
shall be marked with a 4" X 4" marking, that stands five or six feet tall
including a curb notch.
(Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
§ 154.051 ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   ( A)   The City Council shall not approve an final plat (and, hence, said
final plat shall not be entitled to recording) until:
      (1)   All improvements required in the approved improvements plan have
been completed by the subdivider/developer at his expense, inspected and
approved by the City Engineer and dedicated to the city or other appropriate
entity; or
      (2)   In accordance with the subsections below, the subdivider/developer
has provided the city with legal assurance to guarantee the satisfactory
completion and dedication of all required improvements.
   (B)   Forms of assurance. The required legal assurance may be an escrow
agreement or a letter of credit. Every such instrument shall be approved as to
form by the City Manager, and posted with the City Clerk. Any funds held in
escrow shall be deposited with an approved Escrow Agent.
   (C)   Amount of assurance. The amount of the legal assurance shall be equal
to the City Engineer's estimate of the costs of constructing the uncompleted
portion of the required improvements plus all required inspections fees. Any
escrow deposit may be in the form of:
      (1)   An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a lending
institution guaranteeing to the city the availability of the escrow funds from
time to time upon demand; or
      (2)   Interest bearing accounts with a financial institution authorized
to serve as an Escrow Agent.
   (D)   Eligible sureties. No person shall be eligible to act as surety unless
he has been approved by the State of Illinois to act as a surety on public
works improvements.
   (E)   Term of assurance, extension. The initial term of any letter of credit
or escrow agreement shall not exceed two years. If all the required
improvements have not been completed by the end of the two-year period, the
City Manager, with the advice and consent of the City Council may extend said
letter of credit or escrow agreement for one year only.
   (F)   Release of assurance.
      (1)   The City Manager may release up to 90% of the amount of the letter
of credit or escrow deposit upon receipt of written authorization from the City
Engineer. The amount which the City Engineer authorizes to be released shall be
equal to the value of improvements actually completed in accordance with
approved plans. The remaining 10% of amount of letter of credit or escrow
deposit shall be retained until the one year warranty period on the
improvements expires.
      (2)   The balance of the amount of the letter of credit or escrow
deposit, excepting the warranty retainage, shall not be released until:
         (a)   The City Engineer has certified to the City Manager in writing
that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed; and
         (b)   Said improvements and corresponding right-of-way have been
accepted by and dedicated to the city or other appropriate entity.
         (c)   The one year warranty period has expired and all expenses
arising from any warranty work have been paid for by the Developer or deducted
from the retainage.
   (G)   Failure to complete improvements. If all the required improvements
have not been completed by the end of the two-year period (or three-year
period, in the case of an extension), the City Manager with the assistance of
the City Attorney, may:
      (1)   Make the necessary draws on the letter of credit to pay to the city
an amount equal to the cost of completing the required improvements (as
estimated by the City Engineer) or the amount of the letter of credit not
theretofore released, whichever is less; or
      (2)   Order the Escrow Agent to retain all escrowed funds needed to
complete the required improvements, and to return the balance (if any) of such
funds to the subdivider/developer.
(Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.055 STREETS.
   (A)   The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent,
width, grade and location of all expressways, streets, alleys, crosswalks,
easements, sites for parks, playgrounds and schools, or other land to be
dedicated for public use, shall conform to the General Development Plan of the
city as approved by the Plan Commission and adopted by the City Council and
other responsible governmental bodies of the city as a part of the Official
Plan of the city.
      (1)   All streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, in typographical conditions, to public convenience and safety,
and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served
by such streets. When at all possible each subdivision shall have a minimum of
two separate entrances. Said entrances shall be remote located from one another
such as at opposite diagonal corners of the subdivision, or some similar
spacing.
      (2)   Where such is not shown in the General Development Plan, the
arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
         (a)   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of
existing principal streets, or
         (b)   Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood approved or
adopted by the Plan Commission to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing
streets impracticable.
      (3)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
      (4)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
expressway or primary street, as shown on the General Development Plan, the
Plan Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with
screen planting contained in a non-access reservation, at least ten feet wide,
along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties
and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
      (5)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or
expressway, the Plan Commission may require a street approximately parallel to
and on each side of such railroad or expressway, at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential
districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts.
Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades and future grade separations.
      (6)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets or alleys shall be
prohibited.
      (7)   All street intersections and confluences should encourage safe
traffic flow.
      (8)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
      (9)   Tangents shall be introduced between reverse curves on all streets
(see Table of Minimum Standards in division (B) of this section).
      (10)    When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than 10°, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius
adequate to insure clear sight distance (see Table of Minimum Standards in
division (B) of this section).
      (11)    Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less
than 60°.
      (12)    Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a
radius as specified in the Table of Minimum Standards in division (B) of this
section. The Plan Commission may permit comparable cut-offs or chords in place
of rounded corners.
      (13)    Street right of way widths shall be as shown in the General
Development Plan and where not shown therein shall be as specified in the Table
of Minimum Standards in division (B) of this section, or as recommended by the
Plan Commission.
      (14)    Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations; and where the Plan Commission finds it will
be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. If
pavement is installed on a half street, a temporary vehicle turn around shall
be installed as necessary.
      (15)    Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac) designed to be so permanently shall
not be longer than 500 feet from the intersection of the origin through the
center of the circle to the end of the right-of-way, and shall be provided at
the closed end with a turn-around having an outside pavement diameter of at
least 80 feet, and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet.
      (16)    No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be continued
wherever possible. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Plan
Commission.
      (17)    Street gradients and vertical curves shall be as specified in the
Table of Minimum Standards in this chapter.
      (18)    Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street
and the first floor elevation of the houses or buildings and to permit
convenient and economical access to and drainage of the lots.
   (B)   Minimum standards for street design.
           Right Pavement Radius of  Length   Tangents                   Clear    Radius of     On-
Street     of    Width    Horizontal of       Between  Maximum  Minimum  Sight    property      Street
Type       Way   BOC-BOC  Curves     Vertical Reverse  Gradient Gradient Distance lines at      Parking
           Width                     Curves   Curves                              intersections
Expressway 200   14 ft.   500 ft.    200 ft.  200 ft.  5%       0.35%    500 ft.  —           NONE
           ft.   lane
Major      100   12 ft.   500 ft.    200 ft.  200 ft.  5%       0.35%    500 ft.  25 ft.        NONE
Arterial   ft.   lane
Minor      80    40 ft.   400 ft.    200 ft.  200 ft.  5%       0.35%    400 ft.  20 ft.        NONE
Arterial   ft.
Major      80    40 ft.   400 ft.    150 ft.  150 ft.  6%       0.35%    300 ft.  20 ft.        2 SIDES
Collector  ft.
Minor      60    31 ft.   300 ft.    150 ft.  150 ft.  6%       0.35%    200 ft.  15 ft.        1 SIDE
Collector  ft.
Local      50    27 ft.   100 ft.    100 ft.  100 ft.  6%       0.35%    200 ft.  15 ft.        1 SIDE
           ft.
Cul-de-sac 50    24 ft.   200 ft.    100 ft.  100 ft.  6%       0.35%    200 ft.  15 ft.        NONE
           ft.
Alley      20    18 ft.   200 ft.    100 ft.  100 ft.  6%       0.35%    200 ft.  15 ft.        NONE
           ft.
In         80-
Business   100   56 ft.   500 ft.    200 ft.  200 ft.  2%       0.35%    500 ft.  —           2 SIDES
District   ft.
 
('71 Code, § 12-4-1) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.056 ALLEYS.
   (A)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial, business, and industrial
districts, except that the Plan Commission may waive this requirement where
other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-
street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the
uses proposed.
   (B)   Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted, except where
deemed necessary, and on the recommendation of the Plan Commission.
   (C)   The right of way width of an alley shall be 20 feet in residential
areas and 30 feet in commercial, business, and industrial districts.
   (D)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
   (E)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead end, as
determined by the Plan Commission.
('71 Code, § 12-4-2) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.057 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet wide.
   (B)   Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
   (C)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement, or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course, and
such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose and as determined by the Plan Commission. Parallel streets or parkways
may be required in connection therewith.
('71 Code, § 12-4-3) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.058 BLOCKS.
   (A)   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated.
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the
corporate limits of the city.
      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,800 feet, or be less than 400 feet.
   (C)   Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, shall be required
where deemed necessary by the Plan Commission to provide pedestrian
circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation, and other community facilities.
   (D)   Blocks or portions thereof, intended for commercial and industrial use
shall be designated as such, and the plan shall show adequate off-street areas
to provide for parking, loading docks and such other facilities.
('71 Code, § 12-4-4) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.059 LOTS.
   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, shall be
appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development
and use contemplated.
   (B)   Lot dimensions and areas shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 155, where applicable, but in no case shall a lot for residential
purposes in a new subdivision be less than 75 feet wide at the building line
nor less than 8,500 square feet in area. However:
      (1)   Residential lots where not served by public sanitary sewers and
water supply shall not be less than 100 feet wide nor less than 20,000 square
feet in area. Where either public sanitary sewers or water supply is provided,
each lot may be 10,000 square feet in area with a width of not less than 80
feet.
      (2)   Where unusual soil conditions or other physical factors exist which
may impair the health and safety of the residents of the neighborhood in which
a subdivision may be located, upon recommendation of the State Department of
Public Health, the Plan Commission may increase lot area requirements as may be
necessary.
      (3)   Lots abutting a water course, drainage way, channel or stream shall
have additional minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate
building site and afford the minimum usable area required in this chapter or in
Chapter 155 for front, rear and side yards.
      (4)   Depth and width of lots or properties reserved or laid out for
commercial, business, and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for
the off-street service and parking facilities.
   (C)   Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
   (D)   Within the corporate limits of the city all lots shall abut on a
publicly dedicated street.
   (E)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from
expressways or primary streets, or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet,
and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the
line of lots abutting such expressways and primary streets or other
disadvantageous use.
   (F)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
('71 Code, § 12-4-5) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.060 BUILDING SETBACK LINES.
   (A)   Except for the following, building setback lines in residential areas
of new subdivisions shall conform to the front yard provisions of
Chapter 155, except that in no case shall the building setback line be less
than 25 feet from the front property line.
   (B)   Corner lots shall maintain not less than the minimum building setback
lines on both streets.
('71 Code, § 12-4-6) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.061 PARKS, SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use area
included within the duly adopted official Comprehensive City Plan for the city
and shown on the development plans made a part thereof, is located in whole or
in part in an area being subdivided, the subdivider shall dedicate such lands
to the proper public agency or agencies as a part of the final subdivision
plat; however, in no case shall the amount of required public areas to be
dedicated, in addition to public streets and alleys, exceed 10% of the total
gross acreage owned or controlled by one developer. Where such area for park,
school or other public use exceeds 10% of the total gross area owned or
controlled by one developer, that part of such lands in excess of 10% of the
total gross area shall also be shown on all subdivision plans and plats; and
the acquisition of such additional area needed for parks, playgrounds, schools
or other public uses, other than streets and alleys, shall be secured by the
proper governing bodies, or arrangements made for the acquisition of the area
from the subdivider at the cost of unimproved land, within a period not to
exceed three years from the date of approval of the preliminary plan.
   (B)   Where less than 10% or none of the total gross area being subdivided
is proposed for parks, schools or other public use areas under the official
Comprehensive City Plan, the subdivider shall dedicate such area as required
and, in addition, pay to the proper governing body as determined by the Plan
Commission, a sum of money, so that either or both the dedication and the
payment equal 10% of the appraised value of the land before it is subdivided.
Sums so received by the proper governing body shall be placed in a special fund
and used by the governing body solely for purchase of land for parks, schools
and other public uses in accordance with the official Comprehensive City Plan,
and after receipt of the recommendations of the Plan Commission. The value of
the subject land shall be established by negotiation, and if negotiations fail,
by appraisal made by three qualified appraisers, one of whom shall be appointed
by the Plan Commission, one of whom shall be appointed by the subdivider, and
one of whom shall be mutually agreed upon by the two appraisers named above.
The subdivider may agree with the proper governing body on an installment
method of payment based on the sale of lots.
('71 Code, § 12-4-7) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.075 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   Before a subdivision shall be approved, the City Engineer shall certify that
the improvements described in the subdivider's plans and specifications,
together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all provisions of
this code and that they comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle points of the
outside boundary but no further than one-fourth of a mile apart. The monuments
shall be of concrete, not less than six inches in diameter and 36 inches deep
with a copper dowel three inches long cast in place. Iron pipe or steel bars
not less than ½-inch in diameter and 24-inches long shall be set at the
intersection of street center lines and at all corners of lots not marked by
monuments.
   (B)   The monuments and bars shall be level with the finished grade.
   (C)   Any monuments, pipe, bars, or other survey markers disturbed by
construction or grading shall be reset by an Illinois-licensed land surveyor at
the developer's expense.
('71 Code, § 12-5-1) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.076 UTILITY AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Utility and street improvements shall be provided in each new
subdivision in accordance with the standards and requirements described in the
schedules set forth in the table in division (C) of this section.
   (B)   The standards and specifications for each general type of development
shall be as follows:
      (1)   For apartments and row houses, improvements to be in accord with
Standard A.
      (2)   For one and two family dwellings, improvements to be in accord with
Standard B.
      (3)   For one family homes with typical lot widths greater than division
(B)(2) above, improvements to be in accord with Standard C.
      (4)   For commercial, business, industrial and other types, as determined
by the Plan Commission and the City Engineer.
('71 Code, § 12-5-2)
   (C)   Schedules.
Applicable Standard Utility and Street Improvement Items
A B C
Applicable
Standard   Utility and Street Improvement Items
A B C
           Public water per city, and IEPA, specifications and connected to the water
X X X      distribution system of the city. See §
           154.081 for further information.
X X X      Public sanitary sewers per city, and IEPA, specifications and connected to the
           sanitary sewer system of the city.
           Expressways or major arterials. Cross-sections in accordance with the General
X X X      Development Plan, §
           154.055(B), and as determined by the City Engineer and the Plan Commission.
X X X      Minor arterial or major collectors. 80 feet right-of-way, 40 feet pavement,
           sidewalks per city specifications.
X X X      Minor collector streets. 60 feet right-of-way, 31 feet pavement, sidewalks per
           city specifications.
  X X      Local streets. 50 feet right-of-way, 27 feet pavement, sidewalks per city
           specifications.
    X      Cul-de-sac. 50 feet right-of-way, 24 feet pavement, sidewalks per city
           specifications.
           Streets along development boundaries, and streets connecting development with
X X X      existing improved street system; cross-sections as determined by City Engineer and
           Plan Commission.
X X X      Alleys. 20 feet right-of-way, 18 feet pavement per city specifications.
X X X      Grading and center line gradients. Per plans and profiles approved by City
           Engineer.
X X X      Storm sewer system and other drainage improvements. Per plans and specifications
           approved by City Engineer and the Plan Commission.
           Street base, surface and curb:
X X X         (a)   Combination concrete curb and gutter Type M-4.18 per Illinois State
           standard specifications.
X X X         (b)   Street Pavement Option 1
                 6 ½ inch stabilized base course (BAM)
                 1 ½ inch bituminous concrete surface course (Class I)
                 All as per Illinois State standard specifications.
X X X         (c)   Street Pavement Option 2
                 Monolithic concrete curb, gutter and street Type M-4.18 curb and six-inch
           nonreinforced concrete pavement.
                 All as per Illinois State standard specifications.
X X X      Valley Gutter. Portland cement concrete per city specifications.
X X X      Driveways. Per city specifications.
           Sidewalks. Four inches thick and five feet wide Portland cement concrete per city
X X X      specifications. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets.
           Sidewalks shall be installed at the time the lot is developed or prior to issuance
           of the Certificate of Occupancy.
X X X      Seeding of planting strips in streets. Per city specifications.
X X X      Street name signs and traffic control signs. At all intersections per city
           specifications.
X X X      Street Lighting. Per city specifications.
X X X      Telephone and electric service. In rear or side lot easements.
X X X      Gas. In street planting strip.
X X X      Lot grading. Per city specifications.
           Septic tanks. Private septic systems are not permitted in the city limits. Septic
X X X      systems allowed in the 1.5 mile jurisdictional area only per County Board of
           Health, but only if lot area is no less than 20,000 square feet.
 
('71 Code, § 12-5-3) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 1581, passed 7-15-
69; Am. Ord. 1924, passed 7-12-76; Am. Ord. 2899, passed 6-13-94; Am. Ord.
3265, passed 8-14-00)
§§ 154.077 through 154.079 Reserved.
§ 154.080 UTILITIES.
   (A)   All utilities provided as new installations within a subdivision shall
be placed in the right of way or in easements, and shall be provided
underground unless an exception or exemption has been granted.
   (B)   Responsibility. For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall make
the necessary arrangements with the appropriate utility companies for the
proper installation of utilities to assure that all lots have adequate gas,
electrical, and communications service.
   (C)   Requirements. All underground electric distribution circuits installed
by the utility company within the city shall be installed in accordance with
the Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electric Supply and
Communication Lines, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards,
and General Order No. 160, Rules for Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines, Illinois Commerce Commission.
   (D)   Enforcement. The Health, Building and Zoning Officer shall not issue
any occupancy permits until all utilities have been installed in the
subdivision.
   (E)   Exceptions. The requirements for underground utilities shall not apply
in the following instances:
      (1)   Principal electric distribution feeder circuits and electric
transmission circuits shall not be required to be installed underground.
      (2)   Any service which is considered by the utility company to be
unfeasible for undergrounding, due to high voltage or inordinately high and
unjustified cost, may be provided overhead when recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved by the City Council.
      (3)   When topographic or soil conditions cause the cost of
undergrounding to be extremely and unjustifiably high, services may be provided
overhead when recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the City
Council.
      (4)   When a subdivision is developed adjacent to or abutting an existing
development in which the primary feeder lines have been installed overhead, the
new subdivision may use the overhead lines with the following provisions:
         (a)   The service lines to the buildings in the new subdivision shall
be installed underground.
         (b)   All additional necessary feeder lines shall be installed
underground.
      (5)   When a building is constructed on a single unoccupied lot in an
area which is fully developed with overhead electric and communication service,
the building may use the overhead service line if it completes the development
of the area.
      (6)   Utilities provided as new installations to lots for industrial
purposes may be provided overhead.
   (F)   Exemptions. The following specific facilities shall be exempt from the
requirements of the ordinance:
      (1)   Poles used exclusively for street lighting.
      (2)   Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures,
authorized by the City Council, crossing or entering any portion of a district
from which overhead wires have been prohibited, and originating in an area in
which overhead wires are allowed.
      (3)   Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a
bracket or similar device, and extending from one location on the building to
another on the same building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any
public street or right-of-way.
      (4)   Radio antenna and associated structures and equipment used for
furnishing communication service.
      (5)   Service terminals and necessary pad-mounted electric equipment
installed above ground, used to distribute communication and electric service
in underground systems.
(Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
§ 154.081 WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution
system adequate to serve all lots within the subdivision. The water
distribution system shall be designed according to standard specifications, and
City Code and Public Works Department's Regulations and Materials
Specifications, and shall be approved by the City Engineer and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. Whenever a water main is extended it shall be
extended across the entire frontage of the property being subdivided and it
shall be connected to any other mains which front on or are adjacent to the
subdivision to provide for looping of the water system.
   (B)   The engineer for the subdivider shall calculate the expected fire flow
requirements within the subdivision based upon the intended zoning and expected
land use. Also taken into consideration when determining the size of pipe to be
installed shall be the anticipated demand for water by "downstream" properties
based on anticipated development of such properties based on the Comprehensive
Plan for such expansion areas.
   (C)   Individual service connections within single family residential
subdivisions shall be extended from the main to within one foot of the lot line
of each lot with an approved corporation and curb box and clearly marked with a
fence post or similar material to facilitate their locations.
   (D)   Upon written request to the Fire Chief, the city will perform fire
flow tests on the existing water mains to be extended and provide the data to
the subdivider's engineer.
(Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
§ 154.082 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Fire hydrants of the type approved by the Public Works Department's
Regulations and Materials Specifications shall be installed according to
standard engineering practices and shall be placed at intervals of not more
than 400 feet for residential, and not more than the maximum specified for
commercial and industrial use, in accordance with applicable National Fire
Protection Association guidelines, most current edition.
(Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
§ 154.083 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   The Plan Commission shall not recommend the approval of any plat
unless the City Engineer determines that the proposed provisions for storm
water drainage are adequate within boundaries of the subdivision, and are in
compliance with
Chapter 157 of this code. Complete documentation of the area to be drained,
including contributory areas outside of the subdivision, shall be provided by
the subdivider's engineer. This documentation shall include at a minimum
current topographic data of the land in question, and calculations showing the
anticipated storm water run-off for given rain events.
   (B)   Drainage improvements in the subdivision shall be coordinated with
existing and planned drainage improvements elsewhere so as to form an
integrated city system. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and
independent of the sanitary sewer system and shall meet the following design
criteria:
      (1)   All arterial streets and major collector streets:
         (a)   Flow from a "ten-year storm" shall not inundate the center 20
feet of the pavement.
         (b)   Flow from a "50-year storm" shall be carried without damage to
any building.
      (2)   Minor collector streets and local streets:
         (a)   Flow from a "ten-year storm" shall not inundate the center 18
feet of the pavement.
         (b)   Flow from a "50-year storm" shall be carried without damage to
any building.
   (C)   Catch basins or inlets, if required, shall be constructed so that the
majority of surface water shall be intercepted before reaching the
intersection, and not carried for a distance of more than 400 feet of the
pavement.
   (D)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage
facility large enough to accommodate potential runoff from the entire drainage
area upstream from the proposed subdivision shall be provided in accordance
with the city's standard specifications. Potential runoff shall be determined
on the basis of the maximum development of the upstream area that is permitted
or to be permitted under the Comprehensive Plan.
   (E)   Drainage easements. Adequate easements for storm water drainage shall
be established along any natural drainage channel and in any other locations
where necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of storm water from streets,
alleys, and all other portions of the subdivision. The precise location and
minimum widths of said easements shall be as approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
§ 154.084 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.
   In the development of any subdivision, the provisions of
Chapter 157 shall be followed.
(Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.090 BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued providing for the improvement of any lot
in said subdivision until:
   (A)   There has been filed with the Health, Building and Zoning Officer a
certified copy of said plat of subdivision as recorded or registered in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Titles, as the case may be.
   (B)   The plans and specifications for the public improvements have been
approved by and filed with the Mayor and the City Council.
   (C)   The letter of credit or escrow agreement as provided by ordinance is
posted with the city.
   (D)   The portion of the improvements proposed in the approved plans
providing for road pavement, sanitary sewer service and water service are
installed and usable.
('71 Code, § 12-7-4) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
§ 154.091 CERTIFICATIONS AND DISCLOSURES ON PLATS.
   When the City Council shall, upon motion and majority vote, approve the
final plat, the Mayor and City Clerk shall be authorized to sign the original
tracing. The certificates on the final plat shall be in the following form with
the signatures of the President of the Henry County Board and the County Clerk
to be necessary only where the plat covers land in the unincorporated area.
CERTIFICATES
   (A)   Under the authority provided by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, enacted by the
State Legislature and the ordinances adopted by the Council, this plat was
given approval by the city, as follows:
      Approved by the Plan Commission at a meeting held              .
                              
Chairman
   (Seal)
                              
Secretary
   Approved by the City Council at a meeting held              .
   (Seal)
                              
Mayor
                              
City Clerk
   Approved by the City Engineer on              .
                              
City Engineer
   Approved by the County Board of Henry County at a meeting held
              .
                              
President, County Board
   (Seal)
                              
County Clerk
   (B)   Each final plat submitted to the city for approval shall carry a
certificate signed by an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor in substantially the
following form:
      "I, (Name), hereby certify that I am an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor
in compliance with the laws of the State of Illinois and that this plat
correctly represents a survey completed by me on (Date), that all monuments
shown thereon actually exist, and that their location, size, type and material
are accurately shown."
                                    SEAL
                                    Signature
   Illinois Land Surveyor No.           
   (C)   Each final plat submitted to the city for approval shall carry a deed
of dedication in substantially the following form:
   "We, the undersigned, (Name), owners of the real estate shown and described
herein, do hereby lay off, plat, and subdivide said real estate in accordance
with the within plat.
   This subdivision shall be known and designated as (Name), an addition to the
City of Kewanee or Henry County, (whichever the case may be). All streets and
alleys and public open spaces, and necessary public improvements as provided
for by Kewanee's Subdivision Regulations, shown and not heretofore dedicated,
are hereby dedicated to the public.
   Front and side yard building setback lines are hereby established as shown
on this plat, between which lines and the property lines of the streets there
shall be erected or maintained no building or structure.
   There are strips of ground, (Number) feet in width, as shown on this plat
and marked "easement," reserved for the use of public utilities for the
installation of water and sewer mains, poles, ducts, lines and wires, subject
at all times to the proper authorities and to the easement herein reserved. No
permanent or other structures are to be erected or maintained upon said strips
of land, but owners of lots in this subdivision shall take their titles subject
to the rights of the public utilities, and to the rights of the owners of other
lots in this subdivision.
   (Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private restrictions,
would be inserted here upon the subdivider's initiative or the recommendation
of the Plan Commission or City Council; important provisions are those
specifying the use to be made of the property and, in the case of residential
use, the minimum habitable floor area.)
   The foregoing covenants, (or restrictions) are to run with the land and
shall be binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them until
January 1, 20       . Twenty five (25) year period is suggested; at which time
said covenants (or restrictions) shall be automatically extended for successive
periods of ten (10) years unless by vote of a majority of the then owners of
the building sites covered by these covenants, or restrictions, it is agreed to
change such covenants, or restrictions, in whole or in part.
   Invalidation of any one of the foregoing covenants, or restrictions, by
judgment or court order, shall in no way affect any of the other covenants or
restrictions, which shall remain in full force and effect.
   The right to enforce these provisions by injunction together with the right
to cause the removal, by due process of law, of any structure or part thereof
erected or maintained in violation hereof, is hereby dedicated to the public,
and reserved to the several owners of the several lots in this subdivision and
to their heirs and assigns.
      WITNESS our Hands and Seals this     day of              , 20     .
                                             
                                             
                                              
State of Illinois
County of Henry
Before me, the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and State,
personally appeared, (Name), (Name), (Name), and each separately acknowledged
the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary act or deed,
for the purposes therein expressed.
Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this        day of             , 20     .
                                             
                                             
Notary Public
Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as may be
required by the Plan Commission or the Council in these enforcement
regulations.
   (D)   Each final plat submitted to the city for approval shall carry a
certificate to be signed by the County Clerk in substantially the following
form:
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
   COUNTY OF HENRY   )
I,             County Clerk of the County of Henry do hereby certify that I
have this day examined the tax records of the property shown on the attached
plat of           and find no delinquent general taxes, unpaid current general
taxes, delinquent special assessments or unpaid current special assessments
against the tract of land described in said plat.
Given under my hand and seal this        day of             , 20     .
                                             
                                             
County Clerk, Henry County, Il. (Seal)
   (E)   Each final plat submitted to the city for approval shall carry a
recording certificate to be signed by the County Clerk in substantially the
following form:
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
   COUNTY OF HENRY   )
   This instrument was filed for record in the Recorder's office this       
day of             ,
20        at     M. and recorded in Plat Book        Page    , as Document No.
      .
                                             
                                             
   County Recorder
                                             
                                             
Deputy
   (F)   Irrevocable offers of dedication certificate and form.
      (1)   The following certificate shall be placed upon a final plat of a
subdivision whenever said plat is approved upon submission of a subdivider's
letter of credit or escrow agreement as provided for in §
154.051:
   The owner hereby irrevocably offers for dedication to the City of Kewanee,
in fee simple absolute unless otherwise called for on the plat, all the
streets, local government uses, easements, parks, and required utilities shown
within the subdivision plat and construction plans in accordance with an
irrevocable offer of dedication dated and recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Henry County, Illinois.
   By
   Date
      (2)   The following form shall accompany any final plat set forth in (1)
above and shall be presented for recording simultaneously with any such plat,
but shall be recorded immediately prior to the recording of the plat.
   OFFER OF IRREVOCABLE DEDICATION
   Agreement made this     day of              , 20     , by and between
             , having office and place of business at
                              , hereinafter referred to as "Developer", and the
City of Kewanee, a municipal corporation having its principal office at 401 E.
Third Street, Kewanee, Illinois, hereinafter designated as "City";
   WHEREAS, the City is in the process of approving a subdivision plat entitled
            , dated             , 20      and made by                         ;
and
   WHEREAS, said plat and the construction plans associated therewith
designated certain property interests and public improvements consisting of:
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
   to be dedicated to the City free and clear of all encumbrances and liens,
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 154 of the Kewanee Code of Ordinances;
and
   WHEREAS, the Developer, prior to final plat approval, shall post a letter of
credit or escrow agreement with the City for the construction and payment
therefor, maintenance, and dedication of said interests and improvements; and
   WHEREAS, the Developer is desirous of offering for dedication the said
improvements and interests in land to the City as shown on the improvement
plans and final plat for said subdivision.
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the City's approval of said subdivision
plat, it is mutually agreed as follows:
   (a)   The Developer hereby promises the City permanent dedication in fee
simple absolute unless otherwise called for on the plat for the premises and
improvements described on the improvement plans and final plat for said
subdivision, said delivery being a formal offer of dedication to the City to be
held by the City in trust until the acceptance or rejection of such offer of
dedication by the City Council.
   (b)   The Developer agrees that said formal offer of dedication is
irrevocable and can be accepted by the local government at any time.
   (c)   The Developer agrees to complete the construction and maintenance of
the land and improvements pursuant to the letter of credit or escrow agreement
and the provisions of the Kewanee Code of Ordinances and any conditions of
approval of said subdivision.
   (d)   That this irrevocable offer of dedication shall run with the land and
shall be binding on all assigns, grantees, successors or heirs of the
Developer.
                                 CITY OF KEWANEE
   (Seal)
            
         Mayor
Attest:
            
City Clerk
Approved as to Form:
            
City Attorney
                                                                                         
                                          DEVELOPER
                                          Attest:
            (Seal)
   (G)   Required disclosures to be on face of plat. The following disclosures
are to be placed on the face of the final plat:
      (1)   Either of the following, depending upon which is the most
appropriate, shall be placed upon the face of the final plat by a registered
professional engineer and the owner:
   To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters both
within and around this subdivision will not be changed by the construction of
same or any part thereof.
      
(Seal)                                                                     
                                    Registered Professional Engineer
                                                
                                          Registration No.
                                             
                                           Owner
   To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters
either within or around this subdivision will be changed by the construction of
same or parts thereof but adequate provision has been made to collect and
divert said surface waters to public drains or private drains to which the
owner has legal access and said provisions are such that the capacity of no
natural or man-made drain will be exceeded and no damage to adjoining
properties will incur because of said provisions.
      
(Seal)                                                                     
                                    Registered Professional Engineer
                                                
                                          Registration No.
                                             
                                           Owner
      (2)   In addition to one of the above, the owner or subdivider shall
disclose on the face of said subdivision final plat the following if a letter
of credit or escrow agreement is provided:
   I hereby disclose and give notice to all that this subdivision has been
approved by the City upon the condition that I enter into an escrow agreement
or letter of credit to secure installation of all improvements required by said
City. The terms of same allow me a period of two (2) years to install said
improvements or provide the City the right to install same to the extent of
funds provided by such security. City ordinances do not permit, however,
occupancy of any premises until adequate provision for access for water and
sanitary sewerage are made.
                                             
                                           Owner
('71 Code, § 12-7-3) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 2347, passed 1-10-
83; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
§ 154.092 INSPECTION AT SUBDIVIDERS' EXPENSE.
   All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions of this
chapter shall be inspected during the course of construction by the City
Engineer or a duly designated deputy. All fees and costs connected with such
inspection and in reviewing the plans and specifications for such improvements
shall be paid by the subdivider.
('71 Code, § 12-7-2) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
§ 154.093 VARIANCES.
   When the subdivider can show that a provision of this chapter, if strictly
adhered to, would cause the unnecessary hardship and when, in the opinion of
the Plan Commission, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to
the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such
provision, the Plan Commission may recommend a variance or modification to the
Council. The subdivider shall apply in writing for such variance. Any variance
thus authorized, shall be attached to and made a part of the final plat.
('71 Code, § 12-7-1) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63; Am. Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-
00)
§ 154.094 ACCEPTANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Upon completion of the construction and installation of the
improvements to be dedicated to the city, the developer shall submit a written
request for acceptance of said improvements to the HBZ Officer. Said request to
include a brief description of the improvements and statements to the effect
that the improvements are free of any encumbrances, were installed in
compliance with all applicable regulations, and a promise to guarantee the
satisfactory performance of the improvements for a period of 12 months from the
date of the accepting resolution.
   (B)   Improvements to be dedicated to the city shall be accepted by the City
Council, by a duly adopted City Council resolution, conditioned upon the
following:
      (1)   Receiving a written statement from the City Engineer that said
improvements have been constructed, installed, and inspected pursuant to the
improvement plans approved by the city, and that said improvements are in
compliance with this chapter.
      (2)   The developer verifies in writing that all waivers of lien have
been obtained from those who provided material, labor, and equipment on the
project.
      (3)   The developer promises in writing to guarantee the satisfactory
performance of the improvements for a 12 month period after formal acceptance.
   (C)   Until accepted by the City Council, the developer is responsible for
conditions of the roads, and for removal of ice and snow from same.
   (D)   The subdivider/developer shall guarantee all the improvements in the
subdivision for a period of one year from the date of their acceptance and
dedication. If at any time during the one-year period the improvements are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired/replaced at the subdivider/
developer's expense. If the subdivider/developer refuses to pay such costs
within 90 days after demand is made upon him by the City Engineer, the city
shall use the 10% retainage on the letter of credit or escrow agreement to make
the necessary repairs/replacement. If the cost of repairs/replacement exceeds
the retainage amount the subdivider/developer shall be liable for the excess.
At the end of the one-year period, the residual of the retainage shall be
released.
(Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
§ 154.095 SAMPLE FORMS.
   (A)   The following is a sample letter of credit of an approved form.
   LETTER OF CREDIT
                                                                      
   (name of bank)
    ,                                                       
   (Bank's city)         (Bank's state)
Irrevocable Credit No.    Date:
City of Kewanee, Illinois      All drafts must be marked:
               Drawn under Credit No.
               Dated
   Gentlemen,
   We hereby open an Irrevocable Letter of Credit in the amount of ($ amount)
in your favor for the account of (Developer), the developer of (name of
subdivision), a subdivision proposed for final plat in the City of Kewanee,
Illinois or within its territorial jurisdiction, for the benefit of the City of
Kewanee. Said money hereunder shall be available by your drafts at sight drawn
on us drawn in the name of the City of Kewanee, Illinois. All drafts so drawn
must be marked "Drawn under (name of bank) , Credit No.          , dated
          ."
   Drafts must be accompanied by a signed statement by the City Manager of the
City of Kewanee, Illinois, that the request is for the installation or
construction of improvements and related work required pursuant to the plans,
specifications and cost estimates dated        , and approved by the City of
Kewanee, Illinois, and on file with the City Manager. Further, all requests for
disbursements under this Letter of Credit made prior to (must be 2 years after
filing), shall be submitted by the developer and accompanied by a certified
estimate of units and value of work completed with contractor's sworn statement
and waiver of mechanics' liens, all approved by the Developer's engineer and
the City Manager of the City of Kewanee, Illinois. It is understood as to all
disbursements that the City Manager shall approve partial drawings only as long
as there remains a sufficient balance to the Credit to cover his then current
estimate of costs for the required improvements which at that time remain to be
completed but in no case shall his approval exceed ninety percent (90%) of the
value of work completed.
   In the event that all of the work for the improvements is not completed to
the satisfaction of the City on or before (1 day short of 2 years after
filing), the funds remaining under this Letter of Credit shall be available to
the City of Kewanee, Illinois upon presentation of their draft at sight drawn
on us in the name of the City of Kewanee, Illinois. This draft so drawn must be
marked "Drawn under (name of bank) Credit No.         dated              .
Further, such draft shall be accompanied by a signed statement by the City
Manager of the City of Kewanee, Illinois as follows: "I, (name), City Manager
for the City of Kewanee, Illinois, do hereby certify that work on required
improvements in the subdivision named (subdivision name) has not been completed
to the satisfaction of the City of Kewanee on or before (one day short of two
years after filing).
   This Credit shall expire on (2 years after filing) or one (1) year after
acceptance of the required improvements, whichever date is the later; provided
however, the undersigned shall notify the City Manager, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, at least 90 days prior to expiration date that this
Letter of Credit is about to expire and provided, however, in no event shall
this Credit expire except upon prior written notice, it being expressly agreed
by the undersigned that the above expiration date shall be extended as shall be
required to comply with this notice provision.
   The undersigned further agrees that this Credit shall remain in full force
and effect and pertain to any and all amendments or modifications which may be
made from time to time to the specifications, and agreements for the
subdivision, without notice from the City of the amendments or modifications.
   All acts, requirements and other preconditions for the issuance of this
Irrevocable Letter of Credit have been completed.
   We hereby engage with the drawers, endorsers and bona fide holders of drafts
drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this Credit, that same shall be
honored upon presentation to the drawer. This Credit must accompany any draft
which exhausts the Credit and must be surrendered concurrently with the
presentation of such draft.
   We hereby undertake and engage that all demands made in conformity with this
Credit will be honored upon presentation. If, within ten (10) days of the date
any demand made in conformity with this Credit is presented, we fail to honor
same we agree to pay all attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses
incurred by the City of Kewanee in enforcing the terms of this Credit.
                  Dated:
                  Name of bank
                  By
                  Title
Attest:
                                                   
Title
(`71 Code, § 12-7-1) (Ord. 1447, passed 10-28-63)
   (B)   Escrow agreement. The sample escrow agreement shown below is of an
approved form.
   ESCROW AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this         day of             , 20
     , by and between Hereinafter called "DEVELOPER"; the City of Kewanee,
Illinois, Hereinafter called "CITY"; and the                 , Hereinafter
called "ESCROW HOLDER."
   WITNESSETH:
   WHEREAS, Developer has submitted a proposed plat of a subdivision within the
City and said Developer is required by the Subdivision Regulations of the Code
of Ordinances of Kewanee either to make certain improvements in said
subdivision, or to guarantee that said improvements will be made within a
period of two years from the date of the filing of the plat of said
subdivision, and to guarantee the satisfactory condition of those improvements
for a one (1) year period following acceptance by the City of said
improvements.
   WHEREAS, under the terms of the subdivision regulations of the City,
Developer may deposit the estimated cost of the required improvements in escrow
with the City as one method of insuring to said City that the required
improvements will be completed and Developer has elected to do so;
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein
and the mutual benefits to be derived therefrom, it is hereby agreed and
understood by and between the parties hereto as follows:
1. Developer has this date deposited the sum of $               with the Escrow
Holder, which sum is composed of the following sums for the noted improvements,
to-wit:
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, said sum being the estimated cost
of the required improvements for the development of the proposed subdivision to
be known as                 
                              .
2. Whenever the Developer shall complete any required improvement and said
improvement shall be approved and accepted by the City of Kewanee within a
period of (two years less one day) from the recording of said subdivision plat,
then in such event the Escrow Holder shall return to Developer upon the
approval and acceptance of said improvement by the City of Kewanee, ninety
percent (90%) of the money deposited herewith. The remaining ten percent (10%)
shall be retained until the required one (1) year guarantee period on the
improvements has expired. Upon the completion by Developer and approval by City
of Kewanee of all required improvements, and the expiration of the guarantee
period, all the money deposited shall be returned to Developer.
3. In the event Developer shall fail to complete any portion of the required
improvements within the period of (two years less one day) days from the
recording of said subdivision plat, then Escrow Holder is hereby expressly
authorized to disburse such portion of the money deposited herewith as shall be
required to complete the required improvements for said subdivision plat. In
the event Developer shall notify City of his inability to complete said
improvements within said (two years less one day) period then in such event
Escrow Holder may also expend such sums as necessary to complete said
improvements. Upon the completion of all said required improvements, the Escrow
Holder shall return to Developer ninety percent (90%) of the unexpended balance
of the sum deposited herewith, less any other charges which may be outstanding
against Developer in connection with said subdivision.
4. In the event the Escrow Holder shall use the sum deposited herewith for the
construction or completion of the construction of any or all of the required
improvements the construction of said improvements, may be done by the City of
Kewanee under the direction of its City Engineer and at its actual cost
including a reasonable charge for engineering supervision; or may be done by
contract between the City of Kewanee and some responsible contractor or
contractors, after sufficient opportunity has been given for competitive
bidding, in accordance with the normal practices of the City, and in such event
the cost of construction shall be based upon the actual contract amount or
amounts plus a reasonable charge for engineering and inspection by the City of
Kewanee.
5. The deposit of said sum with the Escrow Holder is in an interest bearing
account, the interest from which shall be the property of the City. But if no
claim is made for non-performance hereunder within two (2) years from the date
hereof for the construction of said improvements, the escrow account shall be
released to the Developer and the interest from which shall revert to the
Developer upon the failure of said condition; neither the City nor Developer
shall have the right to withdraw interest from said account during the term
thereof.
6. The City may allow substitution of Escrow Holder and Developer, and it may
allow this instrument to be substituted by a bond with adequate surety which
guarantees payment under the terms hereof. Said substitution shall be by filing
with the City an assignment, replacement instrument, or bond and upon said
filing, and approval by Kewanee City Council, the City Attorney shall execute
the necessary release.
7. By execution of these presents and for valuable consideration paid to it by
Developer, the Escrow Holder consents and agrees to meet the obligations
imposed upon it hereby.
8. The parties hereto agree that should any litigation arise out of this Escrow
Agreement, the venue for such litigation shall be in the Circuit Court of the
Fourteenth Judicial Circuit, Henry County, Illinois and the parties hereto
expressly waive all rights to venue inconsistent herewith.
9. This Agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, administrators,
executors and successors of the parties hereto.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused these presents to be
executed on the date first above mentioned.
                                                                             
   "DEVELOPER"
   City of Kewanee, Illinois
   By:
   City Manager
   ATTEST:
   City Clerk
   Approved as to Form:
                                                                              
   City Attorney
   "CITY"
                                                                              
   Attest:
   "ESCROW HOLDER"
(Ord. 3265, passed 8-14-00)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Intent and purpose
   
155.003   Definitions
   
155.004   Interpretation; purpose
   
155.005   International Zoning Code
District Boundaries; Map
   
155.020   Establishment of districts
   
155.021   Zoning maps
   
155.022   New or annexed land
   
155.023   Zoning of streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way
   
155.024   Boundary lines
General Use Regulations
   
155.035   Scope
   
155.036   Nonissuance of license or permit for uses or changes contrary to
provisions
   
155.037   Residential districts; purpose
   
155.038   Business districts; purpose
   
155.039   Manufacturing districts; purpose
   
155.040   Building height; bulk; lot coverage
   
155.041   Lot area and dimension
   
155.042   Location of buildings
   
155.043   (Reserved)
   
155.044   Buildings on a zoning lot
   
155.045   Rezoning of public and semi-public areas
   
155.046   Vision clearance on corner lots
   
155.047   Satellite dishes
   
155.048   Smoke detection devices
District Requirements
   
155.060   R-1 One-Family Dwelling District
   
155.061   R-2 One-Family Dwelling District
   
155.062   R-3 One-Family Dwelling District
   
155.063   R-4 Two-Family Dwelling District
   
155.064   R-5 Multiple-Family Dwelling District
   
155.065   R-6 Federal, State Housing District
   
155.066   B-1 Business District, Limited Retail
   
155.067   B-2 Business District, General Retail
   
155.068   B-3 Business and Wholesale District
   
155.069   B-4 Business District
   
155.070   M-1 Manufacturing District, Limited
   
155.071   M-2 Manufacturing District, General
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
   
155.085   Nonconforming buildings and uses
   
155.086   Discontinuance of use
   
155.087   Change of use
   
155.088   Termination and removal of nonconforming uses
   
155.089   Repairs and alterations
   
155.090   When structures are damaged or destroyed
   
155.091   Additions and enlargements
   
155.092   Exceptions
Accessory Buildings
   
155.105   When part of main building
   
155.106   Location restriction
   
155.107   Permitted accessory uses
Adult Use Regulations
   
155.110   Adult special use permits
   
155.111   Adult special use permit required
   
155.112   Definitions
   
155.113   Application
   
155.114   Criteria for permit issuance
   
155.115   Violation and penalty
Other Special Use Permits
   
155.117   Beer garden/outdoor eating area
   
155.118   Consumer metals recycling facility
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
155.120   Purpose
   
155.121   Parking and loading space requirements
   
155.122   Additional regulations for parking
   
155.123   Additional regulations for loading
   
155.124   Locations of parking areas
   
155.125   Schedule of parking requirements
   
155.126   Off-street loading and unloading facilities
Special Uses
   
155.155   Purpose
   
155.156   Conditions of approval
   
155.157   Procedure in considering applications for special uses
Planned Developments
   
155.170   Character of developments; additional standards and exceptions
required
   
155.171   Use exceptions
   
155.172   Bulk regulations
Flood Hazard Areas
   
155.185   Purpose
   
155.186   Definitions
   
155.187   Duties of Building Official
   
155.188   Base flood elevation
   
155.189   Development permit required
   
155.190   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
155.191   Protecting buildings
   
155.192   Subdivision and other development requirements
   
155.193   Public health and other standards
   
155.194   Carrying capacity and notification
   
155.195   Variances
   
155.196   Disclaimer of liability
   
155.197   Abrogation and greater restrictions
Amendments
   
155.205   Petition for amendment
   
155.206   Review of petition
   
155.207   Notice of public hearings
   
155.208   Written protest
   
155.209   Final decision
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.220   Enforcing officer
   
155.221   Building permits
   
155.222   Certificate of compliance
   
155.223   Use permit
   
155.224   Continuance of existing uses
   
155.225   Fees
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Kewanee Zoning
Regulations.
('71 Code, § 11-1-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and
general welfare of the people;
   (B)   To divide the city into zones or districts restricting and regulating
therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and
use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business, and
manufacturing and other specified uses;
   (C)   To protect the character and the stability of the residential,
business, and manufacturing areas within the City and to promote the orderly
and beneficial development of such areas;
   (D)   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property;
   (E)   To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the
area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light
and air and to protect the public health;
   (F)   To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, business, manufacturing, or other uses within such areas;
   (G)   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform therein;
   (H)   To prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the
character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
   (I)   To prevent additions to, or alterations or remodeling of, existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder;
   (J)   To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare by providing for the off-
street parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial
vehicles;
   (K)   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, and other hazards
in the interest of public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
   (L)   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by
regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding
them;
   (M)   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
city;
   (N)   To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land,
buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value
of desirable development in each district; and
   (O)   To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein.
('71 Code, § 11-1-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING or USE. A subordinate building or use which is located on
the same lot on which the principal building or use is situated and which is
reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such
building or main use, when permitted by district regulations.
   ACREAGE. Any tract or parcel of land having an area of one acre or more
which has not been subdivided by metes and bounds or platted.
   ADULT BUSINESS. A business based upon materials or performances that depict
describe, or relate to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas,” as defined under “adult use” in this section, or a place establishment
or business which offers, advertises, or is engaged in any activity, service,
sale, or display of any commodity or service which is prohibited by statute or
ordinance to minors, or which otherwise forbids sales to, or excludes minors by
virtue of age.
   ADULT USE. An ADULT USE shall include the following:
      (1)   ADULT MEDIA STORE. An establishment or business having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade, and offers, for any
form of consideration, any one or more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, newspapers, tabloids, photographs, films,
tapes, pictures, computer software, and other media matter depicting,
describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas,” as defined in this subsection, or an establishment with a
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material; or
         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
      (2)   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide
projectors, video players or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer
persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
      (3)   ADULT TOPLESS OR BOTTOMLESS ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. An
establishment, whether or not an eating and drinking place and whether or not
such establishment is authorized to sell beer or alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises, which provides dancers or any other form of
entertainment which involves specified sexual activities or the display of
specified anatomical areas as the predominant or primary entertainment activity
of such establishment;
      (4)   ADULT PHYSICAL CULTURE BUSINESS. An establishment which offers or
advertises massage, body rubs, and physical contact with specified anatomical
areas whether or not licensed. Exempted from this definition are establishments
which routinely provide medical services by State-licensed medical
practitioners, electrolysis equipment, continuing instruction in martial or
performing arts, or instruction in organized athletic activities;
      (5)   ADULT ARTISTS-BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business
which provides as a substantial or significant part of its business the
services of applying paint or other substances to or on the human body when
such body is unclothed in any specified anatomical area;
      (6)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. An establishment or business which provides,
as a substantial or significant part of its business, the services of the
modeling of adults distinguished or characterized by emphasis on depicting
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by means of
photography, painting, sketching, drawing, or otherwise;
      (7)   ADULT MOTEL/HOTEL. An establishment or business which provides
motel or hotel rooms which primarily offer motion pictures presenting materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing,
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons;
      (8)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment or business used for
presenting motion pictures, presenting material distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons; and
      (9)   OTHER ADULT USES. Any other commercial use predominantly dealing in
matters appealing to prurient interests.
      (10)    ADULT. For the purposes of this section ADULT shall mean and
refer to persons twenty-one (21) years or older.
      (11)    SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. For the purposes of this section
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES shall mean:
         (a)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
         (b)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy;
         (c)   Fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or breasts;
         (d)   Actual or simulated sex acts including intercourse, oral
copulation, anal intercourse, oral or anal copulation, bestiality, direct
physical stimulation of clothed or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture
in the context of a sexual relationship, anilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia,
cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pedophilia, piquerism, sodomy, or
zooerastia; or
         (e)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
         (f)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breast; or
         (g)   Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the
infliction of pain; or
         (h)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
         (I)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation; or
         (j)   Striptease of the removal of clothing; or
         (k)   The wearing of transparent or diaphanous clothing, including
models dressed only in lingerie to the point where specified anatomical areas,
as defined below, are exposed or clearly visible.
      (12)    SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. For the purposes of this section
“specified anatomical areas,” shall mean:
         (a)   Less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or the female breast area below a point immediately above the
top of the areolae; and
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   AIRPORT or AIRCRAFT LANDING FIELD. Any landing area, runway, or other
facility (including heliports), designed, used or intended to be used either
publicly or privately by any person for the landing and taking off of aircraft,
including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tiedown areas, hangers
and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
   ALLEY. A public way, not more than 30 feet wide, which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is
arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn
or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body,
frame, or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and
motor service to automobiles, but not including any operation specified under
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline, stored only in
underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease, for operation of
automobiles, are offered for sale directly to the public on the premises and
including minor accessories and services for automobiles; but not including
major automobile repairs; and including washing of automobiles where no chain
conveyor, blower or steam-cleaning device is employed. When the dispensing,
sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of
a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS shall not include sale or storage of junkers or
junk yards as defined herein.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. (See Junkyards)
   AWNING. A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall
of a building or overhangs the public way.
   BASEMENT. A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half of
its height is above the established curb level or above the average level of
the adjoining ground where curb level has not been established, a basement
shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN & TOURIST HOMES. An owner-occupied house that contains
no more than five guest rooms, where short-term lodging rooms and meals are
provided. Occupants are capable of independent living.
   BEER GARDEN/OUTDOOR EATING AREA. An accessory outdoor area where food,
alcohol, or beverages are sold to the consumers in connection with a duly
licensed restaurant, tavern or club that serves alcoholic liquor, and where
such food, alcohol, or beverages are intended to be consumed upon the premises
whether indoor or out door. This definition does not include holders of a Class
E- Special Licence as defined in §
111.18(A) of the City Code. Nor does this definition include temporary outdoor
use of the liquor licensee's premises for a period of time of 3 days or less,
on no more than 2 occasions annually, when such use has been approved by the
city's Liquor Commissioner, and is in compliance with all other regulations.
   BILLBOARD. Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or
advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include any
bulletin boards used to announce church services, or to display court or other
public office notices, or signs offering the sale or lease of the premises on
which the sign is located. See also BILLBOARD in
Chapter 153 Sign Regulations.
   BOARDING HOUSE. An establishment with lodging where meals are regularly
prepared and served for compensation and where food is placed upon the table
family style, without service or ordering of individual portions from a menu.
Occupants are capable of independent living.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or
streets, by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines,
or shore lines of waterways or a corporate boundary line of the city.
   BUILDING.  Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to
the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by walls
in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is
designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure, or protection of persons,
animals or chattels. Any structure with interior areas not normally accessible
for human use, such as gas holders, oil towers, and other similar structures,
are not considered as buildings. This term shall include the word STRUCTURE.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open
space requirements of this chapter have been complied with.
   BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED. A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
and normal exit or entrance doors.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or
its equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof; to the
deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof; provided, that where buildings are set
back from the street line the height of the building may be measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING. Any building which does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter prescribing the maximum floor area ratio, required
yards, coverage, height, and setbacks, minimum required spacing between
buildings on a single lot, and minimum required usable open space for the
district in which such building is located.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main use of the
zoning lot on which it is situated.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the street line at a distance from
it, regulated by the front yard requirements set-up in this chapter.
   BULK. The term used to describe the size and mutual relationships of
buildings and other structures, as to size; height; coverage, shape; location
of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, to the center line of streets, to
other walls of the same building, and to other buildings or structures; and to
all open spaces relating to the building or structure.
   BUS LOT. Any lot or land area used for the storage of layover of passenger
buses or motor coaches.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. An adult-use cannabis cultivation center,
craft grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing
organization or transporting organization.
   CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or business
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry,
cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS DISPENSARY. A facility operated by an organization or business that
is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation
to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business establishments for the
purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis
seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified
registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS INFUSER. A facility operated by an organization or business that is
licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to directly incorporate
cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to produce a
cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   CANNABIS PROCESSOR. A facility operated by an organization or business that
is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to either extract
constituent chemicals or compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or
incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to
produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTER. An organization or business that is licensed by the
Illinois Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a
cannabis business establishment or a community college licensed under the
Community College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANOPY. A permanent roof-like structure which may be freestanding or
extending from part, or all of a building face, placed so as to extend outward
from the building providing a protective shield for doors, windows and other
openings. Canopies shall be subject to the same location restriction as apply
to the building or structure which they serve; with the exception of front yard
requirement for canopies on buildings located in the Central Business District.
   CARPORT. A structure, free-standing or attached, open on one or more sides
to the weather, which is used for the parking of motor vehicles. Carports shall
be subject to the same location restriction as apply to accessory buildings.
   CARWASH. A facility used to clean the exterior, and in some cases the
interior, of cars. CAR WASHES can be self-service, full- service (with
attendants who wash the vehicle), or fully automated.
   CELLAR. A cellar is a story having more than one-half of its height below
the curb level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar
shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.
   CLINIC or MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER. An establishment where patients are
admitted for special study and treatment by two or more licensed physicians and
their professional associates, practicing medicine together.
   CLUB or LODGE, PRIVATE. A nonprofit association of persons, who are bona
fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or
portion thereof.
   CONSUMER MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes cars, sport utility vehicles, light trucks,
motorcycles, and similar types of vehicles typically associated as consumer
passenger type vehicles. This shall also include electric and internal
combustion motors.
   CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of the building
measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one
street, the CURB LEVEL shall be the average of levels of the curbs at the
center of the front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been
established, the mean level of the land immediately adjacent to the building
shall be considered the CURB LEVEL.
   DECK. See TERRACE, OPEN.
   DOG GROOMING. Dog grooming refers to both the hygienic care and cleaning of
a dog, as well as a process by which a dog's physical appearance is enhanced
for showing or other types of competition. DOG GROOMING shall not include
kennel or boarding functions.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer
or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including one-family dwelling units, but not including hotels, boarding, or
lodging houses.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed for
occupancy by three or more families living independently in which they may or
may not share common entrances and/or other spaces. Individual dwelling units
may be owned as condominiums, or offered for rent.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping
facilities. designed for occupancy by one family.
   DWELLING, ROW (PARTY WALL). A row of two to eight attached, one- family,
party wall dwellings, not more than two and one half stories in height, nor
more than two rooms in depth measured from the building line.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed or arranged to be occupied by two
families living independently, with the structure having only two dwelling
units.
    FAST FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS. Eating establishments whose principal business is
the preparation of food for immediate sale and consumption, generally served in
disposable containers and wrappers, where orders are placed and picked up by
patrons at the sales window(s), counter(s) or service area(s) for consumption
on or off the premises, where seating is normally without full-time waiter
service. These establishments often provide drive-through facilities.
   FIFTH-WHEEL COUPLING. Provides the link between a semi-trailer and the
towing truck, tractor unit, leading trailer or dolly. Some camper trailers use
a fifth-wheel configuration, requiring the coupling to be installed in the bed
of a pickup truck as a towing vehicle, and FIFTH WHEEL is therefore sometimes
used as a synonym for such campers in North America. The coupling consists of a
kingpin, a two- or three-inch diameter (50.9 or 99.9 mm) steel pin on the front
of the semi-trailer, and a horseshoe-shaped coupling device called a FIFTH
WHEEL on the rear of the towing vehicle.
   FUEL BULK STATION. A place where crude petroleum, gasoline, naphtha,
benzine, benzol, kerosene or other flammable liquid which has a flash point at
or below 200° F. is stored for wholesale purposes, where the aggregate capacity
of all storage tanks is more than 6,000 gallons, regardless of whether the fuel
is stored aboveground, underground or in mobile tank cars to trucks.
   GARAGE, BUS. Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of
three or more passenger motor buses, or motor coaches used in public
transportation, including school buses.
   GARAGE, BUS or TRUCK. A building which is used or intended to be used for
the storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors, and commercial vehicles
exceeding one and one half-ton capacity.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of the principal
building, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the storage of
automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private garage, used for the care,
incidental servicing, and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor vehicles,
are parked or stored for remuneration, hire, or sale within the structure, but
not including trucks, tractors, truck trailers, and commercial vehicles
exceeding one and one half-ton capacity.
   GOOSENECK TRAILER. Attaches to the towing vehicle by way of a ball hitch
that is mounted in the bed of a pickup truck. GOOSENECK TRAILERS are sometimes
mistakenly referred to as fifth-wheel. The difference is that GOOSENECK
TRAILERS utilize a ball hitch and are towed by a pickup truck and fifth-wheel
trailers utilize a kingpin and are towed by a semi-tractor.
   GUEST HOUSE. Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on
the same premises with the principal building, for use by temporary guests of
the occupants of the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities
nor be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.
   HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Includes vehicles not of the consumer type.
Examples include, but are not limited to, large heavy duty dump trucks,
excavation equipment, cranes, bulldozers, farm tractors, and semi-tractors.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A gainful occupation or profession customarily carried on
by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a use which is clearly incidental to the
use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes.
   HOSPITAL or SANITARIUM. An institution open to the public in which patients
or injured persons are given medical or surgical care; or for the care of
contagious diseases or incurable patients.
   HOTEL, APARTMENT. A building containing dwelling units or individual guest
rooms, the majority of which are for permanent guests. Maid and janitor service
may be provided but kitchen facilities are not necessarily included.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A building in which more than five rooms or suites are
reserved to provide living and sleeping accommodations for temporary guests,
with no provisions in said rooms for cooking in any individual room or suite.
   HOUSEHOLDER. The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the owner or
lessee thereof.
   INDEPENDENT ELDERLY CONGREGATE HOUSING. A residential facility occupied by
persons age 55 or older, their spouses, or surviving spouses, except for rooms
or units occupied by resident staff personnel, within which are provided
individual living and sleeping facilities. Such facilities may also provide
other services such as, meal preparation, laundry services, room cleaning,
transportation for routine social and medical appointments, and counseling.
   INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY. A facility providing basic care, including
physical, emotional, social, and other restorative services under periodic
medical supervision. Many of these services, such as nursing care, may require
skill in administration. Most of the residents have long-term illnesses or
disabilities which may have reached a relatively stable plateau. Other
residents whose conditions are stabilized may need medical and nursing services
to maintain stability. Essential supportive consultant services are provided.
   JUNKYARD. A plot of ground, which may be covered with buildings, partially
covered with buildings or without any buildings, which plot is used by anyone
for buying, selling, storing, exchanging, baling, packing, disassembling,
handling, wrecking or trading in junk, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or
parts thereof, dismantled or wrecked farm machinery or parts thereof,
industrial scrap, scrap iron, rags, and any secondhand article whatsoever
including but not limited to the foregoing enumerated items, except a plot of
ground used for any of the above purposes when dealing with junk, rags and
secondhand articles which has a zoning classification of R-1 to R-6 or B-1 to
B-3 as set forth in §§
155.060 through
155.068 and which plot of ground is used in compliance with those chapters.
Facilities that qualify in all aspects as a consumer metals recycling facility
shall be considered as such, and shall not be considered a junkyard.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more
than four dogs, cats and other household domestic animals, over four months of
age, are kept or on which more than two such animals are boarded for
compensation or kept for sale.
   LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL. A place devoted to experimental study such as
testing and analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products is not
included within this definition.
   LINE OF BUILDING (FOR MEASURING YARDS). A line parallel to the nearest lot
line drawn through the point of a building or group of buildings nearest to
such lot line, exclusive of such features specified as being permitted to
extend into a yard.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF STREET. An open hard-surfaced area of land
other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for the
standing, loading, and unloading of motor truck, tractors and trailers, to
avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. Such space
shall be not less than ten feet in width, 45 feet in length, and 14 feet in
height, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.
   LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE. A residential structure that provides lodging with
or without meals, is available for permanent occupancy only, and which makes no
provisions for cooking in any of the rooms occupied by paying guests. Occupants
are capable of independent living.
   LOT. The word LOT when used alone shall mean a zoning lot unless the context
of this chapter clearly indicates otherwise. This term shall include the works
plat.
   LOT, CORNER. A parcel of land situated at the intersection of two or more
streets or adjoining a curved street at the end of a block.
   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a
public street; for a corner lot the owner may elect either street line as the
front lot line.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A side lot line common with another lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The rear lot line is the lot line or lines most nearly
parallel to and most remote from the front lot line. Lot lines other than front
or rear lot lines are side lot lines.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line.
   LOT, ZONING. See ZONING LOT.
   MANUFACTURE. The making of anything by any agency or process.
   MARQUEE or CANOPY. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which
projects from the wall of a building and may overhang the public way.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable, factory-built home designed to permit its
transport by wheel on streets to the place where it is to be occupied as a
dwelling unit, complete and ready for year-round and permanent occupancy,
attached to a permanent foundation.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL, PRIVATE. A building in which freight, brought to
said building by motor truck, is assembled and sorted for routing in intrastate
and interstate shipment by motor truck.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a
use or lawfully established at the time of the adoption of this chapter or
amendments thereto, which does not conform after the passage of this chapter or
amendments hereto with the use regulations of this chapter.
   NURSERY, DAY. An institution providing care for three or more children under
the age of four years for periods of more than four hours but not exceeding 24
hours.
   NURSERY SCHOOL. An institution providing day care service for children from
four to six years of age.
   NURSING HOME or REST HOME. See INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY.
   OCTAVE BAND. A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves
in order to classify sound according to pitch.
   PARCEL DELIVERY STATION. A building in which commodities, sold at retail
within the area and packaged by the retailer, are assembled and routed for
delivery to retail customers located within the area.
   PARKING AREA, PRIVATE. An open hard-surfaced area of land, other than a
street or public way, designed, arranged, and made available for the storage of
private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings
for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles under 1½ ton capacity, and available to the public, whether
for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. Space within a public or private parking area of
not less than 162 square feet (8.5 feet by 19 feet), exclusive of access drives
or aisles, ramps, columns, or office and work areas, for the storage of one
passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one half-ton capacity.
   PARKING SPACE, RESERVOIR or STACKING. Off-street parking spaces allocated to
motor vehicles awaiting entrance to a drive-in service or ordering window at an
establishment, thus minimizing vehicle back-up or congestion in the adjacent
roadway.
   PATIO. See TERRACE, OPEN.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land which is developed as a unit under
single ownership or control, which includes two or more principal buildings and
which is at least four acres in area, except for planned developments operated
by a municipal corporation which shall be at least two acres in area, and
manufacturing planned developments which shall be at least ten acres in area.
   PORCH. A structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure
and commonly open to the weather in part. A PORCH may or may not have a roof.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation or municipal department, duly
authorized to furnish under public regulation to the public, electricity, gas,
steam, telephone, telegraph transportation, or water.
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land with tracts and auxiliary facilities
for tract operation, but not including depots, loading platforms, stations,
train sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops or water
towers.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular-type portable structure (marine or
terrain) without a permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven,
and that is primarily designed as a temporary living accommodation for
recreational, camping, and travel use, including, but not limited to: camping
trailers, motor homes, mini motor homes, travel trailers, truck campers, van
campers, boats, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, or other such items used
primarily for recreational purposes. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE also includes
trailers designed to transport materials other than people, including , but not
limited to: boats, vehicles, snowmobiles, and other forms of cargo.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE does not include any vehicle which has, or is eligible
for, a passenger license plate.
   RECYCLING FACILITY, CONSUMER METALS. A facility for the acceptance by
donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable, consumer-based, non-ferrous
metal products from the public. Operations at the facility shall be in
compliance with §
155.118. Facilities in excess of the size limitations contained in §
155.118 shaft be considered to be junkyards, as defined in §
155.003 herein, and subject to the regulations applicable to junkyards.
   RINGELMANN NUMBER. The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density of emission.
   SALON. An establishment where a hairdresser or beautician conducts business.
Examples of services provided at a salon include, but are not limited to, hair
cutting, manicure and pedicure, and spray tanning.
   SEMI-INDEPENDENT ELDERLY CONGREGATE HOUSING. A facility providing all the
features of independent elderly congregate housing along with limited health
care and rehabilitative services.
   SEMI-TRAILER. A trailer with a large proportion of its weight being
supported either by a semi-tractor or by a detachable front axle assembly
called a dolly. A SEMI-TRAILER is equipped with legs that can be lowered to
support it when it is unhooked from the tractor. When coupled together, the
tractor and trailer combination is often referred to as a semi, 18-wheeler,
big-rig or truck and trailer. The purpose of a SEMI-TRAILER is to carry
freight. Types of SEMI-TRAILERS include dry freight vans, refrigerated vans
(reefers), flatbeds (standard, step-deck, lowboy, double drop, etc.) and tank
trailers. Trailer sizes vary, but the most common sizes are 53 feet or 48 feet
in length and 102 inches or 96 inches in width. SEMI- TRAILERS are attached to
the towing vehicle by way of fifth-wheel coupling.
   SETBACK LINE, BUILDING. See BUILDING SETBACK LINE.
   SHELTERED CARE OR BOARD AND CARE FACILITY. A facility which provides
maintenance (food, shelter and laundry services) and personal care, such as
assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing, or other personal needs or
general supervision and oversight of the physical and mental well- being of an
individual who is incapable of managing his person.
   SHIPPING CONTAINER. A large, strong container, usually constructed of
corrugated metal of sufficient strength for stacking, used to store goods
during shipment.
   SHORT-TERM RENTALS. A short-term rental of a single-family dwelling that
lets property owners rent out their spaces to travelers looking for a place to
stay for periods of 29 days or less.
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to, or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure, or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business.
   SKILLED NURSING FACILITY. A facility providing skilled nursing care,
continuous skilled nursing observations, restorative nursing, and other
services under professional direction with frequent medical supervision. Such
facilities are provided for patients who need the type of care and treatment
required during the post-acute phase of illness or during recurrence of
symptoms in long-term illness.
   SMOKE UNITS. The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in
Ringelmann numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this
chart, Ringelmann density reading is made at least once every minute during the
period of observation; each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes
during which it is observed; and the various products are added together to
give the total number of SMOKE UNITS observed during the total period under
observation.
   SPECIAL USE. Any use of land or buildings, or both, described and permitted
herein, subject to the provisions of §§
155.155 through
155.157.
   STABLE, LIVERY. Any building other than a private stable, designed,
arranged, used, or intended to be used for the storage of horses and horse-
drawn vehicles, or both.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of
a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an additional story
for each fourteen feet or fraction thereof.
   STORY, HALF. That portion of a building under a gable, hip, or mansard roof,
the wall plates on which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more
than four and one half feet above the finished floor of such story. In the case
of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings
less than three stories in height, a half story in a sloping roof shall not be
counted as a story for the purpose of this chapter. In the case of multiple-
family dwellings three or more stories in height, a half story shall be counted
as a story.
   STREET. A public way other than an alley.
   STREET LINE. A line separating an abutting lot, piece or parcel from a
street.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having location on the ground.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change other than incidental repairs which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any structure that contains water which is used, or intended
to be used for, swimming, wading, or recreational bathing. This includes in-
ground, above-ground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
   TAVERN. A building where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises.
   TEA ROOM. A small public eating place which does not use deep fat fryers or
grills, whose hours of operation are limited and whose service and decor are
designed primarily for feminine clientele but excluding restaurants, cafes and
drive-through service windows for same, provided said place may include a small
gift shop in the same building.
   TERRACE, OPEN. A level plane or platform which, for the purpose of this
chapter, is located adjacent to one or more faces of a principal or accessory
structure and which is constructed not more  than four feet in height above the
average level of the adjoining ground. Open terrace is the same as a deck or
patio.
   TOURIST COURTS, MOTOR LODGES, MOTELS. A group of attached or detached
buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used
temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or
parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, motels,
motor lodges or other similar type uses.
   TRUCK PARKING AREA or YARD. Any land used or intended to be used for the
storage or parking of trucks, tractors, truck trailers and including commercial
vehicles, while not loading or unloading and which exceed one and one half-ton
in capacity.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged
or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.
   USED CAR LOT. A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers or trucks are
displayed for sale or trade.
   YARD. An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or
group of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level
upward, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, and which extends along
a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the
yard regulations for the district on which the zoning lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and
lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of a building.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and
lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal
building.
   YARD, SIDE. That part of the yard lying between the nearest line of the
principal building and a side lot line, and extending from the required front
yard (or from the front lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the
required rear yard.
   ZERO LOT LINE. The location of a building on a zoning lot in such a manner
that one or more of the building's sides, or the building's party wall, rests
directly on a lot line.
   ZONING LOT. A plot of ground, made up of one or more parcels, which is or
may be occupied by a use, building, or buildings including the open spaces
required by this chapter.
   ZONING MAPS. The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as a part
hereof, designating zoning districts.
('71 Code, § 11-2-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2057, passed 6-11-79;
Am. Ord. 2357, passed 3-28-83; Am. Ord. 2452, passed 8-13-84; Am. Ord. 2475,
passed 11-12-84; Am. Ord. 3123, passed 8-25- 97; Am. Ord. 3142, passed 1-26-98;
Am. Ord. 3165, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 3297, passed 2-13-01; Am. Ord. 3300,
passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord. 3327, passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 3607, passed 5-11-09;
Am. Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 3883, passed 5-22-17; Am. Ord. 3933,
passed 6-25-18; Am. Ord. 3935, passed 7-9-18; Am. Ord. 3980, passed 10-28- 19;
Am. Ord. 3989, passed 12-19-19; Am. Ord. 4099, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. 4230,
passed 2-10-25)
§ 155.004 INTERPRETATION; PURPOSE.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the safety, health,
comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to
interfere with, abrogate, annul, or repeal any ordinance, rules, regulations,
previously adopted, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this
chapter or which shall be adopted, pursuant to law relating to the use of
buildings or premises, nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or
abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between
parties, except that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the
use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or required larger
open spaces than are imposed or required by such other provisions or such
easements, covenants, or other agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
('71 Code, § 11-24-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.005 INTERNATIONAL ZONING CODE.
   A certain document which is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the
city being marked and designated as the "International Zoning Code," 2021
edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by
the city for reference. The Building Official may reference and utilize the
contents of the International Zoning Code when presented with situations not
addressed by this chapter.
(Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES; MAP
§ 155.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In order to carry, out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the city
is hereby divided into the following districts:
   Residential Districts
      R-1    One-family Dwelling District
      R-2    One-family Dwelling District
      R-3    One-family Dwelling District
      R-4    Two-family Dwelling District
      R-5    Multiple-family Dwelling District
      R-6    Federal, State Housing District
   Business Districts
      B-1    Business District, Limited Retail
      B-2    Business District, General Retail
      B-3    Business Services and Wholesale District
      B-4    Business District
   Manufacturing Districts
      M-1    Manufacturing District, Limited
      M-2    Manufacturing District, General
('71 Code, § 11-3-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 1596, passed 2-23-70;
Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
§ 155.021 ZONING MAPS.
   The location and boundaries of the districts established herein are shown
upon the zoning map, together with all notations, references and other
information shown thereon, and all amendments thereto, shall be a part of this
chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map, together
with all notations, references and other information shown thereon, were fully
set forth and described herein.
('71 Code, § 11-3-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.022 NEW OR ANNEXED LAND.
   Submerged land heretofore reclaimed, or which may be reclaimed hereafter,
and land heretofore annexed or which may be annexed to the city hereafter, and
which is not shown on the zoning map made a part of this chapter, shall be
classified the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District until such time as the Council
designates the permitted use of the land per the provisions of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 11-3-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.023 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS AND RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   All streets, alleys, public ways, and railroad rights-of-way, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as
the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways and
railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line of a street, alley, public way,
or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such
areas, unless otherwise specifically designated shall be deemed to be the same
as that of the abutting property up to such center line.
('71 Code, § 11-3-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 1923, passed 7-12-76;
Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
§ 155.024 BOUNDARY LINES.
   Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as
shown on the zoning maps incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets,
alleys or similar rights-of-way, they shall be construed as following the
center lines thereof.
   (B)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
   (C)   Where a lot is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot
shall be construed to be within the more restricted district; provided, that
this construction may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals, per §
33.062(A)(1), if the property owner desires.
('71 Code, § 11-3-5) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 3297, passed 2-13-01)
GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 155.035 SCOPE.
   No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used
for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the building
or land is located.
('71 Code, § 11-4-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.036 NONISSUANCE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT FOR USES OR CHANGES CONTRARY TO
PROVISIONS.
   No application for a building permit or other permit or license, or for a
certificate of occupancy, shall be approved by the administrative officer of
this chapter, and no permit or license shall be issued by any other city
departments which would authorize the use or change in use of any land or
building contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or the erection, moving,
alteration, enlargement or occupancy of any building designed or intended to be
used for a purpose or in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 11-4-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.037 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS; PURPOSE.
   The residential districts are established in order to protect public health,
and promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and
welfare. These general goals include, among others, the following specific
purposes:
   (A)   To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious fumes,
offensive odors, noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, heat, glare and other
objectionable factors.
   (B)   To protect residential areas to the extent possible and appropriate in
each area against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic, especially through
traffic, and to alleviate congestion by promoting off-street parking.
   (C)   To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public
streets and other public facilities by controlling the density of population
through regulation of the bulk of buildings.
   (D)   To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing for
ample light and air to buildings and the windows thereof.
   (E)   To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open
space on the same zoning lot with residential development.
   (F)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the
probable need for future residential expansion and to meet the need for
necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of residences, which increase
safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable
influences.
   (G)   To promote the best use and development of residential land per a
comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability of residential development
and protect the value of land and improvements and so strengthen the economic
base of the city.
('71 Code, § 11-4-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.038 BUSINESS DISTRICTS; PURPOSE.
   The business districts are established to protect public health, to promote
public safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare, and to protect the
economic base of the city and the value of property. These general purposes
include, among others, the following specific objectives:
   (A)   To promote the most desirable use of land per a well-considered plan
so that adequate space is provided in appropriate locations for the various
types of business uses, thereby protecting and strengthening the economic base
of the city.
   (B)   To place in separate districts those businesses which may create
noise, odors, hazards, unsightliness or which may generate excessive traffic.
   (C)   To permit selected business uses in districts where adjacency to or
inclusion in a residential area has sufficient elements of service or
convenience to such areas to offset the disadvantage.
   (D)   To encourage the grouping in appropriate locations of compatible
business uses which will tend to draw trade that is mutually interchangeable
and so promote public convenience and business prosperity and contribute to the
alleviation of traffic and pedestrian congestion.
   (E)   To provide for the establishment of off-street parking facilities,
permitted and required, so as to alleviate traffic congestion and so promote
shopping convenience and business prosperity.
('71 Code, § 11-4-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.039 MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS; PURPOSE.
   The manufacturing districts are established to protect public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare and to protect the
economic base of the city, as well as the value of real estate, by regulating
manufacturing developments in appropriate locations. These general objectives
include, among others, the following specific objectives:
   (A)   To protect established residential areas, and the health of families
living therein, by restricting those nearby manufacturing activities which may
create offensive noise, vibration, smoke/dust, odors, heat, glare, fire hazards
and other objectionable influences to those areas which are appropriate
therefor.
   (B)   To provide adequate space in appropriate locations for most types of
manufacturing and related activities so that the economic structure of the
community may be strengthened, and that employment opportunities may be found
in the interest of public prosperity and welfare.
   (C)   To provide more space for manufacturing activities in locations
accessible to rail and highways, so that the movement of raw materials,
finished products and employees can be carried on efficiently and with a
minimum danger to public life and property.
   (D)   To establish proper standards of performance which will restrict
obnoxious manufacturing activities, while at the same time encourage and permit
the manufacturing activities which have adopted facilities for the processing
of finished products without adversely affecting the health, happiness, safety,
convenience and welfare of the people living and working in nearby areas.
   (E)   To protect manufacturing districts from incompatible uses of land by
prohibiting the use of such space for new residential development, thereby
preserving the land for a more appropriate use per the plans for city
improvement and development.
   (F)   To promote the most desirable use of land per a well-considered plan
of land use for all of the city, to conserve the use of property, to promote
stability of manufacturing activities and related development, and to protect
the character and established development in each area of the community, to
enhance and stabilize the value of land and to protect the tax base of the
city.
('71 Code, § 11-4-5) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.040 BUILDING HEIGHT; BULK; LOT COVERAGE.
   (A)   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated or structurally
altered so as to have a greater height, a higher ratio or lot coverage or
smaller open space about it than permissible under the limitations set forth
herein for the district in which such building is located, except that parapet
walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks, stage
towers, scenery lofts, grain elevator silos and bins (grain or feed) and
necessary mechanical appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the maximum
height provisions when erected per all other ordinances of the city.
   (B)   No space allocated to a building or dwelling group for the purpose of
complying with the side, rear, or front yard or court or other open space or
lot area requirements of this chapter, shall thereafter, by reason of change in
ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy the yard, court, open
space, or lot area requirements of any other building or dwelling group.
   (C)   An open terrace, including a roofed-over open porch or terrace, on
dwellings erected prior to July 1, 1996, may occupy a front yard, provided the
vertical planes around the exterior perimeter of the porch have at least 50% of
their surface area open with no screens, windows or other obstructions, and
provided the unoccupied portion of the front yard has a depth of not less than
15 feet. A one-story bay window may project into a front yard not more than
three feet. Overhanging eaves, including gutters, may project over the minimum
required side yard not more than 18 inches.
   (D)   No usable open space or off-street parking space or loading space
existing or provided hereafter for any building shall be reduced below the
minimum requirements hereinafter set forth for such usable open space, parking
space, or loading space, nor further reduced if already less than said minimum
requirements.
('71 Code, § 11-4-6) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 1-10-72;
Am. Ord. 3050, passed 4-22-96)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.041 LOT AREA AND DIMENSION.
   (A)   When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area
and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the use
district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one
ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
   (B)   Any single lot or parcel of land, held in one ownership, which was of
record at the time of adoption of this chapter, that does not meet the
requirements for minimum lot width or area, may be utilized for a permitted
use, provided that yards, courts or usable open space are not less than 75% of
the minimum required dimensions or areas.
   (C)   A one-family dwelling constructed prior to enactment of the zoning
regulations, or amendments thereto, located in any residential zoning district,
except R-6, which is nonconforming in terms of lack of width or depth in one of
the yards required in the district in which it is located, is permitted to be
enlarged, provided the enlargement is not constructed in the nonconforming yard
and the nonconforming yard meets the following minimum width or depth:
      (1)   A nonconforming front yard to be no less than 50% of the front yard
required for the district in which the lot is located.
      (2)   A nonconforming side yard to be no less than 75% of the side yard
required for the district in which the lot is located.
      (3)   A nonconforming rear yard to be no less than 75% of the rear yard
required for the district in which the lot is located.
('71 Code, § 11-4-7) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2926, passed 10-19-
94; Am. Ord. 3297, passed 2-13-01)
§ 155.042 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS.
   Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, every building shall be
constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a public
street or permanent easement of access to a public street, which easement shall
have a minimum width of 25 feet, unless an easement of lesser width was of
record prior to the adoption of this chapter.
('71 Code, § 11-4-8) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.043 (RESERVED)
§ 155.044 BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT.
   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide dwelling
units shall be located on a zoning lot as defined in § 155.003 and in no case
shall there be more than one such building on one zoning lot.
('71 Code, § 11-4-10) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.045 REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC AREAS.
   An area indicated on the zoning map as a public park, recreation area,
public school site, cemetery or other similar open space, shall not be used for
any other purpose than that designated; and when the use of the area is
discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned to the most restricted adjoining
district until appropriate zoning is authorized by the City Council within
three months after the date of application filed for rezoning.
('71 Code, § 11-4-11) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.046 VISION CLEARANCE ON CORNER LOTS.
   No building or structure hereafter erected and no planting or other
obstruction to the vision of drivers of motor vehicles shall be located:
   (A)   In any R Districts, exceeding a height of three feet above the street
grade within 12 feet of the intersecting street lines bordering corner lots,
and
   (B)   In any B or M Districts, within eight feet of the intersecting street
lines bordering a corner lot, provided that this regulation shall not apply to
that part of a building above the first floor.
('71 Code, § 11-4-12) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.047 SATELLITE DISHES.
   All satellite dishes 24 inches in diameter and larger hereinafter erected
within the city limits of the city shall be erected only in the side yard or
the rear yard as defined in §
155.003. Satellite dishes erected in the front yard of any property shall be
less than 24 inches in diameter and shall be affixed to the principle building
on the zoning lot. The Zoning Officer shall be consulted by all citizens
regarding the proper placement of any satellite dish to be erected within the
city. All free-standing dishes shall be installed only after obtaining a
building permit.
('71 Code, § 11-4-13) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 3297, passed 2-13-
01)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.048 SMOKE DETECTION DEVICES.
   Smoke detection devices shall be installed within every structure as
required by the current adopted edition of the International Residential,
Building and Fire Codes.
(Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.060 R-1 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings.
      (2)   Home occupations as defined in this chapter.
      (3)   Truck gardening and other horticultural uses where no building is
involved and when no sale of products is conducted on the premises.
      (4)   Churches.
      (5)   Convents, monasteries, rectories or parish houses to be occupied by
not more than ten persons.
      (6)   Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes for a period
not to exceed one year. Said temporary buildings and uses are restricted to
construction of residential buildings on the lot where the temporary buildings
and uses are located, which residential buildings are in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      (7)   Accessory buildings, as defined herein and as regulated by §§
155.105 through
155.107.
      (8)   Planned developments, as defined in §
155.003.
      (9)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 153.
      (10)   Off-street parking facilities, as required or permitted by §§
155.120 through
155.126.
('71 Code, § 11-5-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2784, passed 5-11-92;
Am. Ord. 2814, passed 12-14-92; Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
per the provisions of §§
155.155 through
155.157.
      (1)   Airport, heliport, landing field or landing strip, subject to the
Federal Aeronautics Administration certifying that a new or reoriented runway
will not interfere with the flight pattern of any established airport, landing
field, or landing strip.
      (2)   Bus terminal, railroad passenger station, freight terminal, taxicab
service, office or station, or any other public transportation terminal
facilities.
      (3)   Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums.
      (4)   Golf courses, public or private.
      (5)   Hospitals or sanitariums, public or private.
      (6)   Municipal or privately owned recreation building or community
center, when operated not for profit.
      (7)   Penal or correctional institutions.
      (8)   Planned residential developments, as defined in §
155.003.
      (9)   Police station or fire station.
      (10)    Public or private park or playground.
      (11)    Public utility facilities, for example, filtration plant, water
reservoir or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station and
other similar facilities.
      (12)    Railroad rights-of-way.
      (13)    Schools, elementary, high or college, public or private.
      (14)    Institutions or hospitals for the care of the insane or feeble
minded, public or private.
      (15)    Multiple-family dwellings and apartments.
      (16)    Day care centers or nursery schools.
      (17)    Nonresidential parking areas per §
155.122(E).
      (18)    Sheltered care or board and care facility.
      (19)    Independent and semi-independent elderly congregate housing.
      (20)   Salon.
      (21)   Dog grooming.
      (22)   Short-term rental.
('71 Code, § 11-5-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2091, passed 11-12-
79; Am. Ord. 2389, passed 8-22-83; Am. Ord. 2419, passed 3-26-84; Am. Ord.
3047, passed 4-8-96; Am. Ord. 3165, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 3935, passed 7-9-
18; Am. Ord. 3980, passed 10-28-19; Am. Ord. 4099, passed 5-9-22)
   (C)   Height of buildings. The maximum height of buildings permitted shall
be as follows:
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings: Twenty five feet and not over 2½
stories.
      (2)   Church. Seventy five feet for towers or steeples but not more than
45 feet for the main structure.
('71 Code, § 11-5-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
   (D)   Lot size.
      (1)   Every one-family dwelling hereinafter erected or structurally
altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 8,500 square feet and
a width at the established building line of not less than 75 feet, except as
provided in division (E)(4) of this section.
      (2)   Churches, convents, and monasteries hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 10,000
square feet and a width at the building line of not less than 80 feet.
('71 Code, § 11-5-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
   (E)   Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building,
structure, or enlargement:
      (1)   Front yard. Each lot upon which a dwelling or permitted
nonresidential use is constructed shall have a front yard of not less than 30
feet. Where lots comprising 40% or more of the frontage between two
intersecting streets are developed with buildings having front yards with a
variation of more than 15 feet in depth, the average of such front yards shall
establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage. In no case
shall a front yard of more than 40 feet be required.
      (2)   Side yard.
         (a)   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed, there shall be
a side yard on each side equal to 10% of the width of the lot or six feet,
whichever is less. On corner lots there shall be maintained a side yard of not
less than 15 feet on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the
street upon which the building or structure maintains frontage, and in the case
of a reversed corner lot, there shall be maintained a setback from the side
street of not less than 50% of the front yard required on the lots in the rear
of such corner lots, but such setback need not exceed 15 feet. No accessory
building on said reversed cor ner lot shall project beyond the front yard
required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than five feet
to the side lot line of said adjacent lot.
         (b)   On lots upon which a church is constructed or extensions made to
an existing church, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet on
each side of the main structure and a combined total of side yards of not less
than 25 feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. Every lot or parcel of land upon which a building is
constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 30 feet.
      (4)   Lot coverage. Not more than 35% of any lot may be occupied by
buildings or structures. including accessory buildings.
      (5)   Permitted obstructions. The following shall not be considered as
obstructions when located within or over required yards:
         (a)   Open terraces, decks or patios where the walking surface is no
greater than 48 inches above the adjacent grade measured at a distance of three
feet away in all directions;
         (b)   Awnings;
         (c)   Chimneys, not exceeding 2% of the width of the yard;
         (d)   Steps not over four feet in height;
         (e)   Arbors and trellises;
         (f)   Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall comply with the
regulations set forth in
Chapter 158 .
         (g)   Breezeways and open porches (rear yards only);
         (h)   Open parking areas.
('71 Code, § 11-5-5) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 1747, passed 8-28-72;
Am. Ord. 1993, passed 12-12-77; Am. Ord. 2941, passed 11-28-94; Am. Ord. 3297,
passed 2-13-01; Am. Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17; Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
   (F)   Dwelling standards. Every one-story dwelling hereafter erected in any
R-1 One-Family District shall have at total ground floor area of not less than
1,100 square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls, including
utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways,
garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended
periods for living, eating, or sleeping purposes. Every dwelling of more than
one story hereafter erected in any R-1 District shall have a total floor area,
measured from the outside of the exterior walls, of not less than 1,400 square
feet, including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches,
breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during
extended periods for living, eating and sleeping purposes, except that enclosed
space intended for habitable rooms which are to be completed within a
reasonable time may be considered in computing such floor areas.
('71 Code, § 11-5-6) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.061 R-2 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Any permitted uses as set forth in §
155.060 in the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
('71 Code, § 11-6-1)
   (B)   Special uses. Any use permitted as a special use in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District may be permitted in any R-2 District
per the provisions of §§
155.155 through
155.157.
('71 Code, § 11-6-2)
   (C)   Height of buildings. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the R-1 One- Family Dwelling District.
('71 Code, § 11-6-3)
   (D)   Lot size.
      (1)   Every one-family dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered
shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 7,200 square feet, and a
width at the established building line of not less than 60 feet, except as
provided in division (E)(4) of this section.
      (2)   Churches, convents, and monasteries: The same regulations shall
apply as permitted or required in the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
('71 Code, § 11-6-4)
   (E)   Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building,
structure or enlargement:
      (1)   Front yard. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
      (2)   Side yard.
         (a)   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed, there shall be
a side yard on each side equal to 10% of the width of the lot or six feet,
whichever is less. On corner lots there shall be maintained a side yard
adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon which the building or
structure maintains frontage, and in case of a reversed corner lot, there shall
be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than 50% of the front
yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lots, but such setback
need not exceed 15 feet. No accessory building on said reversed corner lot
shall project beyond the front yard required in the adjacent lot to the rear,
nor be located nearer than five feet to the side lot line of said adjacent lot.
         (b)   On lots upon which a church is constructed or extensions made to
an existing church, the same regulations shall apply as permitted or required
in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
      (3)   Rear yards. Every lot or parcel of land upon which a building is
constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 30 feet.
      (4)   Lot coverage. The same regulations shall apply as permitted or
required in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
      (5)   Permitted obstructions. The same regulations shall apply as
permitted or required in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
('71 Code, § 11-6-5) (Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
   (F)   Dwelling standards. Every one story dwelling hereafter erected in any
R-2 One-Family District shall have a total ground floor area of not less than
900 square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls, including
utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways,
garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended
periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. Every dwelling of more than
one story hereafter erected in any R-2 One-Family District shall have a total
floor area, measured from the outside of the exterior walls, of not less than
1,100 square feet, including utility rooms, but excluding basements, cellars,
open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently
or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes, except that
increased space intended for habitable rooms which are to be completed within a
reasonable time may be considered in computing such floor areas.
('71 Code, § 11-6-6) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.062 R-3 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Any permitted uses as set forth in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
   (B)   Special uses. Any use permitted as a special use in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District may be permitted in any R-3 District
per the provisions of §§
155.155 through
155.157.
   (C)   Height of buildings. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
   (D)   Lot size.
      (1)   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 6,000
square feet and a width at the established building line of not less than 50
feet, except as provided in division (E)(4) of this section.
      (2)   Churches, convents, and monasteries hereafter erected or
structurally altered: The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required
in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
('71 Code, § 11-7-4)
   (E)   Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building,
structure, or enlargement:
      (1)   Front yard. Each lot upon which a dwelling is erected shall have a
front yard of not less than 25 feet. When lots comprising 40% or more of the
frontage between two intersecting streets are developed with buildings having a
front yard with a variation of more than 15 feet in depth, the average of such
front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire
frontage. In no case shall a front yard of more than 50 feet be required.
      (2)   Side yard.
         (a)   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed, there shall be
a side yard on each side equal to 10% of the width of the lot or six feet,
whichever is less. On corner lots there shall be maintained a side yard
adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon which the building or
structure maintains frontage, and in the case of a reversed corner lot, there
shall be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than 50% of the
front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lots, but such
setback need not exceed 15 feet. No accessory building on said reversed corner
lot shall project beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the
rear, nor be located nearer than five feet to the side lot line of said
adjacent lot.
         (b)   On lots upon which a church is constructed or extensions made to
an existing church, the same regulations shall apply as permitted or required
in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
      (3)   Rear yard. Every lot or parcel of land upon which a building is
constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
      (4)   Lot coverage. The same regulations shall apply as permitted or
required in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
      (5)   Permitted obstructions. The same regulations shall apply as
permitted or required in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
('71 Code, § 11-7-5) (Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
   (F)   Dwelling standards. Every one story dwelling hereafter erected in any
R-3 One-Family Dwelling District shall have a total ground floor area of not
less than 720 square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls
including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches,
breezeways, garages, and other spaces that are not used frequently or during
extended periods for living, eating, or sleeping purposes. Every dwelling of
more than one story hereafter erected in an R-3 One-Family District shall have
a total floor area, measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less
than 900 square feet, including utility rooms, but excluding cellars,
basements, open porches, breeze ways, garages and other spaces that are not
used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating, or sleeping
purposes except that enclosed space intended for habitable rooms which are to
be completed within a reasonable time may be considered in computing such floor
areas.
('71 Code, § 11-7-6) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.063 R-4 TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any permitted use in the R-3 One-Family Dwelling District.
      (2)   Two-family dwellings.
      (3)   Three and four family dwellings as transitional use when located on
lots having a side lot line adjoining or when facing a business or
manufacturing use, or a railroad right-of-way, provided the building is located
on a lot having a width of not less than 70 feet and has an area of not less
than 8,500 square feet.
      (4)   Transitional nonresidential off-street parking when authorized by
the City Council as outlined in §§
155.120 through
155.126.
      (5)   Sheltered care of board and care facility for one or two patients.
   (B)   Special uses. Any use permitted as a special use in § 155.050 R-1 One-
Family District may be permitted in any R-4 District per the provisions of §§
155.155 through
155.157.
('71 Code, § 11-8-2)
   (C)   Height of buildings. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
('71 Code, § 11-8-3)
   (D)   Lot size:
      (1)   One-family dwellings. The same regulations shall apply as required
or permitted in §
155.062 One-family Dwelling District.
      (2)   Two-family dwellings: Every two-family dwelling hereafter erected
or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 8,500
square feet and a width at the building line of not less than 70 feet, except
as provided in division (E)(4) of this section.
      (3)   Converted dwellings. An existing one-family dwelling located on a
lot of less area than required in this subchapter may be converted to a two-
family dwelling without increasing the lot size, provided that the building is
not enlarged beyond its present outside dimensions and that all other
regulations of this chapter are complied with. Additions may be made to an
existing building only when lot size and yard requirements of this subchapter
are complied with.
      (4)   Churches, convents and monasteries. The same regulations shall
apply as required or permitted in the R-1 Districts.
('71 Code, § 11-8-4)
   (E)   Yard areas. No buildings shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building,
structure, or enlargement:
      (1)   Front yards. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the R-3 Districts.
      (2)   Side yards.
         (a)   One-family detached dwellings. The same regulations shall apply
as required or permitted in the R-3 Districts.
         (b)   Two-family dwellings. The same regulations shall apply as
required or permitted for one-family detached dwellings.
         (c)   Converted dwellings. An existing One-family dwelling located on
a lot having side yards of less width than required herein may be converted to
a two-family dwelling, provided that the building is not enlarged beyond its
present outside dimensions.
      (3)   Rear yards. Every lot or parcel of land upon which a building is
constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 20 feet.
      (4)   Lot coverage. The same regulations shall apply as permitted or
required in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
      (5)   Permitted obstructions. The same regulations shall apply as
required or permitted in the R-1 Districts.
('71 Code, § 11-8-5)
   (F)   Dwelling standards. Each dwelling hereafter erected, converted or
reconstructed in any R-4 District shall contain floor area in compliance with
the following:
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings shall have a total ground floor area
of not less than 720 square feet measured from the outside of the exterior
walls, including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches,
breeze ways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during
extended periods for living, eating, or sleeping purposes. Every dwelling of
more than one story hereafter erected in any R-4 Two-Family District shall have
a total floor area, measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less
than 1,150 square feet, including utility rooms but excluding cellars,
basements, open porches, breeze ways, garages and other spaces that are not
used for living, eating or sleeping purposes, except that enclosed space
intended for habitable rooms which are to be completed within a reasonable time
may be considered in computing such floor areas.
      (2)   Two-family dwelling structures shall have a total floor area of not
less than 620 square feet of floor area per dwelling unit measured from the
outside walls, including utility rooms but excluding all other areas not used
for living or sleeping purposes.
('71 Code, § 11-8-6)
   (G)   Health standards. Any premises in an R-4 District rented to any person
shall include, as a minimum, 200 square feet of living space per person, 100
square feet of sleeping space per person, ventilation for all sleeping quarters
in conformance with the city code as well as other ventilation per said city
code; one bathroom for each four persons and an additional bathroom for each
four persons, or fraction thereof; and one parking space per resident.
('71 Code, § 11-8-7)
(Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2482, passed 12-10-84; Am. Ord. 3165,
passed 7-13-98)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.064 R-5 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any permitted use as set forth in §
155.063 R-4 District.
      (2)   One-family row dwellings (party wall type) with not more than six
dwelling units in a building.
      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings and apartments.
      (4)   Boarding and lodging houses.
      (5)   Tourist homes having not more than five rooms for transient guests.
      (6)   Transitional uses. Principal offices of physicians, dentists,
lawyers, architects, real estate brokers and other professional occupations
when conducted in a residential structure used primarily as a residence when
located on lots having a side line adjoining a lot in a business or
manufacturing district, or adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, or when facing
a business or manufacturing district or a railroad right-of-way directly across
a street or alley, provided that:
         (a)   The lot on which the transitional use is located does not extend
more than 75 feet from the adjoining business or manufacturing district, or
more than 120 feet in depth from the street line in cases where the lot does
not adjoin but faces a B or M District.
         (b)   The occupancy is conducted in conjunction with the use of a
dwelling unit as a residence and that the residential character of the exterior
of the dwelling is not changed. Medical clinics are not included or permitted.
      (7)   Sheltered care or board and care facilities for five or fewer
patients.
('71 Code, § 11-9-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2109, passed 1-14-80;
Am. Ord. 3165, passed 7-13-98)
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
per the provisions of §§
155.155 through
155.157.
      (1)   Any use permitted as a special use in §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
      (2)   Off-street public parking areas and garages, provided there is need
for this facility and that no appropriate site is available in nearby business
or manufacturing districts.
      (3)   Public buildings, including art gallery, library, museum or similar
structures.
      (4)   Rest homes and nursing homes.
      (5)   Tea rooms, but excluding restaurants, cafes and drive-through
service windows for same.
      (6)   Telephone exchanges, antenna towers and other outdoor equipment
essential to the operation of the exchange.
      (7)   Undertaking establishments.
      (8)   Transitional uses. Principal office of physicians, dentists,
lawyers, architects, real estate brokers and other professional occupations
when conducted in a residential structure but which do not meet the other
requirements for such transitional uses as set forth in division (A) of this
section.
      (9)   Any use permitted in division (A) of this section when a building
which is to be erected or structurally altered in connection with the use shall
exceed 25 feet or 2½ stories in height but shall exceed ten stories in height.
('71 Code, § 11-9-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2104, passed 1-14-80;
Am. Ord. 2252, passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord. 3047, passed 4-8-96)
   (C)   Height of buildings. No building, which is to be erected or
structurally altered in connection with the uses set forth in division (A) of
this section, shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered to exceed 25
feet or 2½ stories in height. No building which is to be erected or
structurally altered in connection with the uses set forth in division (B) of
this section, shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered to exceed ten
stories in height.
('71 Code, § 11-9-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2252, passed 12-14-
81)
   (D)   Yard areas. No building or structure nor the enlargement of any
building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the
following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with
such structure and enlargement. For one-family row dwellings, a zero lot line
may be used on the party wall side(s) of any of the attached, one family
dwelling units in the building. The front, rear, and side yards required for
row dwellings will be determined by considering all the lots comprising the row
dwelling building's site to be the zoning lot on which the building is located.
The required yards, minimum lot width, and minimum lot area will thus be
determined using the zoning lot so obtained.
      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet.
      (2)   Side yard. On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side
of a main building of not less than 15 feet for all multiple-family dwellings
of not more than ten stories in height. On interior lots there shall be a side
yard on each side of the main building equal to 10% of the width of the lot or
six feet, whichever is less for all one-family and two-family dwellings. On
corner lots the side yard on the intersecting street side shall be not less
than ten feet, except in the case of a reversed corner lot, where there shall
be a side yard on the intersecting street side of the corner lot of not less
than 50% of the front yard required in the lots in the rear of such corner lot.
No accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the
front yard line required on the key lot in the rear, nor be located nearer than
five feet to the side lot line of such key lot.
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet for
interior lots nor less than 15 feet on corner lots.
      (4)   Lot coverage. No more than 35% of the area of a lot may be covered
by buildings or structures.
      (5)   Lot area. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered in
the R-5 Multiple-Family District shall have a total lot area of less than 6,000
square feet nor a lot width at the established building line of less than 60
feet.
      (6)   Courts. No inner courts completely surrounded on all sides by a
building shall be permitted. Outer courts are permitted provided the depth of
the court is no greater than the width of the court.
      (7)   Fences and walls. There may be fences and walls which conform to
the provisions for §
155.060 R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
('71 Code, § 11-9-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 1646, passed 11-9-70;
Am. Ord. 1993, passed 12-12-77; Am. Ord. 3123, passed 8-25-97; Am. Ord.  4230 ,
passed 2-10-25)
   (E)   Health standards. Any premises in an R-5 District rented to any person
shall include, as a minimum, 200 square feet of living space per person, 100
square feet of sleeping space per person, ventilation for all sleeping quarters
in conformance with the city code as well as other ventilation per said city
code; one bathroom for each four persons and an additional bathroom for each
four persons, or fraction thereof; and one parking space per resident.
('71 Code, § 11-9-5) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2482, passed 12-10-
84)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.065 R-6 FEDERAL, STATE HOUSING DISTRICT.
   Federal, state or county housing projects meeting state and federal
standards shall be permitted in the R-6 Federal, State Housing District. The
housing project must be approved and sponsored by the state, federal or county
housing authority.
('71 Code, § 11-10-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 1596, passed 2-23-
70)
§ 155.066 B-1 BUSINESS DISTRICT, LIMITED RETAIL.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Dwelling units, provided they are located above the first floor and
above a permitted business use. Dwelling units shall not be permitted on the
ground floor of business buildings or in the rear of business establishments on
the ground floor.
      (2)   Art and school supply store.
      (3)   Auto accessory store, where there is no driveway entrance across
the sidewalk into the main building.
      (4)   Bakery shop, including the baking and processing of food products,
when prepared for retail use on the premises only.
      (5)   Banks and financial institutions.
      (6)   Barber shop, beauty parlor, chiropody, massage or similar personal
service shop.
      (7)   Book and stationery stores.
      (8)   Candy and ice cream shops.
      (9)   Camera and photographic supply shops for retail sale.
      (10)    Coin and philatelic stores.
      (11)    Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair when
conducted for retail sales on the premises only.
      (12)    Currency exchanges.
      (13)    Department stores.
      (14)    Drug stores.
      (15)    Dry-cleaning and pressing establishments, when employing
facilities for the cleaning and pressing of not more than 1,500 pounds of dry
goods per day and when using perchlorethylene or other noninflammable, nontoxic
solvents approved by the Fire Department.
      (16)    Dry-goods stores.
      (17)    Electrical appliance store and repair, but not including
appliance assembly or manufacturing.
      (18)    Florist shop and conservatory for retail trade on the premises
only.
      (19)    Food and fruit stores.
      (20)    Frozen food stores.
      (21)    Furniture store, and upholstery when conducted as part of the
retail operations and secondary to the main use.
      (22)    Furrier, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only.
      (23)    Garden supplies and seed stores.
      (24)    Gift shops.
      (25)    Hardware stores.
      (26)    Haberdashery.
      (27)    Hobby stores.
      (28)    Household appliance store.
      (29)    Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of
draperies, slip covers, and other similar articles, when conducted as part of
the retail operations and secondary to the main use.
      (30)    Jewelry store and watch repair.
      (31)    Launderette and laundromat.
      (32)    Leather goods and luggage store.
      (33)    Liquor store, package goods only.
      (34)    Loan offices.
      (35)    Meat markets.
      (36)    Musical instrument sales and repair, retail trade only.
      (37)    News stand.
      (38)    Notions store.
      (39)    Offices, business and professional, including medical clinics.
      (40)    Optician, optometrist.
      (41)    Paint and wallpaper store.
      (41a)    Pet shops, but not including animal hospitals.
      (42)    Photography studio including the developing of film and pictures
when conducted as a part of the retail business on the premises.
      (43)    Plumbing showroom, without shop or repair facilities.
      (44)    Postal substations, (finance stations and contract stations).
      (45)    Public utility collection offices.
      (46)    Restaurants, tea rooms and cafes, including drive through service
windows for same, when the establishment is not of the drive-in type where food
is served to occupants remaining in motor vehicles for consumption on the
premises.
      (47)    Savings and loan associations.
      (48)    Sewing machine sales and service.
      (49)    Shoe store.
      (50)    Signs, as defined and regulated by §§
155.140 through
155.145.
      (51)    Sporting goods store.
      (52)    Stationery store.
      (53)    Telegraph office.
      (54)    Tobacco shop.
      (55)    Toy Store.
      (56)    Travel bureau and transportation ticket office.
      (57)    Typewriter and adding machine sales and service.
      (58)    Variety store.
      (59)    Wearing apparel shop.
      (60)    Taxicab terminal, service office or station.
      (61)    Art galleries and studios.
      (62)    Antique shops.
      (63)    Bicycle sales and repair.
      (64)    Costume rental shop.
      (65)    Locksmith.
      (66)    Mirror and glazing shop.
      (67)    Orthopedic and medical appliance store.
      (68)    Picture framing for retail trade only.
      (69)    Physical culture and health services.
      (70)    Schools: music, dance, business, commercial, or trade.
      (71)    Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
      (72)    Theater, indoor.
      (73)    Blueprinting and photostating shops.
      (74)    Catering establishments.
      (75)    Glass cutting and glazing establishments.
      (76)    Parcel delivery stations.
      (77)    Any other similar type retail store not specifically listed
herein, and which has economic compatibility with the established uses on
adjoining property.
      (78)    Any use permitted in §
155.067 B-2 Business District may also be permitted in this District provided
it is located above the first floor or in the basement.
      (79)    All activities, except for automobile off-street parking
facilities as permitted or required in this B-1 District shall be conducted
wholly in an enclosed building.
      (80)   Planned developments, as defined in §
155.003.
      (81)   EVCS, electric vehicle charging station. An EVCS may be permitted
as an accessory use within any existing legal commercial parking space in a
parking lot, subject to all applicable city code requirements and the
following. EVCS for public use shall be subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   The EVCS’ shall be located in a manner that will be easily seen
by the public for informational and security purposes and shall be illuminated
during evening business hours.
         (b)   Be located in desirable and convenient parking locations that
will serve as an incentive for the use of electric vehicles.
         (c)   The EVCS pedestals shall be protected as necessary to prevent
damage by automobiles.
         (d)   The EVCS pedestals shall be designed to minimize potential
damage by vandalism and to be safe for use in inclement weather.
         (e)   Complete instructions and appropriate warnings concerning the
use of the EVCS shall be posted on a sign in a prominent location on each
station for use by the operator.
         (f)   One standard non-illuminated sign, not to exceed four square
feet in area and ten feet in height, may be posted for the purpose of
identifying the location of each cluster of EVCS’.
         (g)   The EVCS may be on a timer that limits the use of the station to
the normal business hours of the use(s) that it serves to preclude unauthorized
use after business hours.
('71 Code, § 11-11-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 5-29-
79; Am. Ord. 2091, passed 11-12-79; Am. Ord. 2661, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord.
2970, passed 5-8-95; Am. Ord. 3046, passed 4-8-96; Am. Ord. 3070, passed 7-22-
96; Am. Ord. 4052, passed 5-10-21; Am. Ord. 4067, passed 8-9-21; Am. Ord. 4201,
passed 9-9-24; Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
per the provisions of §§
155.155 through
155.157.
      (1)   Auditorium, stadium, arena, armory, gymnasium and other similar
places of public events.
      (2)   Clubs and lodges (nonprofit), fraternal or religious institutions.
      (3)   Meeting halls.
      (4)   Radio and television broadcasting stations.
      (5)   Telephone exchanges and offices, antenna towers and other outdoor
equipment essential to the operation of the exchange in the public convenience
and necessity.
      (6)   Electric substations.
      (7)   Municipal police or fire stations and public libraries.
      (8)   Planned business developments, as defined in §
155.003.
      (9)   Undertaking establishments.
      (10)    Multiple-family dwellings and apartments; boarding and lodging
houses.
      (11)    Recreation places, including bowling alley, dance hall,
gymnasium, skating rink, archery range, golf practicing, miniature golf course
or other similar place of amusement or entertainment when operated for
pecuniary profit.
      (12)    Any use, otherwise permitted in this district, that requires a
liquor license for lawful operations, per
Chapter 111 Alcoholic Liquor, of the City Code.
      (13)    Hospital, skilled nursing facility, nursing home, or intermediate
care facility.
      (14)    Independent or semi-independent elderly congregate housing.
      (15)    Sheltered care or board and care facility for six or more
patients.
      (16)   Any use permitted as a special use in an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-
5 Residential Zoning District.
      (17)    Beer garden/outdoor eating area.
      (18)    EVCS’ may be allowed on a public right-of-way in the downtown
area bound by the railroad tracks on the north, Burr Boulevard on the east,
Central Boulevard on the south and Park Street on the west and shall be placed
within two feet of the front edge of the parking location it is intended to
service. The EVCS shall not interfere with the required sidewalk dimensions
required by current ADA regulations. EVCS’ installed on a public right-of-way
shall require a revenue sharing agreement with the city as written and approved
by the City Council. EVCS shall comply with all requirements of those EVCS on
private property as noted above under permitted uses.
('71 Code, § 11-11-12) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2420, passed 3-26-
84; Am. Ord. 2457, passed 8-27-84; Am. Ord. 3046, passed 4-8-96; Am. Ord. 3165,
passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 3292, passed 2-26-01; Am. Ord. 3327, passed 10-9-01;
Am. Ord. 3936, passed 7-9-18; Am. Ord. 4201, passed 9-9-24)
   (C)   Height of buildings. No building or structure shall be erected or
structurally altered to exceed a height of three stories, nor shall it exceed
35 feet in height, except in the area of the Central Business District
described in §
155.121(B)(4). Parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads,
stacks and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected over and above the
maximum height of 35 feet, provided they are constructed per all other
provisions of this code.
('71 Code, § 11-11-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
   (D)   Yard areas. No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building:
      (1)   Front yard.
         (a)   No front yard shall be required when all frontage between two
intersecting streets lies within this District. However, when lots within this
District are adjacent to and adjoining lots in an R district, all of which
front upon the same street between two intersecting streets, there shall be
established the same front yard setback for all of the frontage as has been
established in the R district.
         (b)   Exception. When existing buildings located in this District have
already established a building line at the street line at a depth less than
required above, then all new buildings may conform to the same building line,
except for the first 50 feet of the B-1 District frontage adjacent to the R
district, whereupon there shall be provided a front setback of not less than
ten feet.
      (2)   Side yard. No side yard is required, except for a corner lot which
abuts upon an R district, or upon an alley separating this District from an R
district. There shall then be provided a side yard equal to ½ the front yard
required in the abutting R district, but in no case more than ten feet. The
setback shall also apply if the business building fronts the intersecting
street, commonly referred to as the side street.
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet;
provided, however, a one story accessory building may be located thereon,
except for the five feet adjacent and parallel to the rear lot line or alley
line for the storage of motor vehicles and the unloading and loading of
vehicles under roof, as provided in §§
155.120 through
155.126.
      (4)   Privacy screening with uniform eight-foot height must be provided
when business abuts a residential district and shall comply with the
regulations set forth in
Chapter 158 .
('71 Code, § 11-11-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2196, passed 6-8-81;
Am. Ord. 2661, passed 2-80-88; Am. Ord. 2820, passed 3-8-93; Am. Ord. 3875,
passed 3-27-17) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.067 B-2 BUSINESS DISTRICT, GENERAL RETAIL.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any permitted use as set forth in §
155.060 B-1 District.
      (2)   Dwelling units, provided they are located above the first floor and
above a permitted business use. Dwelling units shall not be permitted on the
ground floor of business buildings or in the rear of business establishments on
the ground floor.
      (3)   Automobile service stations.
      (4)   Billiard and pool rooms.
      (5)   Clubs and fraternal organizations.
      (6)    Hand laundries employing not more than four persons.
      (7)    Hotels, including dining and meeting rooms.
      (8)    Pawn shop.
      (9)    Signs, as defined and regulated by §§
155.140 through
155.145.
      (10)    Taverns.
      (11)    Taxidermist.
      (12)    Undertaking establishments.
      (13)    Any other similar type retail store not specifically permitted
herein and which has economic compatibility with the established uses on
adjoining properties.
      (14)    All activities, except for automobile off-street parking
facilities, as permitted or required its this B-2 District shall be conducted
wholly within an enclosed building.
('71 Code, § 11-12-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2661, passed 2-8-88;
Am. Ord. 2970, passed 5-8-95; Am. Ord. 3046, passed 4- 8-96; Am. Ord. 3070,
passed 7-22-96; Am. Ord. 4053, passed 5-10-21)
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
per the provisions of §§
155.155 through
155.157.
      (1)   Any use which may be allowed as a special use in §
155.066 B-1 Limited Business District.
      (2)   Planned business developments, as defined in §
155.003.
      (3)   Public utilities and public service uses, including:
         (a)   Electric substations.
         (b)   Fire stations.
         (c)   Police stations.
         (d)   Public libraries.
         (e)   Telephone exchanges.
         (f)   Water pumping stations.
         (g)   Water reservoir.
         (h)   Other similar uses.
      (4)   Consumer metals recycling facility as stipulated in §
155.118 .
('71 Code, § 11-12-2) (Am. Ord. 3607, passed 5-11-09)
   (C)   Height of buildings. Same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in §
155.066 B-1 Business District, Limited Retail.
('71 Code, § 11-12-3)
(Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
   (D)   Yard areas. No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building:
      (1)   Front yard.
         (a)   No front yard shall be required when all frontage between two
intersecting streets lies within this District. However, when lots within this
District are adjacent to and adjoining lots in an R district, on all
intersecting streets there shall be established the same front yard setback for
all of the frontage as has been established in the R district.
         (b)   Exception. When existing buildings located in this District have
already established a building line at the street line or at a lesser depth
than required above, then all new buildings may conform to the same building
line, except for the 50 feet of B-2 District frontage adjacent to the R
district whereupon there shall be provided a front setback of not less than ten
feet.
      (2)   Side yard. No side yard is required except for a corner lot which
abuts upon an R district or upon an alley separating this District from an R
district. There shall then be provided a side yard equal to ½ the front yard
required in the abutting R district, but in no case more than ten feet. The
same setback shall apply also if business buildings front the intersecting
street, commonly referred to as the side street.
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet;
however, that a one-story accessory building may be located thereon, except for
the ten feet adjacent and parallel to the rear lot line or alley line, for the
storage of motor vehicles and the unloading and the loading of vehicles under
roof as provided in §§
155.120 through
155.126.
      (4)   Screening. The same screening regulations shall apply as required
or permitted in §
155.066 B-1 District.
('71 Code, § 11-12-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2661, passed 2-8-88)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.068 B-3 BUSINESS AND WHOLESALE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any permitted use in §
155.067 B-2 District.
      (2)   Air conditioning and heating sales and service.
      (3)   Automobile and truck (under 1½ ton capacity) minor repair and
service shop, but not including body repair and rebuilding, or painting.
      (4)   New consumer motor vehicle sales and service shop, but not
including automobile body repair and rebuilding, or painting of automobiles.
Used consumer motor vehicle sales permitted only as an incidental use to new
consumer motor vehicle sales or as permitted by a special use permit.
      (5)   Automobile washing, including the use of mechanical conveyors,
blowers, steam-cleaning.
      (6)   Battery and tire service stations.
      (7)   Beverage, nonalcoholic, bottling and distributing.
      (8)   Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair.
      (9)    Boat showroom.
      (10)    Building materials sales, when conducted wholly within a
building.
      (11)    Book binding.
      (12)    Contractor's offices and shops, where no fabricating is done on
the premises and where all storage of material is within a building.
      (13)    Exterminating shop.
      (14)    Feed and seed store, wholesale.
      (15)    Greenhouses, wholesale growers.
      (16)    Household appliance repair shop.
      (17)    Laboratories, commercial (medical, dental, research, experimental
and testing), provided no production or manufacturing of products takes place.
      (18)    Motels.
      (19)    Plumbing, heating and roofing supply shops.
      (20)    Printing, publishing and issuing of newspapers, periodicals,
books, stationery and other reading matter.
      (21)    Pet shop, kennel or animal hospital when conducted wholly within
an enclosed building.
      (22)    Plumbing shop.
      (23)    Photograph developing and processing.
      (24)    Radio and television broadcasting stations.
      (25)    Signs, as defined and regulated by §§
155.140 through
155.145.
      (26)    Silver plating and repair shop.
      (27)    Storage warehouse. However, the following items are excluded from
being stored in this permitted use: flammable, explosive, noxious, toxic or
ecologically harmful materials, which include, but are not limited to naphtha,
benzene, benzole, gasoline, varnish or any product in whole or in part either
gunpowder, ammunition, ordnance, fireworks, nitro-glycerin, phosphorus,
saltpeter, nitrate of soda, camphene, kerosene, or other petroleum based
materials. This permitted use does not allow any type of maintenance or repairs
to be conduct within the storage warehouse.
      (28)    Uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses and
accessory buildings when located on the same premises.
      (29)   Utility trailer sales.
      (30)   Wholesale business.
('71 Code, § 11-13-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2171, passed 1-26-
81; Am. Ord. 2661, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 2799, passed 10-26-92; Am. Ord.
3070, passed 7-22-96; Am. Ord. 3883, passed 5-22-17; Am. Ord. 3933, passed 6-
25-18)
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
per the provisions of §§
155.155 through
155.157.
      (1)   Any use which may be allowed as a special use in §
155.067 B-2 General Business District.
      (2)   Planned business developments as defined in §
155.003.
      (3)   Processing or assembly limited to the following, provided that
space occupied in a building does not exceed 6,000 square feet of total floor
space and basement space, not including stairwells, or elevator shafts; and
provided such processing or assembly can be conducted without noise, vibration,
odor, dust or any other condition which might be disturbing to occupants of
adjacent buildings. When manufacturing operations of the same or similar
products demand space exceeding 6,000 square feet, they shall be located in the
M-1 Manufacturing District.
      (4)   Recreation places, including bowling alley, dance hall, gymnasium,
skating rink, archery range, golf practicing range, miniature golf course or
other similar places of amusement or entertainment when operated for pecuniary
profit.
      (5)   Restaurants and drive-ins when the establishment is of the type
where food is served to occupants remaining in motor vehicles for consumption
on the premises, except drive through service windows.
      (6)   Used consumer motor vehicle sales (such as a used car lot) on an
open lot or within a building.
      (7)   Cannabis dispensary. Cannabis dispensaries shall not be located
within 250 feet of the property line of a school, park or any other use deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission and City Council. The hours of operation
shall be determined as a part of the conditions under which the special use is
granted. The consumption of all cannabis and cannabis infused products, on the
dispensary site, shall be prohibited. Dispensaries shall comply with all other
city and state laws.
      (8)   Automobile, truck, utility trailer, tractor, or bus storage yard,
operable vehicles only.
      (9)    Indoor shooting range.
('71 Code, § 11-13-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2661, passed 2-8-88;
Am. Ord. 3933, passed 6-25-18; Am. Ord. 3990, passed 12-19-19; Am. Ord. 4014,
passed 7-27-20; Am. Ord. 4035, passed 11-30-20; Am. Ord. 4145, passed 8-14-23)
   (C)   Height of buildings. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in §
155.066 B-1 Business District.
   (D)   Yard areas. No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building:
      (1)   Front yard.
         (a)    No front yard shall be required when all frontage between two
intersecting streets lies within this District. However, when lots within this
District are adjacent to and adjoining lots in an R District, all of which
front upon the same street between two intersecting streets, there shall be
established the same front yard setback for all of the frontage as has been
established in the R district.
         (b)    Exception. When existing buildings located in this District
have already established a building line at the street line or at a lesser
depth than required above, then all new buildings may conform to the same
building line, except for the 50 feet of B-3 District frontage adjacent to the
R district whereupon there shall be provided a front setback of not less than
ten feet.
      (2)   Side yard. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in §
155.066 B-1 Business District, Limited Retail.
      (3)   Rear yard. The same rear yard regulations shall apply as required
or permitted in §
155.066 B-1 Business District, Limited Retail.
      (4)   The same screening regulations shall apply as required or permitted
in §
155.066 B-1 District.
('71 Code, § 11-13-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2661, passed 2-8-88)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.069 B-4 BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any permitted use in §
155.068 B-3 District.
      (2)   Agricultural implement sales and services, on an open lot or within
an enclosed building.
      (3)   Automobile and truck body repair, rebuilding and painting.
      (4)   Garages, public, for storage of private passenger vehicles under 1½
ton capacity.
      (5)   Public auction rooms.
      (6)   Restaurants and drive-ins when the establishment is of the type
where food is served to occupants remaining in motor vehicles for consumption
on the premises, except drive through service windows.
      (7)   Riding academies.
      (8)   Sheet metal shop, provided floor area occupied does not exceed
6,000 square feet.
      (9)   Trailer sales or rental (house trailers or mobile homes) on an open
lot or within a building.
('71 Code, § 11-13A-1) (Am. Ord. 2799, passed 10-26-92; Am. Ord. 3046, passed
4-8-96; Am. Ord. 4054, passed 5-10-21)
      (10)   Minor processing or assembly of previously prepared sub-components
into a finished product, limited to the following; provided that space occupied
in a building does not exceed 6,000 square feet of total floor space and
basement space, not including stairwells, or elevator shafts; and provided such
processing or assembly shall occur in a wholly enclosed building; and provided
no noise, vibration, smoke, odors, fumes or other nuisance conditions arising
from the operations are observable at the boundary of the property. When
processing or assembly operations of the same or similar products demand space
exceeding 6,000 square feet, they shall be located in a manufacturing district.
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
per §§
155.155 through
155.157.
      (1)   Machine shops and metal products manufacture, when not equipped
with heavy (exceeding 50-ton pressure) punch presses, drop forges, riveting and
grinding machines, or other equipment which may create noise, vibration, smoke
or odors, heat, glare or fire hazards, exceeding the performance standards made
a part of §
155.070(A).
      (2)   Tool and die shops.
      (3)   Welding shops.
      (4)   Automobile, truck, utility trailer, tractor, or bus storage yard,
operable vehicles only.
      (5)   Any use which may be allowed as a special use in §
155.068 B-3 Business and Wholesale District.
('71 Code, § 11-13A-2)
   (C)   Height of buildings. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in §
155.068 B-3 Business District.
('71 Code, § 11-13A-3)
   (D)   Yard areas. The same regulations shall apply as required or permitted
in §
155.068 B-3 Business District.
('71 Code, § 11-13A-4)
   (E)   Screening. The same screening regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in §
155.066 B-1 District.
('71 Code, § 11-13A-5)
(Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2661, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 3046, passed
4-8-96; Am. Ord. 3424, passed 1-26-04; Am. Ord. 3883, passed 5-22-17) Penalty,
see §
155.999
§ 155.070 M-1 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT, LIMITED.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Since most uses permitted in this District will be in
proximity to residential districts, it is hereby declared that performance
standards shall be high, and that all manufacturing, processing, or assembly of
materials and products must be carried on in a manner not injurious or
offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission of
odors, fumes, of gases, dust, smoke, noise, vibrations or fire hazards.
Therefore, the following uses may be permitted provided there is compliance
with the performance standards established herein:
      (1)   Any use permitted in a B district, but not including residences or
apartment, except such dwelling accommodations as may be needed to house a
caretaker or watchman employed on the premises, and their families.
      (2)   Artificial limb manufacture.
      (3)   Automobile painting, upholstering, repairing, reconditioning and
body and fender repairing when done within the confines of a structure.
      (4)   Apparel and other products manufactured from textiles.
      (5)   Batteries, manufacture and rebuilding.
      (6)   Bedspring and mattress manufacture.
      (7)   Belting.
      (8)   Bicycle manufacture.
      (9)   Brooms and brushes.
      (10)    Boat building and repair.
      (11)    Building equipment, building materials, lumber, coal, sand, and
gravel yards, and yards for contracting equipment, maintenance or operating
equipment of public agencies, or public utilities, or materials or equipment of
similar nature.
      (12)    Bus lines shops and garages.
      (13)    Canning and preserving.
      (14)    Canvas and canvas products.
      (15)    Carpet and rug cleaning.
      (16)    Carpet manufacturing.
      (17)    Carting, express hauling or storage yards (delivery to within 15
mile radius only).
      (18)    Cement block manufacture.
      (19)    Ceramic products, pottery, and glazed tile.
      (20)    Chick hatcheries.
      (21)    Cleaning and dyeing establishments when employing facilities for
handling more than 1,000 pounds of dry goods per day.
      (22)    Cigarettes and cigars.
      (23)    Coated fabrics, except rubberized.
      (23A)   Consumer metals recycling facility as stipulated in §
155.118 .
      (24)    Cork and cork products.
      (25)    Creameries and dairies.
      (26)    Drapery and bedding manufacture.
      (27)    Drugs and pharmaceutical products.
      (28)    Electric motors and generators.
      (29)    Engraving.
      (30)    Felt manufacture.
      (31)    Fur goods, not including tanning or dyeing.
      (32)    Glass products, from previously manufactured glass.
      (33)    Heating appliances and sheet metal products, including stoves and
ranges.
      (34)    Hosiery manufacture.
      (35)    Ice cream and ice manufacture.
      (36)    Laundries, more than 1,000 pounds daily capacity.
      (37)    Machine shops and metal products manufacture, when not equipped
with heavy (exceeding 50 ton pressure) punch presses, drop forges, riveting and
grinding machines, or other equipment which may create noise, vibration, smoke,
or odors, heat, glare, or fire hazards, exceeding the performance standards
made a part of this chapter.
      (38)    Metal polishing and plating.
      (39)    Musical instruments.
      (40)    Pianos and organs.
      (41)    Perfumes and cosmetics.
      (42)    Plastic products, but not including the processing of the raw
materials.
      (43)    Public utility electric substations and distribution centers, gas
regulation centers and underground gas holder stations.
      (44)    Rubber products (small) such as washers, gloves, footwear and
bathing caps, but excluding rubber and synthetic rubber processing.
      (45)    Shoes and boots.
      (46)    Signs, as defined and regulated by this chapter.
      (47)    Storage of household goods.
      (48)    Storage and sale of trailers, farm implements and other similar
products on an open lot.
      (49)    Sporting and athletic equipment.
      (50)    Storage of flammable liquids, fats or oils in tanks, each of
50,000 gallons or less capacity, but only after the location and protective
measures have been approved by local governing authorities.
      (51)    Stone, marble, and granite grinding and cutting.
      (52)    Storage warehouse (excluding the storage of flammable, explosive,
noxious, toxic or ecologically harmful materials including but not limited to
naptha, benzine, benzole, gasoline, benzine varnish, or any product in whole or
in part of either, gunpowder, ammunition, ordnance, fireworks, nitro-
glycerine, phosphorus, saltpetre, nitrate of soda, camphene, kerosene or other
petroleum base materials.
      (53)    Textiles, spinning, weaving, dyeing and printing.
      (54)    Tools and hardware, such as hand tools, bolts, nuts, screws,
cutlery, house hardware, locks and plumbing appliances.
      (55)    Tool and die shops.
      (56)    Toys and children's vehicles.
      (57)    Wire brush manufacture.
      (58)    Any other manufacturing establishment that can be operated in
compliance with the requirements of this division, without creating objectional
noise, odors, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, or vapor and that is a use compatible
with the use and occupancy of adjoining properties.
      (59)   Planned developments, as defined in §
155.003.
('71 Code, § 11-14-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2171, passed 1-26-
81; Am. Ord. 2661, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 3607, passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. 4067,
passed 8-9-21)
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
per the provisions of §
155.155 through
155.157.
      (1)   Any permitted or special use which may be allowed in the B-1, B-2,
B-3 or B-4 Business Districts, but not including the following: churches;
religious institutions; schools, elementary, high or college, public or
private; day care centers or nursery schools (except those accessory to a
manufacturing use; cemeteries or mausoleums; golf courses, public or private;
hospitals, public or private; institutions or hospitals for the care of the
insane or feeble minded, public or private; public or private park or
playground (except those accessory to a manufacturing use); skilled nursing
unit; multiple-family dwelling, apartment, boarding and lodging house; elderly
congregate housing, independent and semi- independent; rest homes and nursing
homes; sheltered care or board and care facilities.
      (2)   Planned developments, industrial.
      (3)   Airport and aircraft landing fields.
      (4)   Stadiums, auditoriums, and arenas.
      (5)   Outdoor theaters.
      (6)   Public or privately owned and operated fairgrounds, permanent
carnivals “kiddie parks” or other similar amusement centers.
      (7)   Junkyards.
      (8)   Welding shops.
      (9)   Automobile, truck, trailer, tractor or bus storage yard, operable
vehicles only.
      (10)    Truck terminal.
      (11)   Cannabis infuser. Cannabis infusers shall not be located within
1,000 feet of the property line of a school, park or any other use deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission and City Council. The hours of operation
shall be determined as a part of the conditions under which the special use is
granted. The consumption of all cannabis and cannabis infused products, on the
infuser site, shall be prohibited. Infusers shall comply with all other city
and state laws.
      (12)   Cannabis transporter. Cannabis transporters shall not be located
within 1,000 feet of the property line of a school, park or any other use
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and City Council. The hours of
operation shall be determined as a part of the conditions under which the
special use is granted. The consumption of all cannabis and cannabis infused
products, on the transporter site, shall be prohibited. Transporters shall
comply with all other city and state laws.
      (13)   Cannabis cultivation center. Cannabis cultivation centers shall
not be located within 750 feet of the property line of a school, church,
licensed daycare center, nursery school, park, sheltered care or board and care
facility, penal or correctional institutions, hospitals or sanitariums, public
or private, municipal or privately owned recreation building, or any other use
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and City Council. The hours of
operation shall be determined as a part of the conditions under which the
special use is granted. The consumption of all cannabis and cannabis infused
products, on the cannabis cultavation center site, shall be prohibited.
Cannabis cultavation centers shall comply with all other city and state laws.
      (14)   Cannabis craft grower. Cannabis craft growers shall not be located
within 750 feet of the property line of a school, church, licensed daycare
center, nursery school, park, sheltered care or board and care facility, penal
or correctional institutions, hospitals or sanitariums, public or private,
municipal or privately owned recreation building, or any other use deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission and City Council. The hours of operation
shall be determined as a part of the conditions under which the special use is
granted. The consumption of all cannabis and cannabis infused products, on the
cannabis craft grower site, shall be prohibited. Cannabis craft growers shall
comply with all other city and state laws.
('71 Code, § 11-14-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2057, passed 6-11-
79; Am. Ord. 2273, passed 4-26-82; Am. Ord. 2661, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 3292,
passed 2-26-01; Am. Ord. 3381, passed 3-10-03; Am. Ord. 3991, passed 12-19-19;
Am. Ord. 3992, passed 12-19-19; Am. Ord. 4066, passed 8-9-21)
   (C)   Height of buildings. No building or structure shall be erected or
structurally altered to exceed a height of three stories nor shall it exceed 45
feet in height, except as provided in §§
155.035 through
155.048.
('71 Code, § 11-14-3)
   (D)   Yard areas. The maximum ground area occupied by all buildings shall be
not more than 60% of the area of the lot or tract on which a building permit
has been issued.
      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 25 feet wherein there shall be no structure of any kind, open storage of
materials or equipment, or the parking of vehicles.
      (2)   Side yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of not less than 15
feet on both sides of the building or buildings, but where the property is
adjacent to an R district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet
on the side nearest to residential lots. The parking of private automobiles may
be permitted within the side yard areas, but not closer than five feet to any
lot zoned for residential use.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard is not required except where a lot abuts
upon an R district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than
30 feet, and no storage of materials or equipment, or the parking of
automobiles shall take place within the ten feet closest to any residential lot
or lots.
('71 Code, § 11-14-4)
   (E)   Performance standards. The following requirements shall apply:
      (1)   Noise.
         (a)    The sound pressure level, to be measured as described below,
shall not exceed the following decibel levels in the designated octave bands
when adjacent to the designated types of use districts:
Sound Level in Decibels
Octave Band, Cycles per All Residential Districts B-1, B-2, B-3 Districts
Second
Sound Level in Decibels
Octave Band, Cycles per All Residential Districts B-1, B-2, B-3 Districts
Second
37.5 to 75              58                        73
75 to 150               54                        69
150 to 300              50                        65
300 to 600              46                        61
600 to 1200             40                        55
1200 to 2400            33                        48
2400 to 4800            26                        41
Over 4800               20                        35
 
         (b)    Objectionable sounds of an intermitted nature which are not
easily measured shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent
uses.
         (c)    Method of measurement. Measurement is to be made at the nearest
boundary of the nearest residential area or at any other point along the
boundary where the level is higher. The sound levels shall be measured with a
sound level meter and associated octave band filter as prescribed by the
American Standards Association.
      (2)   Smoke and particulate matter. The emission of smoke or dusts by
manufacturing plants in an amount sufficient to create a general nuisance to
adjoining properties shall be prohibited. Total emission of smoke and
particulate matter shall be limited to the following:
         (a)    Ringelmann requirements. All smoke and the emission of all
other particulate matter in quantities sufficient to produce an opacity at any
point greater than Ringelmann 3 is prohibited. The only exception shall be a
plume consisting entirely of condensed steam. A Ringelmann 1 unit is defined as
20% density for one minute. No more than 15 units of Ringelmann smoke shall be
permitted per hour and no smoke more intense than Ringelmann 2 except that
during one hour of a 24-hour day, 30 units of smoke may be emitted but with no
smoke more intense than Ringelmann 3.
         (b)    The total quantity of emitted solids shall not exceed one pound
per hour, per acre of lot area.
      (3)   Odors. No odor shall be emitted by any use permitted in this
District in such quantities as to be readily detectable by an average observer
at any point on the boundary line of the premises or beyond.
      (4)   Noxious gases. Processes and operations of permitted unescapable of
dispersing gases or toxic particulate into the atmosphere must be hooded or
otherwise suitably enclosed. The emission of such toxic gases or particulate
matter shall be from a stack.
      (5)   Glare and heat. Operations producing intense light or heat shall be
performed within an enclosed building and not be visible beyond any lot line
bounding the property whereon the use is conducted.
      (6)   Vibrations. There shall be no uses which create heavy, earth-
shaking vibrations which are noticeable at the property line of the subject
premises.
('71 Code, § 11-14-5)
   (F)   Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall comply with the regulations
set forth in
Chapter 158 .
(Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.071 M-2 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT, GENERAL.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The uses permitted in this District generally include
those manufacturing and industrial activities which cannot be operated
economically without creating some conditions which may be objectionable or
obnoxious to the occupants of adjoining properties and for that reason, must be
grouped in areas where similar industrial uses are now located or where the
permitted uses will be best located per the comprehensive land use plan of the
city, which is designed to protect the welfare of the community:
      (1)   Any use permitted in §
155.070 Limited Manufacturing M-1 District.
      (2)   Aircraft, assembly and testing of fuselage and motors.
      (3)   Automobiles, truck and trailers manufacture.
      (4)   Blacksmith shop.
      (5)   Box and crate manufacture.
      (6)   Brass foundry.
      (7)   Brick, tile, and terra cotta manufacture.
      (8)   Building materials; such as prefabricated houses, composition
wallboards, partitions and panels.
      (9)   Cement products.
      (10)    Chemicals, not including those which may be inflammable or
explosive.
      (11)    Coffin manufacture.
      (11A)   Consumer metals recycling facility as stipulated in §
155.118 .
      (12)    Cooperage works.
      (13)    Corrugated metal products.
      (14)    Dyes, aniline, ink pigments, and others.
      (15)    Feed milling and processing.
      (16)    Grain elevators.
      (17)    Glass blowing and manufacture.
      (18)    Graphite and graphite products.
      (19)    Hemp products.
      (20)    Ink from primary raw materials, including colors and pigment.
      (21)    Linoleum.
      (22)    Lumber, preserving treatment, processing, sawmills and planing
mills.
      (23)    Metal stamping and extrusion of metal products.
      (24)    Metal foundries and casting.
      (25)    Machinery, heavy manufacturing and repair; including electrical,
construction, mining and agriculture.
      (26)    Meat and fish products, packing and processing of, but not
including slaughtering and glue and size manufacturing.
      (27)    Motor freight terminal.
      (28)    Motor testing of internal combustion motors.
      (29)    Porcelain products; such as bathroom and kitchen equipment.
      (30)    Railroad equipment; such as railroad car and locomotive
manufacture.
      (31)    Rubber products, including tires and tubes and tire recapping.
      (32)    Wax products, manufacture from paraffin.
      (33)    Wool scouring and pulling.
      (34)    Welding shops.
('71 Code, § 11-15-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2051, passed 5-29-
79; Am. Ord. 3607, passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. 3883, passed 5-22-17)
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
per the provisions of §§
155.155 through
155.157.
      (1)   Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the M-
1 Manufacturing District unless already permitted under division (A) of this
section.
      (2)   Areas for the dumping or disposal of garbage, refuse or trash
provided the sanitary land fill method is used.
      (3)   Extraction of gravel, sand or other raw material.
('71 Code, § 11-15-2)
      (4)   Adult Business as described in §§
155.110 through
155.115 Adult Use Regulations.
(Ord. 3142, passed 1-26-98)
      (5)   Cannabis infuser. Cannabis infusers shall not be located within
1,000 feet of the property line of a school, park or any other use deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission and City Council. The hours of operation
shall be determined as a part of the conditions under which the special use is
granted. The consumption of all cannabis and cannabis infused products, on the
infuser site, shall be prohibited. Infusers shall comply with all other city
and state laws. (Ord. 3991, passed 12-19-19)
      (6)   Cannabis transporter. Cannabis transporters shall not be located
within 1,000 feet of the property line of a school, park or any other use
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and City Council. The hours of
operation shall be determined as a part of the conditions under which the
special use is granted. The consumption of all cannabis and cannabis infused
products, on the transporter site, shall be prohibited. Transporters shall
comply with all other city and state laws. (Ord. 3992, passed 12-19-19)
      (7)   Cannabis cultivation center. Cannabis cultivation centers shall not
be located within 750 feet of the property line of a school, church, licensed
daycare center, nursery school, park, sheltered care or board and care
facility, penal or correctional institutions, hospitals or sanitariums, public
or private, municipal or privately owned recreation building, or any other use
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and City Council. The hours of
operation shall be determined as a part of the conditions under which the
special use is granted. The consumption of all cannabis and cannabis infused
products, on the cannabis cultivation center site, shall be prohibited.
Cannabis cultivation centers shall comply with all other city and state laws.
(Ord. 4066, passed 8-9-21)
      (8)   Cannabis craft grower. Cannabis craft growers shall not be located
within 750 feet of the property line of a school, church, licensed daycare
center, nursery school, park, sheltered care or board and care facility, penal
or correctional institutions, hospitals or sanitariums, public or private,
municipal or privately owned recreation building, or any other use deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission and City Council. The hours of operation
shall be determined as a part of the conditions under which the special use is
granted. The consumption of all cannabis and cannabis infused products, on the
cannabis craft grower site, shall be prohibited. Cannabis craft growers shall
comply with all other city and state laws. (Ord. 4066, passed 8-9-21)
   (C)   Height of buildings. No building or structure shall hereafter be
erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of four stories or 60 feet,
except as provided in §§
155.035 through
155.048.
('71 Code, § 11-15-3)
   (D)   Yard areas.
      (1)   Front yard. No front yard shall be required when all of the
frontage on one side of the street between intersecting streets, a public area
or a railroad right-of-way is located in an M-2 Manufacturing District. Where
the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is
located partially in an M-2 District and partially in some other use district,
the front yard requirements of the other use district shall apply to the M-
2 District.
      (2)   Side yard. Same regulations shall apply as required or permitted in
§
155.070 M-1 Manufacturing District.
      (3)   Rear yard. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in §
155.070 M-1 Manufacturing District.
('71 Code, § 11-15-4)
   (E)   Performance standards: The following requirements shall apply:
      (1)   Noise. The sound pressure levels shall be the same as those
permitted in §
155.070 M-1 Manufacturing District.
      (2)   Smoke and particulate matter. The emission of smoke or dusts in an
amount sufficient to create a general nuisance to occupants of adjoining
properties or to the general area wherein the use is located shall be
prohibited.
      (3)   Odors. No odors shall be emitted by any use permitted in this
District in such quantities as to be readily detectable by an average observer
at any point on the boundary line of the nearest residential or business
district.
      (4)   Noxious gases. Processes and operations of permitted uses capable
of dispersing gases or toxic particulate into the atmosphere must be hooded or
otherwise suitably enclosed. The emission of such toxic gases or particulate
matters shall be from a stack not less than 25 feet in height.
      (5)   Glare and heat. Operations producing intense light or heat, when
adjacent to a residential or business district, shall be performed within an
enclosed building and not be visible beyond the boundary separating the subject
premises from any adjoining residential or business district.
      (6)   Vibrations. There shall be no uses which create heavy, earth-
shaking vibrations which are noticeable at any district boundaries separating
residential and business uses from an M-2 Manufacturing District.
('71 Code, § 11-15-5)
   (F)   Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall comply with the regulations
set forth in
Chapter 158 .
(Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17) Penalty, see §
155.999
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
§ 155.085 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES.
   (A)   Any lawfully established use of a building or land, at the effective
date of this chapter, or of amendments hereto, that does not conform to the use
regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a
legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided
herein.
   (B)   Any legal nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use
provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
   (C)   Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date of this chapter or of amendments hereto, may be completed per
the approved plans; provided construction is started within six months and
diligently prosecuted to completion. Such building shall thereafter be deemed a
lawfully established building.
('71 Code, § 11-16-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.086 DISCONTINUANCE OF USE.
   (A)   Whenever any part of a building, structure, or land occupied by a
nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the
provisions of this chapter, such premises shall not thereafter be used or
occupied by any nonconforming use, even though the building may have been
originally designed and constructed for the prior nonconforming use.
   (B)   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure, or part
thereof, has been discontinued for a period of six consecutive months, or for a
continuous period of 12 months if the building was originally designed and
constructed for a nonresidential use, or whenever there is evident a clear
intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such use shall
not after being discontinued or abandoned, be re-established, and the use of
the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of the
district.
   (C)   Where no enclosed building is involved discontinuance of a
nonconforming use for a period of six months shall constitute abandonment.
   (D)   Exception. whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure, or
part thereof, has been discontinued for a period of six consecutive months, or
for a continuous period of 12 months if the building was original designed and
constructed or modified for a nonresidential use, the owner may appeal to the
City Council for a continuance of the nonconforming use. The City Council may
grant a continuance of the same or more restricted zoning use,but may not grant
a less restricted use.
('71 Code, § 11-16-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 3849, passed 10-11-
16; Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.087 CHANGE OF USE.
   (A)   A nonconforming use of a building or structure, or part thereof, may
be changed to a use of the same or of a more restricted character, but may not
thereafter be changed to any less restricted use.
   (B)   Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming
use which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of
this chapter shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use.
('71 Code, § 11-16-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.088 TERMINATION AND REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   The period of time during which the following nonconforming uses of
buildings, structures or land may continue or remain shall be limited to the
following periods from the effective date of this chapter or of any amendments
hereto which causes the use to be nonconforming. Every such nonconforming use
shall be completely removed from the premises at the expiration of the period
signified, or shall be made to conform to the regulations of this chapter.
   (A)   Any nonconforming building or structure having an assessed valuation
not in excess of $1,000 on the effective date of this chapter: Two years.
   (B)   All nonconforming signs, billboards, and outdoor advertising
structures: Ten years, except any presently existing posting or sign service
which shall continue to conduct their business as it now is without expansion
except as in conformity with the requirement of this chapter.
   (C)   Any nonconforming use of land where no enclosed building is involved,
or where the only buildings employed are accessory or incidental to such use,
or where such use is maintained in connection with a conforming building: Two
years.
   (D)   A nonconforming house trailer or mobile home, in existence on or
before September 28, 1970, and located within the limits of the city or within
the zoning jurisdiction of the city on any tract of land owned by any person,
may continue or remain so long as it is inhabited and not remaining uninhabited
for a period exceeding 60 days, and so long as it is maintained per the
existing Basic Housing and Property Maintenance Code and other ordinances of
the city. No nonconforming house trailer or mobile home shall be replaced by
another house trailer or mobile home and no other house trailer or mobile home
shall be placed on the same lot or tract of land with the existing
nonconforming house trailer or mobile home.
('71 Code, § 11-16-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2116, passed 3-10-
80)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.089 REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a
nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
   (B)   No structural alterations shall be made in a building or other
structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
      (1)   When the alteration is required by law.
      (2)   When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the
nonconforming use.
      (3)   When a building containing residential nonconforming uses may be
altered in any way to improve livability, provided no structural alteration
shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of
the building.
('71 Code, § 11-16-5) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.090 WHEN STRUCTURES ARE DAMAGED OR DESTROYED.
   (A)   If a building or structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged
or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50% or more of its replacement value
at the time, the building or other structure can be rebuilt or used thereafter
only for a conforming use and in compliance with the provisions of the
district. In the event the damage or destruction is less than 50% of its
replacement value, based upon prevailing costs, the building may then be
restored to its original condition and the occupancy or use of such building
may be continued which existed at the time of such partial destruction.
   (B)   In either event, restoration or repair of the building or other
structure must be started within a period of one year and diligently prosecuted
to completion.
('71 Code, § 11-16-6) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.091 ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS.
   (A)   A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the
entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use, and is made to
conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (B)   No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered
in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space occupied
by such nonconforming use.
   (C)   No nonconforming building in any Residential District shall be so
altered as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
   (D)   No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required useable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries of
the zoning lot as it existed at the effective date of this chapter, or to
displace any conforming use in the same building or on the same parcel.
('71 Code, § 11-16-7) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.092 EXCEPTIONS.
   Wherever a lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conforms
to the use regulations of this chapter, but is nonconforming only in the
particular manner hereinafter specified, the building and use thereof shall be
exempt from the requirements of §§
155.088 and
155.089.
   (A)   In any R district where a dwelling is nonconforming only as to the
number of dwelling units it contains, provided no such building shall be
altered in any way so as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
   (B)   In any R-5 District, where a use permitted in the B-1 District
occupies ground floor space within a multiple-family dwelling located on a
corner lot.
   (C)   In any B or M district where the use is less distant from an R
district than that specified in the regulations for the district in which it is
located.
('71 Code, § 11-16-8) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
§ 155.105 WHEN PART OF MAIN BUILDING.
   Where a substantial part of the wall of an accessory building is a part of
the main building or where an accessory building is attached to the main
building in a substantial manner as by a roof, such accessory building shall be
counted as part of the main building.
('71 Code, § 11-17-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.106 LOCATION RESTRICTION.
   (A)   (1)   An accessory building may not be located nearer to any interior
lot line than that permitted for the main building, when any part of this
accessory building is on line with the main building, if extended. However,
when an accessory building is located in the rear yard, it may then be located
within three feet of the interior lot line, but not nearer than five feet of
the rear lot line.
      (2)   However when a substantial part of the wall of an accessory
building is a part of the main building or where an accessory building is
attached to the main building in a substantial manner as by a roof so as to be
counted as part of the main building and said accessory building is located in
the rear yard, it may then be located within three feet of the interior lot
line, but not nearer than five feet of the rear lot line subject to divisions
(B) and (C) of this section.
   (B)   An accessory building shall not be erected prior to the establishment
or construction of the main building to which it is accessory.
   (C)   No accessory building shall be located on a reversed corner lot beyond
the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer
than five feet to the side lot line of the adjacent building on the lot to the
rear.
   (D)   The height of an accessory building on a residential zoning lot, or
serving a residential use, shall not exceed 18 feet, or the height of the
principal building, whichever is less.
('71 Code, § 11-17-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2224, passed 9-14-
81; Am. Ord. 3297, passed 2-13-01)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.107 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   An accessory use includes, but is not limited to the following:
   (A)   A children's playhouse, garden house and private greenhouse.
   (B)   A garage, shed or building for domestic storage.
   (C)   Incinerators incidental to residential use.
   (D)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot with
any retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations.
   (E)   Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities, on
the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless such storage is
excluded by the district regulations.
   (F)   Off-street motor vehicle parking areas, and loading and unloading
facilities.
   (G)   Signs as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated in this
chapter.
   (H)   Public utility communication, electric, gas, water and sewer lines,
their supports and incidental equipment.
   (I)   Swimming pools. Swimming pools must comply with the regulations set
forth in
Chapter 159, Swimming Pool Regulations.
   (J)   Water gardens. Decorative landscaping utilizing water, such as water
gardens, fish ponds, and the like, which contain an area of water with a depth
exceeding 24 inches shall be fenced in the same manner as that prescribed for
swimming pools.
   (K)   Recreational vehicles are permitted to be parked or stored in
residential districts in compliance with the following:
      (1)   Loading and unloading of recreational vehicles. A recreational
vehicle may be temporarily parked upon any lot or parcel of land for a period
not to exceed 72 hours for loading and unloading purposes.
      (2)   Temporary parking or long-term storage is permitted inside any
wholly enclosed building, which conforms to the zoning requirements of the
particular zone where located.
      (3)   Temporary parking or long-term storage is permitted outside in the
side yard or rear yard provided said recreational vehicle is:
         (a)   Operable in its normally intended manner.
         (b)   Owned by the occupant of the residential unit, or a guest of the
occupant, on the same zoning lot.
         (c)   Not used as a permanent dwelling.
         (d)   Properly licensed and/or insured as provided for by applicable
regulations.
         (e)   Not nearer than two feet to the lot line.
      (4)   Temporary parking or long-term storage is permitted outside on a
driveway, provided:
         (a)   Space is not available in the rear yard or side yard, or there
is no reasonable access to either the side yard or rear yard; a corner lot is
always deemed to have reasonable access to the rear yard; a fence is not
necessarily deemed to prevent reasonable access;
         (b)   Inside parking is not possible;
         (c)   The unit is parked perpendicular to the front curb.
         (d)   No part of the unit may extend over the public sidewalk or
public thoroughfare (right-of-way).
   (L)   Yard or garage sales shall be allowed as an accessory use in all
residential districts, subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   Merchandise purchased for resale shall not be permitted to be sold
at a garage sale or yard sale;
      (2)   No more than three sales shall be held from the same premises
within any calendar year. In the case of a combined neighborhood sale, no more
than three such sales shall be held per premises within any calendar year;
         (a)   The following community events shall be excluded from the
maximum number of sales allowed:
            1.   More on 34;
            2.   Hog Days;
      (3)   Each sale shall not last more than three days per sale;
      (4)   Sales shall be conducted only during the period between sunrise and
sunset;
      (5)   All items being sold shall be placed on private property. No items
for sale shall be located on the city right-of-way, including the street
surface, terrace area and sidewalk;
      (6)   Sale signs shall only be posted at the site of the sale in
accordance with
153.18(A); and
      (7)   All items for sale, tables, signs, racks and any other items used
to display items or advertise the yard or garage sale shall be removed from
view from neighboring properties immediately after the sale has ended.
('71 Code, § 11-17-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 3292, passed 2-26-
01; Am. Ord. 3297, passed 2-13-01; Am. Ord. 3300, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord.
3876, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 4138, passed 6-26- 23; Am. Ord.  4230 , passed
2-10-25)  Penalty, see §
155.999
ADULT USE REGULATIONS
§ 155.110 ADULT SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The uses defined in section §
155.003 as “adult business” or “adult uses” are of such character that their
unrestrained location can and has caused or contributed substantially to
blighted neighborhoods, residential and commercial, and therefore, the
following regulations are enacted in addition to all other applicable land use
and development standards in this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing set forth in this chapter of this Code shall authorize,
legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business,
building or activity which violates any municipal ordinance or provision of the
Statutes of the State regarding nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness,
assignation, prostitution, or obscene or harmful matter, nor shall the use of
such language be interpreted to legalize the types of businesses which promote
such violations.
(Ord. 3142, passed 1-26-98)
§ 155.111 ADULT SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in any adult business or adult use as
defined in §
155.003 without first obtaining an Adult Special Use Permit under this section.
      (1)   Exemption for ancillary adult use. An ancillary adult use shall be
exempt from the requirements of this section provided a site plan is on file
with the the Building Official demonstrating that only an ancillary portion of
the business consists of an adult use. The establishment shall maintain
adequate records to substantiate the percentage of the overall business
operations consisting of an adult use. The adult use shall be considered
ancillary if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The adult use comprises less than fifteen percent (15%) of the
overall business operations as measured by the percentage of gross sales or
floor area devoted to adult merchandise or service; and
         (b)   The adult use is not advertised as such by signs on the site
advertising the adult use or by adult merchandise visible from the exterior of
the building; and
         (c)   The adult use is separated from and screened from the area into
which minors are permitted.
(Ord. 3142, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
§ 155.112 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the words, terms, and phrases shall have the following meanings:
   INDIVIDUAL VIEWING AREA. Any area designed for occupancy of one person for
the purpose of viewing performances, pictures, movies, videos or other
presentations.
   PERSON. Individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, or any
other forms of business organization or group.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A structure which is used primarily for religious
worship and related religious activities.
   SCHOOL. Any child day care center or a public or private institution of
learning for minors, which offers instruction in those courses of study
required by, or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by, the State
Board of Education. This definition includes preschools, kindergartens,
elementary schools, junior high schools, senior high schools or any special
institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional
institution of higher education, including a community or junior college,
college or university.
(Ord. 3142, passed 1-26-98)
§ 155.113 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applicants for an Adult Special Use Permit shall file a written
application on a form supplied by the Building Official which shall be signed
by the property owner or his or her authorized representative and (if
different) the applicant under penalty of perjury. Said form shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee which shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Contents of application. The application shall at a minimum provide
the following information:
      (1)   The name(s) and mailing addresses of the property owner(s) and
proposed business operators;
      (2)   The property location, including assessor's parcel number;
      (3)   The name and nature of the business and activities to be conducted
on the property;
      (4)   The proposed hours of operation;
      (5)   The form(s) of security proposed;
      (6)   The manner of enforcing age restrictions;
      (7)   A detailed floor plan drawn to scale and dimension showing the uses
within each room and the location of all walls and partitions including their
height and material of construction;
      (8)   A detailed site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned including: all
buildings and structures on the site; ingress and egress to the site; parking
areas; setbacks and spaces between buildings; walls, fences, and landscaping
and their location, height, and materials; location and design of exterior
lighting sources, including illumination levels in foot-candles at ground
level; the location of security monitoring systems; and trash and recycling
facilities;
      (9)   The location of all doors and windows, including sizes, materials
and coverings if any;
      (10)   The architectural exterior elevations drawn to scale and dimension
depicting design including colors, signage, materials, ornaments or other
architectural features and any other appurtenances;
      (11)    All other information required to provide an explanation as to
how the proposed project will comply with the requirements of this section and
such other information as the Building Official shall deem appropriate.
   (C)   Approval process. The procedures to be followed in reviewing
applications for an Adult Special Use Permit shall be the same as those set
forth in §§
155.155 through §
155.157 of this Code.
(Ord. 3142, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
§ 155.114 CRITERIA FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The Plan Commission may approve an Adult Use Permit if the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   The adult use shall be located in an M-2 zone.
      (2) The adult use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any
residential zone or any lawfully established nonconforming residential use.
      (3)   The adult use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any lot
upon which there is legally located a religious institution, public park, or
school.
      (4)   The adult use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any other
adult use.
      (5)   The adult use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any
establishment serving or furnishing alcoholic liquor.
      (6)   The adult use shall comply with all applicable development and
design standards of the zone in which it is located.
      (7)   The adult use shall comply with the appropriate sign regulations
for the zone in which it is located, said signage also being subject to any
restrictions placed upon it by the Special Use Permit.
      (8)   The adult use shall not be conducted in any portable or mobile
structure or pushcart.
      (9)   The adult use shall conform to the appropriate parking regulations
under this chapter and shall not sponsor any special events, promotions,
festivals, concerts or other similar events which would increase the demand for
parking beyond the approved number of spaces for the particular use.
      (10)    No adult use shall provide the service, sale, or allow the
consumption on the premises, of alcoholic beverages without first obtaining a
liquor license.
      (11)    The adult use shall not be conducted with any massage,
acupuncture, accupressure, fortune telling, or escort services on the premises;
      (12)    The permittee shall provide a security system that visually
records and monitors all parking lot areas. Recordings made pursuant to this
requirement shall be maintained for a minimum of 14 days;
      (13)    There shall be no display of any sexually oriented material or
sexually oriented merchandise on the premises upon which an adult use is
conducted which would be visible from any location other than from within the
premises;
      (14)    The premises upon which the adult use is conducted shall not
allow admittance of any person under the age of 21 years. The minimum age for
admittance shall be posted at the entrance to the premises.
      (15)    The adult use shall not operate between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
      (16)    The premises on which an adult use is conducted shall have
separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees and female patrons
and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the
restroom(s) for females and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited
from using the restrooms for males, except to carry out duties of repair,
maintenance and clearing of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be
free from any adult-oriented material. Restrooms shall not contain television
monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction
equipment.
      (17)    All areas of the premises on which an adult use is conducted
shall be illuminated at a minimum of 15 footcandles evenly distributed at
ground level.
      (18)    No solicitation of trade may be made at or near the entrance to
the premises on which an adult use is conducted by any means other than signage
which complies with the appropriate sign regulations of the city.
      (19)    All required permits and licenses shall be conspicuously posted
at a location where they may be observed by any member of the public.
      (20)    Any adult use which permits patrons to view live, filmed or
recorded entertainment or to use or consume products or services on the
premises, shall conform to the following requirements:
         (a)   At least one (1) security guard shall be on duty outside the
premises patrolling the grounds and parking areas at all times during hours of
operation. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 50 persons an
additional security guard shall be on duty inside the premises. The security
guard shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing
compliance by patrons with the requirements of this code and notifying the City
Police Department and Building Official of any violations of law. Said security
guard shall be uniformed in such manner as to be readily identifiable to the
public as a security guard. No security guard required hereunder shall act as a
doorperson, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person or any other
capacity while acting as a security guard hereunder; and
         (b)   No exterior window or door on the premises in which an adult use
is conducted shall be propped or kept open at any time during hours of
operation. Any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all
times; and
         (c)   Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen
the interior of the premises from public view for each door used as an
entrance/exit to the premises on which an adult use is conducted.
      (21)    The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult coin
operated businesses, adult arcades, or any adult use which provides one or more
individual viewing areas:
         (a)   The application for the adult use shall be accompanied by a
diagram of the premises showing a plan specifying the location of one or more
manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and
designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.
A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area and no
dimension may exceed eight (8) feet. Each such diagram shall be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated
scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions
of all areas of the interior; and
         (b)   At least one (1) employee shall be on duty and situated at a
manager's station at all times that any patron is present; and
         (c)   The interior shall be configured in such a manner so that there
is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area to which any
patron is permitted access, excluding restrooms. If two (2) or more manager's
stations are designated, then the interior shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view of every area to which any patron is
permitted access, excluding restrooms from at least one of the stations. The
view required by this subsection shall be by direct line of sight. No
alteration in the configuration of the interior floorplan may be made without
the consent of the Building Official; and
         (d)   All individual viewing areas within the premises shall be
visible from a continuous and visually accessible main aisle in a public
portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door, curtain,
wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing
into the individual viewing area; and
         (e)   No individual viewing area shall be occupied by more than one
(1) person at any time; and
         (f)   Individual viewing areas shall be operated and maintained
without any hole or other opening or other means of direct communication or
visual or physical access between the interior space of two (2) or more
individual viewing areas.
   (B)   Measurement of distance.
      (1)   The distance between an adult use and the uses listed in
subsections §§
155.114(A)(2),
155.114(A)(3),
155.114(A)(4), and
155.114(A)(5) of this section shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the parcel
on which the adult use is conducted to the nearest property line of the parcel
on which such uses listed in subsections §§
155.114(A)(2),
155.114(A)(3),
155.114(A)(4), and
155.114(A)(5) of this section are located.
      (2)   Once an adult use obtains an Adult Special Use Permit pursuant to
this section, the subsequent establishment of any use listed in subsection §§
155.114(A)(2),
155.114(A)(3) and
155.114(A)(5) of this section within the restricted distances shall not render
the adult use non-conforming.
   (C)   Inspections. The permittee shall permit officers of the city to
conduct unscheduled inspections of the premises on which the adult use is
operated for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law at any time the
adult use is open to the public.
   (D)   Revocation.
      (1)   Revocation grounds. The Building Official shall recommend
revocation of an Adult Special Use Permit upon discovering that any of the
following have occurred:
         (a)   The adult use has been or continues to be operated in violation
of any of the requirements of this section, a written notice of such violation
has been sent to the permittee and the violation continues or reoccurs within
six (6) months of service of the notice; or
         (b)   The application is found to contain incorrect, false, or
misleading information; or
         (c)   A court of competent jurisdiction has found the adult use to
constitute a public nuisance.
      (2)   Revocation notice. Upon determining that the grounds for revocation
exist the Building Official shall furnish written notice of the revocation to
permittee. Such notice shall summarize the principle reasons for the
revocation, and shall state that the permittee must abate any and all
violations of this Code within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the
notice. Absent a timely compliance with the revocation notice, the revocation
notice shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for review.
   (E)   Moratorium after revocation. If an Adult Use Permit is revoked no
Adult Use Permit shall be issued for the same location for a period of two (2)
years from the effective date of revocation.
(Ord. 3142, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
§ 155.115 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   See §
155.999 of this chapter.
(Ord. 3142, passed 1-26-98)
OTHER SPECIAL USE PERMITS
§ 155.117 BEER GARDEN/OUTDOOR EATING AREA
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)    The purpose of these regulations is to allow, under certain
conditions the use by consumers of outdoor areas accessory to an establishment
which lawfully serves alcoholic liquor. Said use of these accessory, outdoor
areas to be conducted under the authority of a properly issued special use
permit, the guidelines for which are contained herein.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to conduct a beer garden/outdoor eating area
as defined in §
155.003 hereof, without first obtaining a special use permit under this
section.
   (B)   Operating conditions.
      (1)   Lighting. Beer garden/outdoor eating area operated after dark shall
be adequately illuminated by electric lights; but such illumination shall be so
arranged and shielded by the licensee so as to reflect away from any adjoining
property and streets. There shall be no flashing lights, strobe lights, or
similar lights in the beer garden/outdoor eating area.
      (2)   Screening. The licensee shall provide a wall or fence with minimum
height of six feet or greater as recommended by the Plan Commission and
approved by the City Council to screen the patrons on the premises from the
view of the surrounding property. Such fence or wall shall be of a design and
structure as recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the City
Council. The perimeter of the fence or wall shall be landscaped by the licensee
with suitable plants and shrubbery to preserve, as far as possible, harmony
with the appearance of the surrounding property. Said landscaping to be as
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the City Council.
      (3)   Signs. There shall be no signage within the beer garden/outdoor
eating area that is visible from off the premises.
      (4)   Hours of operation. The beer garden/outdoor eating area shall be
closed at 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, inclusive. The beer garden/
outdoor eating area shall be closed at midnight on Fridays and Saturdays.
      (5)   Disposal of refuse. At least once every 24 hours the licensee shall
dispose of waste materials which tend to create a public nuisance on the
premises. The licensee shall keep the premises whereon the beer garden/outdoor
eating area is located, free from waste material and shall provide appropriate
refuse containers.
      (6)   Littering. No person shall place, throw or deposit any case,
bottle, paper, waste material or refuse upon the outside premises of any beer
garden/outdoor eating area, or in the vicinity of same except in adequate
receptacles provided for that purpose, nor shall the licensee permit such
conduct.
      (7)   Maintaining quiet and good order. It shall be the duty of the
licensee to maintain quiet and good order upon the premises of an outdoor
eating place/beer garden and not permit disorderly or immoral conduct or
loitering. The licensee shall not cause or create any noise or other nuisance
in the outdoor area where the quiet and good order of the premises or of the
neighborhood are disturbed. No person on the premises of a beer garden/outdoor
eating area shall needlessly make or cause to be made any loud or unseemly
noise, nuisance, or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the
premises or the neighborhood is disturbed.
   (C)   Application procedures.
      (1)   Application procedures for a beer garden/outdoor eating area shall
be the same as for a special use permit as provided for in sections §§
155.155 through
155.157, Special Uses, of this chapter.
      (2)   Additional information. In addition to the information requested in
sections §§
155.155 through
155.157, Special Uses, of this chapter, the applicant shall also provide the
following information:
         (a)   The proposed capacity of the facility.
         (b)   The location and size of the entrances and exits.
         (c)   The kind of ground surface and storm water run-off facilities.
         (d)   The location, size and construction of all structures.
         (e)   The location, size and construction of surrounding walls, fences
or barriers.
   (D)   Standards of issuance.
      (1)   The criteria for issuing a special use permit contained in §§
155.155 through
155.157, Special Uses, of this chapter.
      (2)   The reputation of the applicant, his officers or agents, if any,
and their ability to operate the beer garden/outdoor eating area in a manner
consistent with the maintenance and preservation of good order, public health,
safety, good morals and welfare.
      (3)   Whether the requirements of this section and all other governing
laws and ordinances have been met.
      (4)   Any special use permit for a beer garden/ outdoor eating area may
only be issued to the site's liquor licensee.
   (E)   Revocation of special use permit.
   In addition to any other reason specified in any other regulation, a special
use permit issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked or
suspended when the City Council finds that:
      (1)   The licensee is operating in violation of this section or of any
other governing law, ordinance or regulation; or
      (2)   The licensee is operating so as to constitute a nuisance by reason
of noise disorderly or illegal conduct or immoral activity on the premises.
(Ord. 3327, passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 3897, passed 8-14-17; Am. Ord.  4230 ,
passed 2-10-25)
§ 155.118 CONSUMER METALS RECYCLING FACILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to allow, under certain
conditions, the use of a wholly enclosed building and the surrounding land as a
consumer metals recycling facility as defined in §
155.003 (see RECYCLING FACILITY, CONSUMER METALS).
      (1)   The use of the premises shall be conducted under the authority of a
properly issued special use permit, in a B-2, B-3, or B-4 Zoning District.
      (2)   The use shall be a permitted use in an M-1 or M-2 Zoning District.
      (3)    The guidelines contained herein are applicable to any location in
which such a use is carried out.
   (B)   Operating conditions.
      (1)   All activities on the premises, with exception of off-street
parking, and loading/unloading, shall take place inside a wholly enclosed
building.
         (a)   The activities related to non-ferrous metals shall include only
collection, non-mechanical sorting, and storage of the metal products.
         (b)   No use of internal combustion engines for power-driven
processing eguipment shall be allowed.
      (2)   Screening. As stipulated in the special use permit for sites
located in B-2, B-3 or B-4 Districts, or as provided for in the standard zoning
regulations for sites located in a manufacturing district.
      (3)   Signs. As stipulated in the special use permit for sites located in
B-2, B-3 or B-4 Districts, or as provided for in the standard zoning
regulations for sites located in a manufacturing district.
      (4)   Hours of operation. The facility shall open no earlier than 8:00
a.m., and stay open no later than 7:00 p.m.
      (5)   Sanitary conditions. Sanitary conditions shall be maintained at all
times to eliminate infestation of insects and rodents, and to mitigate odors.
      (6)   Prohibited commodities. No paper, cardboard, plastic, glass, fiber,
commercial refuse, residential refuse, putrescible waste, appliances, special
waste or hazardous waste, as defined by the Illinois EPA, shall be collected,
sorted, or stored on the premises.
      (7)   Size limitations.
         (a)   The maximum gross square foot area of the building on a site
devoted to use as a consumer metals recycling facility shall not exceed 1,500
square feet.
         (b)   The area of the interior of the building devoted specifically
for acceptance, sorting, and storing of the metals shall not exceed 1,000
square feet.
      (8)   Setbacks. The minimum setbacks from lot lines and existing
residential uses shall be as stipulated in the special use permit for sites
located in B-2. B-3 or B-4 Districts, or as provided for in the standard zoning
regulations for sites located in a manufacturing district.
      (9)   Parking and loading. One off-street loading space shall be
maintained at all times, along with four off-street parking spaces for use of
customers and employees.
   (C)    Application procedures. Application procedures for a consumer metals
recycling facility shall be the same as for a special use permit as provided
for in §§
155.155 through
155.157, Special Uses, of this chapter.
   (D)   Standards of issuance.
      (1)   The criteria for issuing a special use permit contained in §§
155.155 through
155.157.
      (2)   Whether the requirements of this section and all other governing
laws and ordinances have been met.
      (3)   Any special use permit for a consumer metals recycling facility
shall be non-transferable to any new owners or operators.
   (E)   Revocation of special use permit. In addition to any other reason
specified in any other regulation, a special use permit issued under the
provisions of this section may be revoked or suspended when the City Council
finds that the licensee is operating in violation of this section or of any
other governing law, ordinance or regulation.
(Ord. 3607, passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord.  4230 , passed 2-10-25)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 155.120 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the
public streets, and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by
establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading and
unloading of motor vehicles per the use to which property is put.
('71 Code, § 11-18-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.121 PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Procedure. An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged
building, structure, or use shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale
and fully dimensioned showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided
in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Extent of control. The off-street parking and loading requirements of
this chapter shall apply as follows:
      (1)   All buildings and structures erected and land uses initiated after
the effective date of this chapter shall provide accessory off-street parking
or loading facilities as required hereinafter for the use thereof, except that
a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to
the effective date of this chapter shall not be required to furnish parking or
loading facilities if construction is begun thereon within six months of the
effective date of this chapter and diligently prosecuted to completion.
      (2)   When a building or structure erected prior to or after the
effective date of this chapter shall undergo any decrease in number of dwelling
units, gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter for the required parking or loading
facilities, and further, when said decrease would result in a requirement for
fewer total parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of
this chapter thereto, parking and loading facilities may be reduced
accordingly, provided that existing parking or loading facilities shall be so
decreased only when the facilities remaining would at least equal or exceed the
parking or loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions of
this chapter to the entire building or structure as modified.
      (3)   When a building or structure shall undergo any increase in the
number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities,
and further, when said increase would result in a requirement for additional
total parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this
chapter thereto, parking and loading facilities may be increased accordingly,
provided that existing parking or loading facilities shall be so increased that
the facilities would at least equal or exceed the parking of loading
requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this chapter to
the entire building or structure as modified.
      (4)   (a)   When a building is erected in the Central Business District
and the compliance with the regulations and requirements for off-street
parking, as set forth in this subchapter would result impractical difficulties
or undue hardship, the applicant for a permit to erect or enlarge a building
may elect to contribute to the city $1,200 for each required parking space. All
such funds received shall be deposited with the city in a special fund to be
known as “Central Business District Special Off-Street Parking Fund” and shall
be used by the city to develop off-street parking facilities, within the area
described below, for the convenience, safety, and general welfare of the people
of the city.
         (b)   The Central Business District wherein the above applies is
described as follows: Beginning at the alley first east of Main Street on First
Street; thence westwardly along First Street to Main Street; thence southwardly
along Main Street to Central Boulevard; thence westwardly along Central
Boulevard to Tremont Street; thence northwesterly along Tremont Street to First
Street; thence westwardly along First Street to the center of Lexington Avenue;
thence northwardly along Lexington Avenue extended to the south line of the
railroad right-of-way; thence northeastwardly along said railroad right-of- way
to the center of Main Street; thence southwardly along Main Street to Third
Street; thence eastwardly to the alley first east of Main Street; thence
southwardly along said alley to the point of beginning.
   (C)   Existing parking and loading spaces. Accessory off-street parking and
loading spaces in existence on the effective date hereof may not be reduced in
number unless already exceeding the requirements of this subchapter for
equivalent new construction; in which event said spaces shall not be reduced
below the number required herein for such equivalent new construction.
   (D)   Permissive parking and loading spaces. Nothing in this subchapter
shall prevent the establishment of off-street automobile parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, subject to full
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, except that off-street
parking areas accessory to existing multiple-family structures cannot be
located off the premises containing the main use, unless on a lot adjacent
thereto, without authorization by the City Council.
   (E)   Damage or destruction. Any building, structure or use which is in
existence and is a conforming use on the effective date hereof and which
subsequently shall be damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or
other cause may be reconstructed, re-established or repaired with or without
off-street parking or loading facilities, except that parking or loading
facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or
destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However it shall not
be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of
those required by this chapter for equivalent new construction.
   (F)   Schedule of requirements.
      (1)   Tables for required parking and loading. Requirements governing the
number and location of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities in
relation to the use of property are established hereinafter in this subchapter.
The parking and loading requirements for any use not specified herein shall be
the same as for a similar specified use, as determined by §
155.125.
      (2)   Floor area. The term FLOOR AREA as employed in this parking and
loading subchapter in the case of office, merchandising or service types use
shall mean the gross floor area of a building or structure used for service to
the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients, or tenants, including
areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of
merchandise. FLOOR AREAS for the purposes of this subchapter shall not include
any area used for:
         (a)   Storage accessory to the principal use of a building;
         (b)   Incidental repairs;
         (c)   Processing or packaging of merchandise;
         (d)   Show windows, or offices incidental to the management or
maintenance of a store or building;
         (e)   Rest rooms;
         (f)   Utilities; or
         (g)   Dressing, fitting or alteration rooms.
('71 Code, § 11-18-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 1506, passed 6-13-
66)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.122 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR PARKING.
   (A)   Use of parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities accessory to
residential use and developed in any residential district per the requirements
of this subchapter shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such
facilities are accessory or by guests of said occupants. Under no circumstances
shall required parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used
for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles
belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors, or customers of business
or manufacturing establishments, except as permitted in division (E) of this
section.
   (B)   Joint parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities for different
buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively
in any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each
constituent use would be permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so
located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements
for each use.
   (C)   Control of off-site facilities. When required accessory off-street
parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the lot on which the
principal use served is located, they shall be in the same possession, either
by deed or long-term lease, as the property occupied by such principal use, and
the owner shall be bound by covenants filed on record in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds or the Registrar of Titles of the county, requiring the owner
and his said heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of parking
spaces during the existence of said principal use.
   (D)   Permitted districts for accessory parking. Accessory parking
facilities provided elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the principal
use served per §
155.125 may be located in any zoning district except as follows:
      (1)   No parking facilities accessory to an apartment use shall be
located in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
      (2)   No parking facilities accessory to any business or manufacturing
use shall be located in a Residential District, except when authorized by the
City Council as prescribed hereinafter.
      (3)   No parking facilities accessory to a manufacturing use shall be
permitted in a B-1 or B-2 District.
   (E)   Nonresidential parking in residential districts. Accessory off-street
parking facilities serving nonresidential uses of property may be permitted in
all residential districts when authorized by the City Council, subject to the
following requirements in addition to all other relevant requirements of this
subchapter:
      (1)   A special use permit must be applied for and the permit shall be
subject to the same process and receive the same consideration as any other
request for a special use permit required by the City Code.
      (2)   The parking lot shall be accessory to, and for use in connection
with, one or more nonresidential establishments located in adjoining districts
or in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office
buildings or institutions.
      (3)   Said parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles.
      (4)   No commercial repair work, sales or service of any kind shall be
conducted on said parking lot.
      (5)   No sign of any kind other than signs designating entrances, exits,
and conditions of use, shall be maintained on said parking lot.
      (6)   Each entrance to and exit from said parking lot shall be at least
20 feet distant from any adjacent property located in any Residential District,
except where ingress and egress to the parking lot is provided from a public
way or public alley separating the residential areas from the proposed parking
lot.
      (7)   In addition to the foregoing requirements, such parking lots shall
conform to any further requirements and conditions as may be prescribed by the
Plan Commission for the protection of properties adjacent to and in the
vicinity of the proposed parking lot.
   (F)   Design and maintenance.
      (1)   Parking space; description. A required off-street parking space
shall be an area of not less than 162 square feet nor less than 8½-feet wide by
19-feet long, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office
and work areas, accessible from streets or alleys or from private driveways or
aisles leading to streets or alleys and to be used for the storage or parking
of passenger automobiles or commercial vehicles under 1½ ton capacity. Aisles
between vehicular parking spaces shall be not less than 12 feet in width when
serving automobiles parked at a 45° angle in one direction nor less than 20
feet in width when serving automobiles parked perpendicular to the aisles and
accommodating two way traffic.
      (2)   Measurement of space. When determination of the number of required
off-street parking spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction up to and including ½ shall be interpreted as one parking space.
      (3)   Open and enclosed spaces. Parking areas may be open or enclosed
except that when parking facilities accessory to a multiple dwelling are
located in a Residential or B-1 or B-2 District elsewhere than on the same
zoning lot with the principal use served, such parking facilities shall be open
to the sky.
      (4)   Access. Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means
of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner as will least
interfere with the movement of traffic. No driveway or curb cut in any district
shall exceed 30 feet in width.
      (5)   Signs. No signs shall be displayed in any parking area within any
Residential District, except such as may be necessary for the orderly use of
the parking facility.
      (6)   Required setbacks. No parking space nor portion thereof established
on the same zoning lot with a building shall be located within a required front
yard. No parking space nor portion thereof established on a zoning lot without
a building shall be located closer to any street line than the established
building line on adjacent properties nor closer than the front yard setback
required for the district in which the parking lot is located. Further, any
wall, fence or hedge developed around any parking area shall be subject to the
front yard setback requirements of this chapter in the same manner as a
building or structure.
      (7)   Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas, except those
accessory to single family dwellings, shall be improved with a compacted
macadam base, not less than four inches thick, surfaced with asphaltic concrete
or some comparable all-weather dustless material.
      (8)   Screening and landscaping. All open off-street parking areas six or
more cars shall be effectively screened by a wall, a solid fence or a densely
planted compact hedge along any side which as joins or is directly across a
street or alley from a property in Residential District or an institutional
property. Such wall, fence or hedge, shall be at least four feet, but not more
than seven feet, in height and shall be maintained in good condition.
      (9)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking
area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining
properties.
   (G)   Special use public parking areas: Any automobile parking area
developed for transient trade, and not accessory to specific main uses or
groups of uses for which parking is required by this chapter, shall be treated
as a special use as defined in §§
155.155 through
155.157 and as allowed per the provisions of said §§
155.155 through
155.157 by the Council.
('71 Code, § 11-18-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2097, passed 12-10-
79; Am. Ord. 3047, passed 4-8-96)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.123 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR LOADING.
   (A)   Loading berth; description. An off-street loading berth shall be a
hard-surfaced area of land, open or enclosed, other than a street or a public
way, used principally for the standing, loading, or unloading of motor trucks,
tractors, and trailers so as to avoid undue interference with the public use of
streets and alleys. A required loading space shall be not less than ten feet in
width, 45 feet in length, and 14 feet in height, exclusive of access aisles and
maneuvering space, except as otherwise specifically dimensioned hereafter.
   (B)   Location. No permitted or required loading berth shall be closer than
50 feet to any property in a Residential District unless completely enclosed by
building walls, or a uniformly painted solid fence or wall, or any combination
thereof not less than six feet in height. No permitted or required loading
berth shall be located within 25 feet of the nearest point of intersection of
any two streets. Loading berths open to the sky may be located in a required
yard.
   (C)   Measurement of berths. When determination of the number of required
off-street loading berths results in a requirement of a fraction, berth, any
fraction up to and including ½ shall be disregarded, and fractions over ½ shall
be interpreted as or loading berth.
   (D)   Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base not less than seven inches thick, surfaced with not less
than two inches of asphaltic concrete or some comparable material which is
dustless and all-weather.
('71 Code, § 11-18-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.124 LOCATIONS OF PARKING AREAS.
   Extent of control. Off-street automobile parking facilities shall be located
as hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, such distance shall be
walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking area to the
nearest entrance of the building that said parking area is required to serve.
   (A)   For one- and two-family dwelling: On the same lot with the buildings
they are required to serve, provided however that any parking of vehicles on
open land in the front yard shall only be allowed when on an improved surface
which is directly accessible by a properly installed approach from the street.
This subsection applies only to parking customarily or routinely used by the
occupant(s) of the dwelling(s) on the site, not to parking of visitor’s
vehicles, nor to parking of a vehicle to facilitate care of same.
   (B)   For three- and four-family dwellings not over two stories in height:
On the same lot or parcel of land as the buildings they are required to serve,
provided however that any parking of vehicles on open land in the front yard
shall only be allowed when on an improved surface which is directly accessible
by a properly installed approach from the street. This subsection applies only
to parking customarily or routinely used by the occupant(s) of the dwelling(s)
on the site, not to parking of visitor’s vehicles, nor to parking of a vehicle
to facilitate care of same. For the purposes of this requirement, a group of
such uses constructed and maintained under single ownership or management shall
be assumed to be on a single lot or parcel of land.
   (C)   For rooming houses, lodging houses, dormitories, sorority and
fraternity houses, apartment houses containing four or more dwelling units and
for other similar uses: On the same lot or parcel of land as the building they
are required to serve, or on a separate lot or parcel of land not more than 300
feet from the nearest entrance to the main building being served; provided the
lot or parcel of land selected for the parking facilities is located in a
district which is the same as or less restricted than the district in which the
main building or principal permitted use being served is located.
   (D)   For clubs, hospitals, sanitariums, orphanages, homes for the aged,
convalescent homes and for other similar uses: The off-street parking
facilities required shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the main
building or buildings being served or on a separate lot or parcel of land not
more than 500 feet from the nearest entrance to the main building served;
provided the lot or parcel of land selected for the parking facilities is
located in a district which is the same as or less restricted than the district
in which the main building or principal permitted use being served is located.
   (E)   For uses other than those specified above, off-street parking
facilities shall be provided on the same lot or parcel of land as the main
building being served or on a separate lot or parcel of land not over 1,000
feet of the entrance of the main building, measured from the nearest point of
the parking area; provided the separate lot or parcel of land intended for the
parking facilities is located in the same district as the principal permitted
use or in a less restricted district.
('71 Code, § 11-18-5) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2216, passed 7-27-
81; Am. Ord. 3298, passed 2-26-01; Am. Ord. 3300, passed 3-26-01)
§ 155.125 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
Business Uses Minimum Spaces Required
Business Uses                           Minimum Spaces Required
Offices
Banks, currency exchanges, loan         4 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
offices, savings & loans, and similar   square feet of gross floor area
financial institutions
Business office, civic administration,  3.3 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
commercial laboratories, computer       square feet of gross floor area
services, electronic data processing
Professional offices: accounting,
dental, engineering, insurance and      5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
financial consulting, law, medical,     square feet of gross floor area
outpatient clinics, or related
professions
Service Establishments
Air conditioning, heating, plumbing     4 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
sales and service                       square feet of gross floor area
Animal hospital                         3.3 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Automobile and truck repair and service 4.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
shop                                    square feet of gross floor area
Barber shop, beauty parlor, chiropody,
massage, physical culture, tanning,     4 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
health services or similar personal     square feet of gross floor area
service shop
Blueprinting, copy and print shops      4 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Car wash                                4 stacking spaces per stall plus 1 per
                                        employee
Catering establishments                 4 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Contractor's offices and shops          4.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Dry-cleaning, laundromat establishments 4 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Exterminating shop                      4.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Household appliance repair shop         4.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Parcel delivery stations                4.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Pawn shop                               4.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Photograph developing and processing    4.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Radio and television broadcasting       1 off-street parking space per employee
stations
                                        1 off-street parking space per each
Riding academies                        employee plus 1 off-street parking
                                        space per each 3 students based on
                                        rated design capacity
                                        1 off-street parking space per each
Schools: music, dance, business,        employee plus 1 off-street parking
commercial, or trade                    space per each 3 students based on
                                        rated design capacity
Silver plating and repair shop          4.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Telecommunication equipment building    1 off-street parking space per employee
Travel bureau                           4.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
Undertaking establishments              4 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
 
Assembly Uses Minimum Spaces Required
Assembly Uses                         Minimum Spaces Required
Amusement park, fairgrounds, kiddie   3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet
parks or similar uses                 of gross land area
Art galleries and studios             2 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                      square feet of gross floor area
Auditorium, dance hall, exhibition    10 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet
hall, lecture hall, meeting hall,     of gross floor area
stadium, arena, armory, gymnasium and OR
other similar places of public events 33% of the occupant load based on rated
                                      design
Billiard and pool rooms               10 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                      square feet of gross floor area
                                      10 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                      square feet of gross floor area
Churches                              OR
                                      1 off-street parking space per 3 or 4
                                      seats
Clubs, lodges and fraternal           4 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
organizations                         square feet of gross floor area
Nightclub                             10 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                      square feet of gross floor area
Public buildings, including art       2 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
gallery, library, museum or similar   square feet of gross floor area
structures
Recreation centers                    10 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                      square feet of gross floor area
Restaurants, cafes, drive-in type     10 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
restaurants, and tea rooms            square feet of gross floor area
                                      10 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
Restaurants with drive-up window      square feet of gross floor area, plus 5
                                      reservoir stacking spaces per drive-up
                                      window
Taverns                               10 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                      square feet of gross floor area
Theater, indoor, movie, or outdoor    1 off-street parking space for every 2.5
                                      seats based upon rated design capacity
 
 
Education Uses                      Minimum Spaces Required
Elementary or junior high school    1 off-street parking space for every
                                    employee
                                    1 off-street parking space for every
High school                         employee, plus 1 off-street parking space
                                    for every 5 students based on rated design
                                    capacity
                                    1 off-street parking space for every 2
College or university               employees, plus 1 off-street parking space
                                    for every 5 students based on rated design
                                    capacity
Day care centers or nursery schools 2 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                    square feet of gross floor area
 
 
                   2 off-street parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
                   floor area
Manufacturing Uses OR
                   1 off-street parking space per employee based on the maximum
                   number of employees during any one work shift
 
Institutional Uses Minimum Spaces Required
Institutional Uses                      Minimum Spaces Required
Airport, heliport, landing field or
landing strip, bus terminal, railroad   As stipulated per special use permit,
passenger station, freight terminal,    using requirements of similar uses as a
taxicab service, office or station, or  design guideline
any other public transportation
terminal facilities
                                        As stipulated per special use permit,
Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums   using requirements of similar uses as a
                                        design guideline
                                        1 off-street parking space per employee
Electric substations                    based on the maximum number of
                                        employees during any one work shift
                                        As stipulated per special use permit,
Fire stations                           using requirements of similar uses as a
                                        design guideline
                                        50 off-street parking spaces per 9
                                        holes plus 1 off-street parking space
Golf courses, public or private         per employee based on the maximum
                                        number of employees during any one work
                                        shift
                                        1.5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of gross floor area
                                        OR
Hospital, sanitarium, or skilled        1 off-street parking space per employee
nursing unit, public or private         based on the maximum number of
                                        employees during any one work shift,
                                        plus 1 off-street parking space per
                                        each 2 hospital beds, plus 1 off-street
                                        parking space per doctor
                                        1 off-street parking space per employee
                                        based on the maximum number of
Penal or correctional institutions      employees during any one work shift,
                                        plus 1 off-street parking space per 4
                                        occupants based on rated design
                                        capacity
                                        As stipulated per special use permit,
Police stations                         using requirements of similar uses as a
                                        design guideline
Public or private park or playground    1 off-street parking space per 5,000
                                        square feet of grass land area
Public utility facilities, for example,
filtration plant, water reservoir or    1 off-street parking space per employee
pumping station, heat or power plant,   based on the maximum number of
transformer station and other similar   employees during any one work shift
facilities
 
 
Mercantile Uses                          Minimum Spaces Required
Any commercial retail or wholesale trade 5 off-street parking spaces per 1,000
establishment                            square feet of gross floor area
 
Residential Uses Minimum Spaces Required
Residential Uses                        Minimum Spaces Required
One-family dwelling                     2 off-street parking spaces for each
                                        family dwelling unit
Two-family dwelling                     2 off-street parking spaces for each
                                        family dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwelling                2 off-street parking spaces for each
                                        family dwelling unit
One-family row dwellings (party wall    2 off-street parking spaces for each
type) with not more than six dwelling   family dwelling unit
units in a building
Apartments                              2 off-street parking spaces for each
                                        family dwelling unit
                                        One parking space for each sleeping
Boarding and lodging house              room, plus one additional space for the
                                        owner or manager of, if resident on the
                                        premises
                                        One parking space for each sleeping
                                        room or suite, plus one additional
                                        space for the owner or manager on the
Dormitory                               premises, plus one additional space per
                                        employee based upon the maximum number
                                        of persons to be employed during any
                                        one work shift
                                        .5 off-street parking spaces per
                                        resident, based on rated design
Elderly congregate housing, independent capacity, plus 1 off-street parking
and semi-independent                    space per employee based on the maximum
                                        number of employees during any one work
                                        shift
Federal, state or county housing
projects meeting state and federal
standards shall be permitted in the R-  2 off-street parking spaces for each
6 Federal, State Housing District. The  family dwelling unit
housing project must be approved and
sponsored by the state, federal or
county housing authority
                                        One parking space for each sleeping
                                        room or suite, plus one additional
                                        space per employee based upon the
                                        maximum number of persons to be
                                        employed during any one work shift,
                                        plus additional spaces as shall be
Hotel                                   necessary because of any supplementary
                                        parking generative activities such as
                                        bars, ballrooms, conference rooms,
                                        dining rooms, nightclub facilities, and
                                        the like. Said additional spaces to be
                                        calculated as if the floor area devoted
                                        to the supplementary activity were a
                                        separate use.
                                        One parking space for each sleeping
                                        room or suite, plus one additional
                                        space for the owner or manager on the
Motel                                   premises, plus one additional space per
                                        employee based upon the maximum number
                                        of persons to be employed during any
                                        one work shift
                                        .25 off-street parking spaces per
                                        resident, based on rated design
Nursing homes and rest homes            capacity, plus 1 off-street parking
                                        space per employee based on the maximum
                                        number of employees during any one work
                                        shift
                                        .5 off-street parking spaces per
                                        resident, based on rated design
                                        capacity, plus 1 off-street parking
Sheltered care or board and care        space per employee based on the maximum
facility                                number of employees during any one work
                                        shift, plus 2 off-street parking spaces
                                        for each family dwelling unit on the
                                        premises
                                        1 off-street parking space per sleeping
                                        room, plus 1 off-street parking space
Tourist homes having not more than five per employee based on the maximum
rooms for transient guests              number of employees during any one work
                                        shift, plus 2 off-street parking spaces
                                        for each family dwelling unit
 
 
                                                                          Minimum
Storage Uses                                                              Spaces
                                                                          Required
                                                                          1 off-
                                                                          street
                                                                          parking
                                                                          space per
                                                                          employee
                                                                          based on
                                                                          the
Automobile, truck, trailer, tractor, or bus storage yard, operable        maximum
vehicles only                                                             number of
                                                                          employees
                                                                          during
                                                                          any one
                                                                          work
                                                                          shift,
                                                                          minimum
                                                                          of 4
                                                                          spaces
                                                                          1 off-
                                                                          street
                                                                          parking
                                                                          space per
                                                                          employee
                                                                          based on
                                                                          the
Bus lines shops and garages, carting, express hauling or storage yards,   maximum
or truck terminal                                                         number of
                                                                          employees
                                                                          during
                                                                          any one
                                                                          work
                                                                          shift,
                                                                          minimum
                                                                          of 4
                                                                          spaces
                                                                          1 off-
                                                                          street
                                                                          parking
                                                                          space per
                                                                          employee
                                                                          based on
Garages, public, for storage of private passenger vehicles under 1 ½ ton the
capacity                                                                  maximum
                                                                          number of
                                                                          employees
                                                                          during
                                                                          any one
                                                                          work
                                                                          shift
                                                                          1 off-
                                                                          street
                                                                          parking
                                                                          space per
Warehouse                                                                 1,000
                                                                          square
                                                                          feet of
                                                                          gross
                                                                          floor
                                                                          area
                                                                          1 off-
                                                                          street
                                                                          parking
                                                                          space per
Multiple-unit personal property storage warehouse (mini-storage)          1,000
                                                                          square
                                                                          feet of
                                                                          gross
                                                                          floor
                                                                          area
 
 
Miscellaneous Uses              Minimum Spaces Required
Planned developments, business, As stipulated per special use permit,
industrial or residential       using requirements of similar uses as a
                                design guideline
 
('71 Code, § 11-18-6) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 3297, passed 2-13-
01)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.126 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING FACILITIES.
   In all districts where property uses include the loading and unloading of
materials or merchandise from vehicles, off-street loading and unloading
facilities shall be provided per the following requirements:
   (A)   For hotels or apartment hotels wherein there are contained exhibition
halls, convention halls, auditoriums, office facilities or retail shops: One
off-street loading and unloading space for the first 40,000 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one additional off-street loading space for each 150,000
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof of gross floor area in
excess of 40,000 square feet.
   (B)   For hospitals or sanitariums containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet
of gross floor area: One off- street loading and unloading space, plus one
additional such space for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof in excess of 100,000 square feet.
   (C)   For buildings containing bowling alleys, taverns, restaurants, or any
retail shops and having 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area: One
off-street loading and unloading space, plus one additional such space for each
additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof in
excess of 100,000 square feet.
   (D)   For banks, business or professional offices or public administration
buildings containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, one
off-street loading and unloading space, plus one additional such space for each
additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof in
excess of 100,000 square feet.
   (E)   For buildings containing furniture and appliance stores, motor
vehicles sales, wholesale stores, household equipment or machinery sales and
having 8,000 to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area, one off-street loading
and unloading space, plus one additional space for each additional 25,000
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of 25,000 square
feet.
   (F)   For buildings containing manufacturing uses; research and testing
laboratories; laundry and dry cleaning establishments; printing, binding,
publishing and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books, and other reading
matter; warehouses and storage facilities; engraving shops; assembly of
materials and products; processing and distribution of materials and products;
and other similar uses having more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area,
exclusive of basement area, and less than 40,000 square feet of gross floor
area, one off-street loading and unloading space, plus one additional such
space for each additional 60,000 square feet of gross floor area in excess of
40,000 square feet.
('71 Code, § 11-18-7) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
SPECIAL USES
§ 155.155 PURPOSE.
   The principal objective of the zoning code is to provide for an orderly
arrangement of compatible buildings and land uses, and for the proper location
of all types of uses required for the social and economic welfare of the city.
To accomplish this objective, each type and kind of use is classified as
permitted in one or more of the various districts established by this chapter.
However, in addition to those uses specifically classified and permitted in
each district, there are certain additional uses which it may be necessary to
allow because of their unusual characteristics or the service they provide the
public. These special uses require particular consideration as to their proper
location in relation to adjacent established or intended uses, or to the
planned development of the community. The conditions controlling the location
and operation of such special uses are established by the following provisions
of this subchapter.
('71 Code, § 11-22-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.156 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   The City Plan Commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose,
such restrictions upon the height, bulk, and area of occupancy of any structure
so approved for special use as may be reasonable under the particular
circumstances, provided that such restrictions and stipulations shall not be
more restrictive than the requirements established for the district in which
such structure is proposed to be located, or as may be required in any
municipal code. Off-street parking facilities as well as off-street loading and
unloading spaces may also be stipulated in the order permitting to special use.
('71 Code, § 11-22-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.157 PROCEDURE IN CONSIDERING APPLICATIONS FOR SPECIAL USES.
   The procedure to be followed in considering application for special uses
shall be as follows:
   (A)   Application. An application verified by the owner or authorized agent
of the owner of the property involved, shall be filed with the City Clerk for
the attention of the Plan Commission upon a form prescribed therefor, which
shall contain or be accompanied by all required information.
      (1)   Applicants for a special use permit shall file a written
application on a form supplied by the Building Official which shall be signed
by the property owner or his or her authorized representative and (if
different) the applicant, under penalty of perjury. If an authorized
representative is involved for the owner or applicant, the authorized
representative shall provide a notarized sworn affidavit from the owner or
applicant attesting to the authorized representative's standing. Said form
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee which shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   Contents of application. The application shall at a minimum provide
the following information:
         (a)   The name(s) and mailing addresses of the property owner(s) and
proposed business operators;
         (b)   The property location, including assessor's parcel number, and
legal description of said property;
         (c)   The name and nature of the business and activities to be
conducted on the property;
         (d)   The proposed hours of operation, if applicable;
         (e)   A detailed site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned including:
            1.   All buildings and structures, existing or proposed, on the
site.
            2.   Traffic access and circulation at the site.
            3.   Parking and loading areas.
            4.   Utility services such as water, sanitary sewer, electricity,
natural gas, phone, cable, and storm sewers.
            5.   Setbacks and spaces between buildings.
            6.   Walls, fences, and landscaping and their location, height, and
materials.
            7.   Sign types, locations and sizes.
            8.   Location and design of exterior lighting sources.
            9.   Trash and recycling facilities;
         (f)   A detailed floor plan of any existing or proposed buildings or
structures drawn proportionally and showing dimensions of the uses within each
room and the location of all walls and partitions including their height and
material of construction;
         (g)   The location of all doors and windows, including sizes,
materials and coverings if any;
         (h)   A written description of the proposed use that includes
pertinent information concerning the proposed use. This written description
must also explain the need for the proposed use at the petitioned site. This
written description must also include a description of how the request
satisfies the review standards found in subsection (C) below.
         (i)   All other information required to provide an explanation as to
how the proposed project will comply with the requirements of this chapter and
such other information as the HBZ Officer shall deem appropriate.
   (B)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of such verified application, the Clerk
shall notify the Chairperson of the Plan Commission, or in his absence the Vice
Chairperson, who shall give notice of a public hearing in the same manner as
provided for hearings on the reclassification of property as contained in §
155.207. A record of pertinent information presented at the public hearing
shall be made and maintained by the Plan Commission as part of the permanent
record relative to the application.
   (C)   Determination. The Plan Commission shall then make its findings and
recommendations to the Council within 30 days following the date of public
hearing on each application. The Council may then authorize a special use as
defined herein by specific ordinance, provided the evidence presented is such
as to establish beyond reasonable doubt:
      (1)   That the proposed use at the particular location requested is
necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in the
interest of public convenience, and will contribute to the general welfare of
the neighborhood or community;
      (2)   That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular
case, be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of
persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property values or
improvements in the vicinity, and
      (3)   That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and
conditions specified in this chapter for such use, and with the stipulations
and conditions made a part of the authorization granted by the Council.
('71 Code, § 11-22-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 3201, passed 3-8-99;
Am. Ord. 4230, passed 2-10-25)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
§ 155.170 CHARACTER OF DEVELOPMENTS; ADDITIONAL STANDARDS AND EXCEPTIONS
REQUIRED.
   Planned developments, as defined in §
155.003 are of such substantially different character from other special uses
that specific and additional standards and exceptions are hereby set out to
govern the recommendations of the Plan Commission and the action of the
Council.
('71 Code, § 11-23-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.171 USE EXCEPTIONS.
   In the case of residential, business, or manufacturing planned developments,
the Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize that there
be in part of the area of such development and for the duration of such
development specified uses not permitted by the use regulations of the district
in which said development is located, provided the Plan Commission shall find:
   (A)   That the uses permitted by such exception are necessary or desirable
and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development;
   (B)   That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or
so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding
neighborhood;
   (C)   That not more than 20% of the ground area or of the gross floor area
of such development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by said exception;
and
   (D)   That in a manufacturing planned development, such additional uses
allowed by exception shall conform with the performance standards of the
district in which the development is located.
('71 Code, § 11-23-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.172 BULK REGULATIONS.
   In case of any planned development, the Plan Commission may recommend and
the City Council may authorize exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of
this chapter within the boundaries of such development, provided that the Plan
Commission shall find:
   (A)   That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such
development as well as of neighboring properties than would obtain under the
bulk regulations of this chapter for buildings developed on separate zoning
lots;
   (B)   That the overall bulk of buildings of the development shall not exceed
that prescribed in this chapter for the district in which it is located;
   (C)   That the minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements of this
chapter shall be adhered to in any such development containing residential
uses, and that there shall be available to each residential building and
immediately adjacent thereto (including the land area upon which it is
erected), the minimum amount of land area required for such building under the
lot area per dwelling unit provisions of this chapter;
   (D)   That spacing between principal buildings shall be at least equivalent
to such spacing as would be required between buildings similarly developed
under the terms of this chapter on separate zoning lots, due consideration
being given to the openness normally afforded by the intervening streets and
alleys; and
   (E)   That along the periphery of such planned developments, yards shall be
provided as required by the regulations of the district in which said
development is located.
('71 Code, § 11-23-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
§ 155.185 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
city by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-8, and 11-31-
2 in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   To make federally subdivided flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
('71 Code, § 11-25-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
§ 155.186 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions are adopted.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100 year flood. The base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
155.188.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING.   A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180
days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to real estate, including, but not
necessarily limited to:
      (1)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      (2)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      (3)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days per year;
      (4)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts
or similar projects;
      (5)   Construction or erection of levees, dam walls or fences;
      (6)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving or
other alterations of the ground surface;
      (7)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters; or
DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing and similar practices that
do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes  are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). These two terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or that may be annexed into the
city, that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the
city are generally identified as such on panel numbers 17073C0400E, 1707C0395E,
17073C0530E, and 17073C0535E, of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Henry County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated June
2, 2011. FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known flooding as identified
by the community. The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Henry County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be
annexed into the city are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map prepared for Henry County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and dated June 2, 2011.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (PFE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODWAY. That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the city shall be as delineated
on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Henry County prepared by FEMA and
dated June 2, 2011. The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the
city shall be according to the best data available from the federal, state or
other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of § 155.191.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA or SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage figured cumulatively during a ten-year
period, equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes REPETITIVE
LOSS buildings (see definition).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure figured cumulatively during a ten-year period, in
which the cumulative percentage of improvements: equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started; or
increases the floor area by more than 20%. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures
which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work done. The term does not include:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided.
('71 Code, § 11-25-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
§ 155.187 DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official shall be responsible for the general administration
and enforcement of this subchapter, and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements
of this subchapter. Specifically, the Building Official shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with §
155.189;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
155.190;
   (C)   Ensure that building protection requirements for all buildings subject
to §
155.191 are met and maintain a record of the "as-built" elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) or floodproofed certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivision and annexations meet the requirements of §
155.192;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of §
155.193;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
155.193 are met and maintain documentation if any variances granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in §
155.999 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this subchapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this
subchapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this subchapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this subchapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to
the floodplain map.
('71 Code, § 11-25-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11; Am. Ord. 4230, passed 2-10-25)   
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.188 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   This subchapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available
base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/
OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Prospect Street Creek
and Mill Street Creek shall be as delineated on the 100 year flood profiles in
the Flood Insurance Study of Henry County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated June 2, 2011.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH
Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the county
wide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Henry County.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an “A Zone” on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Henry
County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Henry County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city, or that may be annexed into the city, shall be as delineated on
the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Henry County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated June 2, 2011.
('71 Code, § 11-25-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
§ 155.189 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Building Official. The Building Official shall not
issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the
requirements of this subchapter.
   (A)   The application for a development permit shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
155.191; and
      (5)   Cost of the project or improvements as estimated by a licensed
engineer or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this
requirement..
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Building
Official shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by survey date to be higher
than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the
date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate map is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the requirements of this subchapter. Conversely, any
development located on land show to be below the base flood elevation and
hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map,
is subject to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   The Building Official shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that his ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate
Map identification. The Building Official shall be responsible for obtaining
from the applicant copies of all other federal, state and local permits,
approvals or permit-not- required letters that may be required for this type of
activity. The Building Official shall not issue a permit unless all other
required federal, state and local permits have been obtained.
('71 Code, § 11-25-5) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11; Am. Ord. 4230, passed 2-10-25)    
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.190 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map,
and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in §
155.190(B) of this subchapter, no development shall be allowed which, acting in
combination with existing and anticipated development will cause any increase
in flood heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The
following specific development activities shall be considered as meeting this
requirement:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
         (a)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one foot;
         (b)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half-foot at a point 1,000 feet upstream of
the proposed structure;
         (c)   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile;
         (d)   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel;
         (e)   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the State of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit; and
         (f)   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 3: the permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier
cells, or other similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 4:
         (a)   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         (b)   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         (c)   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         (d)   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         (e)   All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction grades
and re-vegetated.
         (f)   All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety
Code, and federal requirements must be met.
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5:
         (a)   The boat dock must not extend more than 50 feet into a waterway
and no more than 1/4 of the width of the waterway and shall not extend beyond
the navigational limited established by the IDNR and Corps of Engineers.
         (b)   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet.
         (c)   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed 50% of the landowner's shoreline
frontage nor 50 feet.
         (d)   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet of the projected
property line.
         (e)   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         (f)   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         (g)   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with floatation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         (h)   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         (i)   Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow.
         (j)   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of Engineers.
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6:
         (a)   The following activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit:
            1.   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or
septic tanks riot grossing a lake or stream.
            2.   The construction of light poles, sign posts, and similar
structures.
            3.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
            4.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment pavilions, and carports.
            5.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70
square feet in size, nor ten square feet in any dimension. Only one such
building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
            6.   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:
         (a)   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent pank, protection.
         (b)   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed die scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures.
         (c)   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8:
         (a)   In any and all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the
bed of the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in
concrete or entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet of cover shall be
provided. The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original
condition.
         (b)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (c)   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5)
shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed.
         (d)   If blasting is to be utilized in die construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten days prior to
the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
         (a)   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. Urban
areas are defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten years. (The Department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban).
         (b)   In addition to the materials listed in division (A)(8)(a), other
materials (such as tire revetments) may be utilized in rural areas provided all
other conditions of this permit are met.
         (c)   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage of debris, scrap lumber, metal refuge, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would, cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protections Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act
5).
         (d)   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, 1,000 feet.
         (e)   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated, forces of current and wave action.
         (f)   Materials shall be placed in away which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         (g)   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank.
         (h)   Materials shall be placed so that fee modified bank full-width
and cross-sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
            For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the
bank, toe of the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the
cross-sectional area of the natural channel be reduced by more than 10% nor the
volume of material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of the stream
bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and to
lessen the quantity of material required.
         (i)   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction, area.
         (h)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded, or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (k)   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            1.   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s); and
            2.   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot.
         (l)   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
         (a)   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with
the requirements of the local floodplain ordinance.
         (b)   The principle structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25,1988).
         (c)   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed 500 square
feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another property.
         (d)   Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         (e)   No construction shall be undertaken in or within 50 feet of the
bank of the stream channel.
         (f)   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         (g)   Only one accessory structure, or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit: plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         (h)   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction,
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
         (a)   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed 1,000 feet.
         (b)   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel: all work must be confined to, the existing channel or to
reestablishing flows in the natural stream channel.
         (c)   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and down stream of the site.
         (d)   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            1.   Removed from the floodway;
            2.   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would
be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross-sectional
area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than 10%, nor the
volume of material placed exceed 2 cubic yards per lineal foot of streambank;
            3.   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area
such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            4.   Used to stabilize and existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed:
            5.   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
Department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            6.   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         (e)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 12:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            1.   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater
induced by the existing structure; and
            2.   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         (c)   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR).
         (d)   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the Department's Statewide Permit Number 9 (Minor Shoreline, Channel and
Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide Permit Number 11 (Minor
Maintenance Dredging Activities).
         (e)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 13:
         (a)   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         (b)   The term "temporary" shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         (d)   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         (e)   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or
stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents
that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of Special Condition
Number 3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a
minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the
backwater induced by the temporary structure.
         (f)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         (g)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         (h)   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5).
      (13)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) may be
permitted only if:
      (1)   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
('71 Code, § 11-25-6) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.191 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
155.190, all buildings to be located in the special flood hazard area (SFHA)
shall be protected from flood damage below the FPE. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet;
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20%, or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during
a ten-year period. If substantially improved, the existing structure and the
addition must meet the flood protection standards of this section.
      (3)   Repairs made to a damaged building. These repairs shall be figured
cumulatively during a ten-year period. If substantially damaged, the entire
structure must meet the flood protection standards of this section.
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods.
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, rip-rap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties when necessary stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot above grade with a minimum of two openings. The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation; and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
            1.   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
            3.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space; or
            4.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      (3)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
      (4)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
floatation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      (5)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade.
      (6)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade.
      (7)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundations walls must not exceed
four feet at any point.
      (8)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event.
      (9)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must
be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
      (10)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
or rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with division (B); and
      (2)   Anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180
days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of division (D) unless the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck.
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
400 square feet.
      (6)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement off the floodplain.
      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model.
      (10)   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks; or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage or shed must be non-habitable.
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principle structure on the same lot.
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damages.
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for
every on square foot of floor area.
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $10,000 in market value or
replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 500 square feet.
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning.
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, and the like) shall be stored above the flood protection
elevation.
      (11)   The lowest flood elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
('71 Code, § 11-25-7) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.192 SUBDIVISION AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   The City Council shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they
are known, in all official actions related to land management, use and
development. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the requirements of §§
155.190 and
155.191. Any proposal for such development shall included the following data:
   (A)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where the
base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
   (B)   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
   (C)   A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of the surface
waters in accordance with the Plat Act (ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2). Streets,
blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in
such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Whenever
possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public
grounds.
('71 Code, § 11-25-8) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.193 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§ 155.190 and 155.191, the following standards
apply:
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall included locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
155.191.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above-ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.194 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the city shall notify adjacent communities in writing
30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of
the watercourse.
(Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
§ 155.195 VARIANCES.
   Whenever the standards of this subchapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals
for a variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the City Council.
The City Council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it
deems necessary to further the intent of this subchapter.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities or other
public facilities;
      (6)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      (7)   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that
a variance from the requirements of the building protection standards of §
155.191 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)    Variances to the building protection requirements of §155.191
requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair or alteration of a
historic site or historic structure as defined in "Historic Structures", may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of division (A)(1)
through (A)(5) of this section subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
('71 Code, § 11-25-9) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.196 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this subchapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
subchapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the
floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This subchapter does not
create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damage that results from reliance on this subchapter or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
('71 Code, § 11-25-10) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
§ 155.197 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This subchapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the City
Council to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program;
however, this subchapter does not repeal the original resolution adopted to
achieve eligibility in the Program. Nor does this subchapter repeal, abrogate
or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this
subchapter and other ordinance easements, covenants, or deed restrictions
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
('71 Code, § 11-25-12) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2538, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11)
AMENDMENTS
§ 155.205 PETITION FOR AMENDMENT.
   (A)   The City Council, the Plan Commission and other governmental bodies,
and any private petitioner may apply for an amendment in the text of the zoning
code and in the zoning map. Any petition for an amendment by a private party
shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by the Council, which fee
shall be deposited with the City Clerk within 15 days after the receipt thereof
and no part shall be returnable to the petitioner.
   (B)   All petitioners for amendments to the zoning code, special uses or
variances and all petitioners for the annexation of territory to the city shall
at the time said matter is set for hearing before the Plan Commission of the
city, furnish to the City Attorney a plat on legal sized paper of the area
described in the petition with all boundaries and dimensions clearly marked on
paper from which a reproduction can be made.
   (C)   In the event there are any changes made at the request of the
petitioner, by the findings of the Plan Commission, or the action of the
Council, the petitioner shall furnish a plat as described herein conforming to
the said changes to the City Attorney.
   (D)   The plat herein described shall be attached to the ordinance or
resolution passed by the Council in taking final action upon the petition and
no resolution or ordinance rezoning property, granting a special use or a
variance or annexing territory to the city shall be in effect until such plat
is furnished and attached to the said resolution or ordinance.
('71 Code, § 11-21-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 1562, passed 3-10-
69)
§ 155.206 REVIEW OF PETITION.
   The regulations imposed and the zoning districts created under this chapter
may be amended by ordinance but no such amendment shall be made by the City
Council without public notice and without a public hearing before the Plan
Commission of the city. The Plan Commission shall hold the public hearing and
forward its recommendations to the Council within 45 days of the date the
petition was submitted to the Plan Commission, unless it is withdrawn by the
petitioner.
('71 Code, § 11-21-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.207 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   The Plan Commission of the city shall cause notice of public hearing of
petitioner's application to be given in the following manner:
   (A)   By publishing notice of the time and place of such hearing in a paper
of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the hearing;
   (B)   By causing said notice to contain the particular location for which
the amendment is requested, as well as a brief statement describing the
proposed amendment; and
   (C)   By notifying such property owners, groups or organizations as it deems
desirable of the proposal.
('71 Code, § 11-21-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.208 WRITTEN PROTEST.
   In the event of a written protest against the proposed amendment signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by
the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately adjoining or across the alley or
rear line therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage directly opposite
the frontage proposed to be altered as to such regulations or zoning district,
and filed with the City Clerk, such amendment shall not be passed except by the
favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the City Council.
('71 Code, § 11-21-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.209 FINAL DECISION.
   (A)   The City Council, without further public hearing, may adopt or deny
the report of the Plan Commission for any proposed amendment, or may refer the
petition back to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
   (B)   Any proposed amendment which fails to receive the approval of a
majority of the Plan Commission members, and is so reported, shall not be
passed by the Council except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the
elected members of the Council.
('71 Code, § 11-21-5) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.220 ENFORCING OFFICER.
   The Building Official of the city is designated as the Zoning Administrator
to be responsible for enforcing the zoning code. Said Building Official shall
have the power and shall see that the provisions of this chapter are properly
enforced.
('71 Code, § 11-20-1) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 4230, passed 2-10-
25)
§ 155.221 BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally
altered until a building permit shall be issued by the Building Official
stating that the building or structure, and use of land, comply with the
regulations of this chapter and all building and health laws and provisions of
this code.
   (B)   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot or lots to
be built upon, the size of the building or structure to be erected or
structurally altered, its location on the lot or lots and such other
information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these
regulations. A careful record of such applications and plats shall be kept in
the office of the Building Official.
('71 Code, § 11-20-2) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 4230, passed 2-10-
25)   
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.222 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered
shall be occupied and used until a certificate of compliance has been issued by
the Building Official. The certificate of compliance shall be issued only after
the Building Official makes a finding that the building or structure has been
erected or structurally altered in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and other health and building laws and per a building permit.
   (B)   Certificates of compliance shall be applied for coincident with the
application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the
erection and alterations of such building shall have been satisfactorily
completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of
the Building Official and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any persons
having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. The fee for
such permit is $25.
   (C)   Certificates for the continued occupancy of nonconforming uses
existing at the time of the passage of this chapter shall be issued by the
Building Official and the certificate shall state that the use is a
nonconforming one and does not conform with the provisions of this chapter. The
Building Official shall notify the owners of property being used as
nonconforming use and shall furnish said owner with a certificate of occupancy
for such nonconforming use.
('71 Code, § 11-20-3) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 4230, passed 2-10-
25)  
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.223 USE PERMIT.
   No change shall be made in the use of a building or part thereof now or
hereafter erected or structurally altered, or in the use of land now or
hereafter occupied, without a use permit having first been issued by the
Building Official. No such permit shall be issued to make such change unless it
is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and amendments thereto
hereafter duly enacted.
('71 Code, § 11-20-4) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 4230, passed 2-10-
25)   
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.224 CONTINUANCE OF EXISTING USES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the continuance of present occupancy
or lawful use of any existing building or zoning lot, except as may be
necessary for the safety of life and property, and except as provided in §§
155.035 through
155.048.
('71 Code, § 11-20-5) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60)
§ 155.225 FEES.
   Filing fees pertaining to petitions for variances, appeals, zoning
regulations amendments, zoning map amendments, and special use permits, shall
be $200 per petition for all such petitions filed for hearings taking place
after March 27, 2023. Such fees shall be paid to the City Clerk, who shall give
a receipt therefor and account for same at regular intervals to the Council.
('71 Code, § 11-20-6) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 3521, passed 11-13-
06; Am. Ord. 4132, passed 3-27-23)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate the provisions of this chapter for which another
penalty has not been provided, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $500. The
minimum fine for any offense of this chapter shall be $25.
   (B)   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the special flood hazard
area (SFHA) or failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or
conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of §§
155.185 through
155.195. Upon due investigation the Building Official may determine that a
violation of the minimum standards of §§
155.185 through
155.195 exist. The Building Official shall notify the owner in writing of such
violation.
      (1)   If such owner fails after ten days' notice to correct the
violation:
         (a)   The city may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with §§
155.185 through
155.195 or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure
compliance with §§
155.185 through
155.195.
         (b)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
      (2)   The Building Official shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
   (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
   (C)   (1)   The City Manager may determine that a violation of the minimum
standards of §§
155.185 through
155.197 exists. The City Manager shall notify the owner in writing of such
violation. If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the violation:
         (a)   The city shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with §§
155.185 through
155.197 or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure
compliance with §§
155.185 through
155.197.
         (b)   Any person who violates §§
155.185 through
155.197 shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than $50 or more than
$750 for each offense.
         (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues; and
         (d)   The city shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
      (2)   (a)   The City Manager shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
         (b)   The City Manager is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing,
indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary,
to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
         (c)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Kewanee Zoning Board of Appeals. Written
notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
            1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
            2.   The time and place of the hearing.
         (d)   At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Kewanee
Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended
or revoked.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
('71 Code, § 11-25-11) (Ord. 1413, passed 9-13-60; Am. Ord. 2581, passed 10-29-
85; Am. Ord. 3666, passed 1-11-11; Am. Ord. 4230, passed 2-10-25)
CHAPTER 156: WELL HEAD SETBACK ZONES
Section
   
156.01   Purpose
   
156.02   Definitions
   
156.03   Prohibitions
   
156.04   Waivers, exceptions, and certifications of minimal hazard
   
156.05   Exclusion
   
156.06   Minimum and maximum setback zone map and description
§ 156.01 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-125-4, ILCS
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 14.2, and ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 14.3; and in the interest of
securing the public health, safety, and welfare; to preserve the quality and
quantity of groundwater resources in order to assure a safe and adequate water
supply for present and future generations; and to preserve groundwater
resources currently in use and those aquifers having a potential for future use
as a public water supply, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
properties located within the minimum setback zone established under Section
14.2 of the Environmental Protection Act ("Act") (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 14.2)
and this chapter, maximum setback zone established under Section 14.3 of the
Act ("Act") (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 14.3) and this chapter.
(Ord. 3074, passed 8-12-96)
§ 156.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as stated in this chapter, and unless a different meaning of a word
or term is clear from the context, the definition of words or terms in this
chapter shall be the same as those used in the Act and the Illinois Groundwater
Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 55, §§ 1 et seq.):
   ACT. The Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.).
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   BOARD. The Illinois Pollution Control Board.
   MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE. The area around a community water supply well
established under Section 14.3 of the Act and this chapter, and described in §
156.06.
   MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE. The area around a community water supply well
established under Section 14.3 of the Act and this chapter, and described in §
156.06.
   POTENTIAL PRIMARY SOURCE. Any unit at a facility or site not currently
subject to a removal or remedial action which:
      (1)   Is used for the treatment, storage, or disposal of any hazardous or
special waste not generated at the site; or
      (2)   Is used for the disposal of municipal waste not generated at the
site, other than landscape waste and construction and demolition debris; or
      (3)   Is used for the landing, land treating, surface impounding or
piling of any hazardous waste that is generated on the site or at other sites
owned, controlled or operated by the same person; or
      (4)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 75,000 pounds above
ground, or more than 7,500 pounds below ground, of any hazardous substances.
A new potential primary source is:
      (1)   A potential primary source which is not in existence or for which
construction has not commenced at its location as of July 1, 1996; or
      (2)   A potential primary source which expands laterally beyond the
currently permitted boundary or, if the primary source is not permitted, the
boundary in existence as of July 1, 1996; or
      (3)   A potential primary source which is part of a facility that
undergoes major reconstruction. Such reconstruction shall be deemed to have
taken place where the fixed capital cost of the new components constructed
within a two-year period exceed 50% of the fixed capital cost of a comparable
entirely new facility.
Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal, state, and
local approvals have been obtained, and work at the site has been initiated and
proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.
   POTENTIAL ROUTE. Abandoned and improperly plugged wells of all kinds,
drainage wells, all injection wells, including closed loop heat pump wells, and
any excavation for the discovery, development or production of stone, sand or
gravel.
A new potential route is:
      (1)   A potential route which is not in existence or for which
construction has not commenced at its location as of July 1, 1996, or
      (2)   A potential route which expands laterally beyond the currently
permitted boundary or, if the potential route is not permitted, the boundary in
existence as of July 1, 1996.
Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal, state, and
local approvals have been obtained, and work at the site has been initiated and
proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.
   POTENTIAL SECONDARY SOURCE. Any unit at a facility or a site not currently
subject to a removal or remedial action, other than a potential primary source,
which:
      (1)   Is used for the landfilling, land treating, or surface impounding
of waste that is generated on the site or at other sites owned, controlled or
operated by the same person, other livestock and landscape waste, and
construction and demolition debris; or
      (2)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 25,000 but not more
than 76,000 pounds above ground, or more than 2,500 but not more than 7,500
pounds below ground, of any hazardous substances; or
      (3)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 25,000 gallons above
ground, or more than 500 gallons below ground, of petroleum, including crude
oil or any fraction thereof which is not otherwise specifically listed or
designated as a hazardous substance; or
      (4)   Stores or accumulates pesticides, fertilizers, or road oils for
purposes of commercial application or for distribution to retail sales outlets;
or
      (5)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 50,000 pounds of any
de-icing agent; or
      (6)   Is used for handling livestock waste or for treating domestic
wastewaters other than private sewage disposal systems as defined in the
"Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act".
A new potential secondary source is:
      (1)   A potential secondary source which is not in existence or for which
construction has not commenced at its location as of July 1, 1996; or
      (2)   A potential secondary source which expands laterally beyond the
currently permitted boundary or, if the secondary source is not permitted, the
boundary in existence as of July 1, 1996, other than an expansion for handling
live stock waster or for treating domestic wastewaters; or
      (3)   A potential secondary source which is part of a facility that
undergoes major reconstruction. Such reconstruction shall be deemed to have
taken place where the fixed capital cost of the new components constructed
within a two-year period exceed 50% of the fixed capital cost of a comparable
entirely new facility.
Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal, state, and
local approvals have been obtained, and work at the site has been initiated and
proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.
   SETBACK ZONE. A geographic area, designated pursuant to the Act, containing
a potable water supply well or a potential source or potential route, having a
continuous boundary, and within which certain prohibitions or regulations are
applicable in order to protect groundwaters.
(Ord. 3074, passed 8-12-96)
§ 156.03 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided otherwise in §§
156.04 or
156.05, no person shall place a new potential primary source, new potential
secondary source, or new potential route within the minimum setback zone.
   (B)   Except as provided otherwise in §
156.04, no person shall place a new potential primary source within the maximum
setback zone.
(Ord. 3074, passed 8-12-96)
§ 156.04 WAIVERS, EXCEPTION, AND CERTIFICATIONS OF MINIMAL HAZARD.
   (A)   If, pursuant to Section 14.2 (b) of the Act, the owner of a new
potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential
route is granted a waiver by the Agency, such owner shall be deemed to have a
waiver to the same extent from §
156.03(A) of this chapter.
   (B)   If, pursuant to Section 14.2(c) of the Act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than landfilling or land treating), new
potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted an exception by
the Board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent
from §
156.03(A) of this chapter.
   (C)   If, pursuant to Section 14.2(c) of the Act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than landfilling or land treating) is granted
an exception by the Board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to
the same extent from §
156.03(B) of this chapter.
   (D)   If, pursuant to Section 14.5 of the Act, the owner of a new potential
primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential route is
issued a certificate of minimal hazard by the Agency, such owner shall not be
subject to §
156.03(A) of this chapter to the same extent that such owner is not subject to
Section 14.2(d) of the Act.
(Ord. 3074, passed 8-12-96)
§ 156.05 EXCLUSION.
   Section
156.03(A) of this chapter shall not apply to new common sources of sanitary
pollution as specified pursuant to Section 17 of the Act and the regulations
adopted thereunder by the Agency; however, no such common sources may be
located within the applicable minimum distance from a community water supply
well specified by such regulations.
(Ord. 3074, passed 8-12-96)
§ 156.06 MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE MAP AND DESCRIPTION.
   A maximum setback zone with a radius of 1,000 feet is established around
each one of Kewanee's water wells referenced in the report indicated below, and
including Well #5, IEPA Operating Permit 0226- FY2003 issued March 7, 2005. A
fill description of the wells and maps of the 1,000 feet maximum set back zone
and also the minimum setback zone around each well is contained in the booklet
presented by the IEPA, Division of Public Water Supplies and published by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency in August 1995. This booklet is titled
"Groundwater Quality Protection Program: City of Kewanee, Facility Number
0730650, Well Site Survey Report". This booklet is attached to the original of
this chapter and considered to be a part of this chapter. The City Clerk will
maintain a copy of the Kewanee Well Site Survey Report, bound with the original
ordinance.
(Ord. 3074, passed 8-12-96; Am. Ord. 3466, passed 4-11-05)
CHAPTER 157: STORM WATER, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section
   
157.001   Purpose
   
157.002   Definitions
   
157.003   Storm water regulations
   
157.004   Soil erosion and sedimentation control principles
   
157.005   Adherence to approved drainage plans; enforcement; appeal
 
   
157.999   Penalty
§ 157.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Storm water regulations. It is not the intent of this chapter to take
areas out of use for the sole purpose of storing excess storm water. Nor is it
the purpose of this chapter to restrict land use or increase development costs.
The basic purpose of this chapter is to eliminate the storage or transportation
of excess storm water in or through habitable structures. The use of "natural"
paths of storm water runoff to form the "by-pass" channel and the restriction
of this channel to form storage areas is encouraged. Since political and
ownership boundaries often make the use of "natural" drainage patterns
difficult, the earthmoving that is accomplished to create the maximum land
usage should also be planned to provide a "by-pass" channel for storm water
that will not create a diversion of storm water drainage or radically change
the watershed boundaries. The drainage scheme presented by those who wish to
develop property in the city should be planned to accomplish all of the storm
water controls of this chapter without major loss of land use.
   (B)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control. In regards to soil erosion and
sedimentation control, the purpose of this chapter is to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and the environment in
which they live by guiding, regulating and controlling the design,
construction, use and maintenance of any development or other activity which
disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on
land, or removes natural or cultivated vegetation, and which thereby creates
the increased possibility of soil erosion, sediment deposits or flooding.
(Ord. 3270, passed 8-28-00)
§ 157.002 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
   BY-PASS CHANNEL. A channel formed in the topography of the earth's surface
to carry storm water runoff through a specific area.
   CLEARING. The cutting or destruction of trees, tree stumps of less than six
inches in diameter, brush, or structures.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the volume of storm water
runoff that passes through it during a specific length of time.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to erection or removal of buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, stripping,
clearing, removal or drilling operations.
   DRAINAGE. The removal of surface or ground water from a given area either by
gravity or by pumping.
   DRAINAGEWAY. A ditch, levee, watercourse, or other natural or artificial
condition for the removal of surplus or excess surface water collecting or
accumulating on the land.
   DRY BOTTOM STORM WATER STORAGE AREA. A facility that is designed to be
normally dry and contains water only when excess storm water runoff occurs.
   EROSION. The natural wearing away of the land by the action of running water
and/or wind.
   EROSION, ACCELERATED. An increased wearing away of the land by the action of
running water and/or wind resulting from the development of land, destruction
of vegetative cover, or other activity of man.
   EXCAVATE. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed.
   EXCAVATION. The condition resulting from excavating.
   EXCESS STORM WATER.  That portion of storm water runoff which exceeds the
transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage channels serving a
specific watershed.
   EXPOSED LAND. Land which has been stripped or from which vegetative cover
and/or topsoil has been removed.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location.
   GRADE, EXISTING. The vertical location of the existing ground or other
surface prior to excavation or filling.
   GRADE, FINAL. The vertical location of the ground or other surface after the
grading work is completed in accordance with the erosion and sedimentation
control plan.
   GRADE, ROUGH. The vertical location of the ground or other surface after the
commencement of grading but prior to the establishment of final grade.
   GRADING. To excavate or fill or any combination thereof.
   GROUND WATER RECHARGE. Replenishment of existing natural underground water
supplies.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE. Channels formed by the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   PARCEL. All contiguous land under single ownership and/or unified control or
all land included within a storm water control plan or an erosion and
sedimentation control plan, whichever is greater.
   POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET. A term used to describe the drainage of an area by
means of natural gravity so that it lowers the free water surface to a point
below the existing grade or invert of storm drains within the area.
   RECOGNIZED AGENCY. An agency or governmental unit that has statistically and
consistently examined local and climatic and geologic conditions and maintained
records as they apply to storm water runoff, e.g., U.S. Weather Bureau,
University of Illinois Engineering Experiment Station, Illinois State Water
Survey, etc.
   REMOVAL. Removing vegetation (including ground cover) to the ground and
complete extraction of tree stumps by cutting, burning, chemical application or
other means.
   SAFE STORM DRAINAGE CAPACITY. A term used to describe the quantity of storm
water runoff that can be transported by a channel or conduit without having the
water surface rise above the level of the earth's surface over the conduit, or
adjacent to the waterway.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process of forming and depositing of suspended matter
carried in suspension in water through the action of gravity. It is usually
accomplished by reducing the velocity of the water below the point where it can
transport the suspended material.
   SETTLING. See SEDIMENTATION.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. Water that results from precipitation which is not
absorbed by the soil or plant material.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF RELEASE RATE. The rate at which storm water runoff is
released from dominant to servient land.
   STORM WATER STORAGE AREA. Areas designated to store excess storm water.
   STRIPPING. Any activity which relocates topsoil and tree stumps with
diameters of six inches or more from the site, or relocated topsoil for storage
for later use on the site.
   STRUCTURE. Any object which is constructed or erected and which requires
permanent location on the land or attachment to an object having permanent
location on the land. The term STRUCTURE is intended to include, but not be
limited to, such objects as buildings, fences, parking lots, concrete or
asphalt slabs, decks and patios.
   STRUCTURE, HYDRAULIC. Any engineering structure for the purpose of
regulation and control of water.
   STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY. Any structure used to retard erosion or limit the flow
of water, constructed of nondurable materials in a manner to insure temporary
control of waterflow rates for beneficial use over as short a period as one or
two seasons.
   TRIBUTARY WATERSHED. All of the area that contributes storm water runoff to
a given point.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently, and if the latter, with some degree of regularity. Such flow
must be in a definite direction and cover a prescribed area. Watercourses may
be either natural or artificial, and both may occur either on the surface or
underground.
   WATERCOURSE, ARTIFICIAL. A surface or underground watercourse constructed by
man.
   WATERCOURSE, NATURAL. A surface or underground watercourse created by
natural forces and conditions.
   WATERCOURSE, UNDERGROUND. A geological formation which contains water moving
in a known direction and defined channel.
(Ord. 3270, passed 8-28-00)
§ 157.003 STORM WATER REGULATIONS.
   Drainage schemes for control of storm water shall comply with the following
regulations.
   (A)   The controlled release and storage of excess storm water runoff shall
be required in combination for all developments except single-family
residential developments that contain an area less than one acre.
   (B)   The controlled release rate of storm water runoff from all
developments described in subsection (A), hereof, shall not exceed the existing
"safe" storm drainage capacity of the natural downstream outlet channel or
storm sewer system. The rate at which storm water runoff is delivered to a
designated storm water storage area shall be unrestricted.
   (C)   Storm water channels.
      (1)   A "natural" or surface channel system shall be designed with
adequate capacity to convey through the development the storm water runoff from
all tributary upstream areas. This "by-pass" channel shall be designed to carry
the peak rate of runoff from a 100-year frequency rain event, assuming all
storm sewers are blocked and that the upstream areas are fully developed and
have been saturated with antecedent rainfall. No habitable structures shall be
constructed within this floodway, however, streets and parking or playground
areas and utility easements shall be considered compatible uses.
      (2)   Design of this floodway system shall also take into consideration
control of storm water velocity to prevent erosion or other damage to the
facility which will restrict its primary use. Depths of flow shall be kept to a
minimum and retention of channel configurations shall be totally under
Municipal control. In the event that the area within this "by-pass" channel is
reshaped or restricted for use as a floodway, the Municipality will cause to
have any restrictions removed at the expense of the party or parties causing
said restriction.
      (3)   Should the development contain an existing "natural" waterway, this
land configuration shall be preserved as part of the "by-pass" channel system.
Construction of a "low flow" system of storm sewers to carry the minor storm
runoff and reshaping of the channel with a maximum of six horizontal to one
vertical (6:1) side slopes and bottom of a width adequate to facilitate
maintenance and carry the flood runoff without eroding velocities shall be
included in the plans for land development.
   (D)   The required volume for storm water detention shall be calculated on
the basis of the runoff from a 25-year frequency rain event of any duration as
published by a recognized agency. This volume of storage shall be provided for
the fully developed watershed that is tributary to the area designated for
detention purposes. The storm water release rate shall be considered when
calculating the storm water storage capacity and the control structure designed
to maintain a relatively uniform flow rate regardless of the depth of storm
water in the storage area.
   (E)   Dry bottom storm water storage areas.
      (1)   Dry bottom storm water storage areas shall be designed to serve a
secondary purpose for recreation, open space or other types of uses that will
not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent flooding. A method of
carrying the low flow through these areas shall be provided in addition to a
system of drains, and both shall be provided with a positive gravity outlet to
a natural channel or storm sewer with adequate capacity as described in §
157.002 hereof.
      (2)   The combination of storage of water from a 25-year storm and the
design release rate shall not result in a storage duration in excess of 72
hours. Maximum depth of planned storm water storage shall not exceed four feet
unless the existing natural ground contours and other conditions lend to
greater storage depth, which shall be approved by the municipality. Minimum
grades for turf areas shall be 2% and maximum slopes shall be 10% (ten units
horizontally to one unit vertically). Storage area side slopes shall be kept as
close to the natural land contours as practical and a 10% slope or less shall
be used wherever possible. If slopes greater than 10% are necessary to meet
storage requirements or area restrictions, approval shall be obtained from the
Municipality and suitable erosion control provided in addition to the
protection required to insure public health, safety and welfare.
      (3)   Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible
and shall require little or no attention for proper operation. Outlet control
structures shall also be designed in consideration of the safety of adjacent
persons and property. When necessary, said structures will have features to
restrict access to unwanted parties. Each storm water storage area shall be
provided with a method of emergency overflow in the event that a storm in
excess of the 25-year frequency storm occurs. This emergency overflow facility
shall be designed to function without attention and shall become part of the
"natural" or surface channel system described in §
157.002 hereof. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all
design features.
      (4)   Both outlet control structures and emergency overflow facilities
shall be designed and constructed to fully protect the public health, safety
and welfare. Storm water runoff velocities shall be kept at a minimum and
turbulent conditions at an outfall control structure will not be permitted
without complete protection for the public safety. The use of restrictive
fences shall be kept to a minimum and used only as a last resort when no other
method is feasible.
   (F)   Rooftop and paved storm water storage areas.
      (1)   Rooftop storage shall be designed with permanent-type control
inlets and parapet walls to contain runoff on the rooftop. Emergency overflow
areas shall be provided to insure that the weight of water stored will not
exceed the structural capacity of the roof.
      (2)   Paved surfaces that are to serve as storm water storage areas shall
have minimum grades of 1% and shall be restricted to storage depths of one foot
maximum. Release rates and storage volume requirements for paved storage areas
remain the same as outlined in §
157.002 hereof. If a portion of an area within a storm water storage area is to
be paved for parking or recreational purposes, the paved surface shall be
placed at the highest elevation within the storage area as possible. Maximum
parking lot grades shall not exceed normal design parameters of 3% to 5%.
   (G)   Plans and approval required. Plans, specifications and all
calculations for storm water runoff control as required hereunder shall be
submitted to the city for review and approval prior to the approval of a final
plat, in the case of subdivisions, or issuance of a building permit, in the
case of planned unit developments, commercial, industrial, or qualifying
residential construction. Final engineering plans and calculations shall show
complete details for all of the items covered in this chapter and shall be
submitted for review and approved prior to the start of construction.
   (H)   Control facilities constructed first. Where development of a property
presents the threat of flooding or damage by flash runoff to downstream
residents, the facilities for storm water runoff control shall be constructed
prior to any earthmoving or drainage construction on the project site.
   (I)   Construction precautions. During the construction phases of land
development, facilities shall be provided to prevent the erosion and washing
away of the earth. Refer to §§
157.004,
157.005 and
157.999 for regulations concerning controlling erosion and sedimentation during
development.
(Ord. 3270, passed 8-28-00)
§ 157.004 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PRINCIPLES.
   (A)   Objective. It is the objective of this chapter to control soil erosion
and sedimentation resulting from development activities in the city. Measures
taken to control erosion and sedimentation should be adequate to assure that
sediment is not transported from the site by storm events of a ten year
frequency, or less. The following principles shall apply to all development
activities within the city; and division (B)(9) below shall apply to all sites
at all times, regardless of whether development activities are being performed
on the site.
   (B)   General design principles.
      (1)   Site development should be planned so that it is consistent with
and conforms to the topography and soils of the site so as to prevent and
minimize soil erosion. Radical cuts and fills should be avoided in areas of
steep slopes. Natural contours should be maintained as much as possible.
      (2)   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever
possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses shall be left
undisturbed wherever possible to form a buffer to keep soil on the site. At a
minimum, the undisturbed areas of natural vegetation shall be at least twenty-
five feet wide.
      (3)   The area of land exposed during site development should be limited
to the smallest working area practicable. The period of time during which land
is exposed without vegetation should be limited to the shortest period
practicable and should be during periods of the least intense rainfall.
Stripping and excavation should be minimized. Vegetative cover should be
restored at the earliest possible time. Large topsoil stockpiles and land
removal of topsoil should be minimized. Topsoil stockpiles should be
revegetated during periods of extended use.
      (4)   For channelized or concentrated flows, sediment basins, debris
basins, desilting basins, or silt traps should be installed and maintained to
remove sediment from run-off waters from land undergoing development. To remove
sediment from sheet flow run-off, silt fence, filter fence, or vegetative
filter strips should be used. These control devices shall be installed prior to
work starting in the development and shall remain in place until vegetative
cover is re-established permanently, and all other permanent control devices
are installed and functioning.
      (5)   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should
be based on the probable frequency of climatic and other events likely to
contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs, and benefits
involved.
      (6)   Aesthetics, public health and the requirements of continuing
maintenance should be considered in the design and implementation of erosion
control facilities and practices as part of an erosion and sedimentation
control plan.
      (7)   Provision should be made to accommodate the increased water run-off
caused by changed soil and surface conditions both during and after
development. Drainage ways should be designed and constructed so that their
final gradients and the resultant velocities of water will not create
additional erosion on site or beyond the project limits.
      (8)   Permanent vegetation and hydraulic structures should be established
and installed as soon as practicable during development.
      (9)   Measures shall be taken to prevent tracking of mud and sediment
onto public ways. This shall include, as a minimum, a means of vehicular egress
from the site that has installed therein a rock driving surface, underlain with
filter fabric, which extends back on to the development site at least 30 feet
from the paved road surface on a single residence lot, and 70 feet from the
paved road surface for all other developments. The rock composing this means of
egress shall be IDOT coarse aggregate gradations CA-1 or CA-2. This rock
surface shall be replenished and maintained so that it serves the purpose for
which it is intended throughout the period of development. Any mud or sediment
that does get deposited on a public way via vehicle or other means, shall be
removed within two hours so as to prevent any accumulation.
   (C)   Erosion and sedimentation control plans. All commercial, industrial,
residential, and planned development projects shall have erosion and
sedimentation control plans prepared and submitted to the city for review prior
to commencing. Said plans shall show:
      (1)   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within 100 feet
of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than one foot contour intervals and
clearly portraying the topography and drainage pattern of the area.
      (2)   The location of existing buildings, temporary structures,
utilities, water bodies, flood plains, hydraulic structures, paved areas and
other significant natural or man-made features on the site and adjacent land
within 100 feet of the boundary.
      (3)   Proposed use of the site, including present development and planned
development and utilization; areas of excavation, grading, and filling;
proposed contours, finished grades, and street profiles; provisions for storm
drainage, including the control of accelerated erosion, with a drainage area
map and computations; kinds and locations of utilities; and areas and acreages
proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or
left undisturbed.
      (4)   All erosion and sedimentation control devices, structures or
measures necessary to comply with the general principles of this chapter and
the standards set forth herein. The erosion and sedimentation control plan
shall show all such devices, structures or measures to be employed temporarily
during development of the parcel and to be employed permanently upon completion
of development. These measures shall be shown on the detailed grading plan.
      (5)   Provisions for maintenance of erosion and sedimentation control
devices, structures or measures.
      (6)   Identification of the person(s) who will have responsibility for
maintenance of erosion and sedimentation control devices, structures and
measures, during and after development is completed.
      (7)   As a minimum measure, staked hay bales or acceptable alternatives
shall be properly placed around the frames of all open lid structures, e.g.
storm sewer inlets, during construction to prevent sediment from clogging
sewers and ditches and polluting or silting drainage facilities, watercourses
or bodies of water. Where needed to reduce erosion and sediment movement from
sheet flow, silt filter fence or vegetative filter strips shall be used.
   (D)   Special precautions. If at any stage of development, the City Engineer
determines that the nature of the site, parcel or lot is such that further work
already authorized may cause harm or accelerated erosion to any property,
public way, watercourse, drainageway, hydraulic structure or other structure,
the City Engineer may require that such reasonable special precautions be taken
as are necessary or appropriate to avoid such harm or accelerated erosion.
"Special precautions" may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the
following requirements: a more level exposed slope, construction of additional
drainage structures, berms, terracing, compaction, cribbing, installation of
plant materials for erosion control, other temporary structures, implementation
of recommendations of a soils engineer and/or engineering geologist, or
completion of work in stages so as to insure completion of protective measures
or devices by specified dates.
   (E)   Upon finding by the City Engineer that the plans submitted are in
compliance with this chapter, work directly covered by the plans may commence
as approved.
(Ord. 3270, passed 8-28-00)
§ 157.005 ADHERENCE TO APPROVED PLANS; ENFORCEMENT; APPEAL.
   (A)   Adherence to approved plans.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or improve any
structure, to grade or do any earth moving, to construct or improve any by-pass
channel or storm water storage area, or perform any removal, grading, clearing,
stripping, excavating, filling, development or to install any control
structure, on any property subject to this chapter or on any property for which
final engineering plans have been approved pursuant to this chapter, except as
provided for in such final engineering plans as are approved pursuant to this
chapter.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property which has been
improved, graded or developed in accordance with final engineering plans
approved pursuant to this chapter or upon which a control structure has been
installed or a by-pass channel or storm water storage area has been constructed
in accordance with such engineering plans, to alter or change any structure,
grade, contour line, by-pass channel or storm water storage area in
contravention of such approved engineering plans; to alter or remove any
control structure required by such approved engineering plans; or to allow the
property to remain in a condition which does not conform to such approved
engineering plans in any respect.
   (B)   Enforcement. The City Manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized
and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. Upon
presentation of proper credentials, the City Manager, or his designee, and any
duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times upon any property
within the city to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject
property in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
   (C)   Duty of property owner. It shall be the duty of the owner of any
property required to be improved or developed in conformance with plans
approved pursuant to this chapter to bring such property into compliance with
said plans within ten days of receipt of notice from the City Manager, or his
designee, that a determination has been made that the property does not conform
to the plans under which said property was improved or developed.
   (D)   Right of appeal.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved by a determination of the City Manager, or his
designee, in regard to this chapter, or any person desiring a variance to the
strict application of these regulations, may file an appeal with the Building
Board of Appeals by serving written notice on the City Manager. Said appeal or
request for variance shall be filed within three days of the determination
being appealed. The Building Board of Appeals shall conduct a hearing on the
request for relief within three days of the request being filed. The Building
Board of Appeals shall forward a determination on the appeal or request for
variance within three days of the conclusion of the hearing on the matter.
      (2)   Pending the result of such an appeal, the city shall take no action
against the property owner except in those cases where the City Engineer
determines that the condition of the subject property presents an immediate
threat of flooding, erosion, or damage by flash runoff to downstream residents.
In such event, the city may seek immediate compliance with the approved plans
for said property.
(Ord. 3270, passed 8-28-00)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate the provisions of this chapter for which another
penalty has not been provided, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $500. The
minimum fine for any offense of this chapter shall be $100. In addition to said
fines, violators shall be responsible for any and all damages to public and
private property and improvements arising from their failure to comply with
this section.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 3270, passed 8-28-00)
CHAPTER 158: FENCE REGULATIONS
Section
   
158.01   Title
   
158.02   Purpose and intent
   
158.03   Definitions
   
158.04   Nonconforming fences
   
158.05   Permits required; compliance with codes
   
158.06   Applicability
   
158.07   Construction, appearance and maintenance
   
158.08   Location
 
   
158.99   Penalty
§ 158.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Fence Regulations
of the City of Kewanee.
(Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17)
§ 158.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the materials, location, height,
and maintenance of fencing, walls and decorative posts in order to prevent the
creation of nuisances and to promote the general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17)
§ 158.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FENCE. A barrier constructed of materials other than living shrubbery or
solid masonry erected for the purpose of protection, confinement, enclosure, or
privacy.
   PRIVACY FENCE. An opaque fence made of wood or masonry along alleys and
common lot lines that serves to lessen the noticeable effects of the activities
on one side of the fence to an observer on the other side. No more than 10%
visibility is permitted through said fence when the viewer’s line of vision is
perpendicular to the length of the fence.
(Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17)
§ 158.04 NONCONFORMING FENCES.
   Any permanent fence which meets the definitions herein of fence and privacy
fence which was installed prior to the adoption of this chapter which fails to
meet any of the applicable requirements of this chapter, excluding requirements
related to maintenance, safety, visibility and vision clearance may be
considered a legal nonconforming fence and may be permitted to continue in such
status until it is either abandoned or removed by its owner.
(Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17)
§ 158.05 PERMITS REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.
   (A)   No person shall install, or cause to be constructed, any fence or
screening upon property within the city without first obtaining from the
Building Official a permit fn writing to do so. Where applicable, all work
shall conform to the current adapted building code pursuant to §
150.015 of this code.
   (B)   In addition, any fence or screen, if deemed necessary by the Building
Official or his or her designee, shall be painted, stained or treated with an
appropriate material or substance with a weather resistant characteristic to
cause the fence or screen to be compatible with structures in the surrounding
neighborhood. All such work shall be completed within six months from the date
of receiving a permit from the city.
(Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17) Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.06 APPLICABILITY.
   The requirements of this chapter apply to all fencing 30 inches or more in
height, for all land uses and activities.
(Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17)
§ 158.07 CONSTRUCTION, APPEARANCE AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Appearance.
      (1)   Orientation. For all fences and screens constructed or installed
after the passing of this chapter, the finished side of all fences shall face
outward from the subject property. Visible supports and other structural
components shall be placed and face inward toward the subject property, with
exception to fences that are designed and constructed such that the fence panel
components are attached to the side of a post perpendicular to the panel.
      (2)   Opacity. Any fence within a street yard, including along property
lines that intersect a right-of-way shall have 50% visibility; however, fences
abutting a railroad right-of-way may be solid.
   (B)   Materials.
      (1)   Residential districts. Acceptable materials for constructing
fencing, walls and decorative posts include wood (that is designed, milled and
treated as such to be used for fencing purposes), stone, brick, wrought iron,
vinyl and chain link. Any fence within a street yard, including along property
lines that intersect a right-of-way, shall have 50% visibility. All fences must
be kept in good repair and appearance maintained.
      (2)   Nonresidential districts. Acceptable materials for constructing
fencing and decorative posts include wood (that is designed, milled and treated
as such to be used for fencing purposes), stone, brick, wrought iron, vinyl,
chain link and corrugated steel panels providing that the corrugated steel
panels are treated with a rust preventative treatment that is weather
resistant, is compliant with §
158.05(B) herein and is approved by the Building Official. Barbed wire fencing
is permitted only in manufacturing districts and at heights greater than eight
feet. The height of the barbed wire is not to exceed two feet above the top of
the fence to which it is attached. All barbs and prongs shall be faced toward
the ground. The installation of barbed wire fencing is prohibited along any
property line abutting a residentially zoned property unless set back from the
property line adjacent to the residential property by no less than 15 feet. Any
fence within a street yard, including along property lines that intersect a
right-of-way, shall have 50% visibility.
      (3)   Nonresidential abutting residential. Privacy screening with uniform
eight-foot height must be provided where business or manufacturing abuts a
residential district.
         (a)   No sharp pointed pickets.
         (b)   No barbed wire fence except as permitted in division (B)(2)
herein.
         (c)   No chain link topped by barbed wire except as permitted in
division (B)(2) herein.
         (d)   All fences must be kept in good repair and appearance
maintained.
         (e)   The portion of screening abutting a residential district and
paralleling a means of egress to a public way on either side of the screening,
as measured from the public right-of-way toward the interior of the abutting
properties, for a distance of not less than 20 feet and not greater than 30
feet, shall comply with all regulations for that of the adjacent residential
district.
      (4)   Temporary fencing following purposes may be allowed:
         (a)   Use of rolled wood or plastic snow fencing for the purposes of
limiting snow drifting between November 1 and April 1.
         (b)   For the protection of excavation and construction sites and the
protection of plants during grading construction. Fencing for excavation sites
shall be a minimum of 48 inches in height.
         (c)   For security fencing of permitted temporary use or temporary
outdoor entertainment areas.
         (d)   For the purpose of keeping wildlife out of personal gardens on
residential property provided that said fencing surrounds live vegetation
intended for consumption and said fencing is not a substitute for permanent
fencing. Once the garden has died off and/or the garden is not being
maintained, the fencing shall be removed.
      (5)   Dangerous or hazardous fences. Fences constructed of any material
deemed to be dangerous or hazardous to the public’s welfare and safety by the
Building Official, such as and including electrified, barbed wire and spike-
topped fences shall be prohibited except as permitted in division (B)(2).
   (C)   Visibility. Any fence located within a front or street yard, including
along property lines that intersect a right-of-way, shall have 50% visibility.
   (D)   Height.
      (1)   Maximum. The maximum height of any fence or decorative post shall
be the following:
         (a)   Four feet when located within a required front yard or street
yard on any property.
         (b)   Six feet when:
            1.   Located on any residential property, but not within a required
front yard or a required street yard, except as allowed along a railroad right-
of-way in division (D)(2)(b).
               a.   Exception. When determined by the Building Official that no
safety hazard is created, a six foot fence may be installed in a side yard
adjacent to an intersecting street. The Building Official shall confer with the
Chief of Police that no hazard will be created by such a fence.
            2.   Located on any non-residential property abutting a residential
property, but not within a required front yard or within the required front
yard of an abutting residential property and set back less than 15 feet.
         (c)   Eight feet when:
            1.   Located on any nonresidential-zoned property, but not within a
required front yard or a required street yard, or not within a required front
yard or required street yard setback of an abutting residential property, or
set back at least 15 feet.
            2.   Located on any non-residential property abutting residential
property and set back more than 15 feet.
            3.   Located on any public, institutional, public utility, and
recreational property.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)   Non-residential uses. The maximum heights may be exceeded with
the approval of a variance pursuant to sections §§
33.061 through
33.066. At a minimum, the following conditions shall be established for such
requests:
            1.   The increase in height shall in no way further obstruct vision
for intersecting streets, driveways, sidewalks or other areas.
            2.   The fencing material, any protective treatment and appearance
must be compatible with structures and property in the surrounding
neighborhood.
            3.   The fencing must comply with all required setbacks herein.
         (b)   Along railroad. A fence which is constructed on that portion of
property that abuts a railroad right-of-way may be permitted at a height of not
more than eight feet and may be of a solid nature.
         (c)   Public recreation use areas. Public recreation use areas,
courts, fields and diamonds may be enclosed along their boundaries with an open
type fence to a height not to exceed eight feet.
         (d)   Swimming pools. Fencing for all swimming pools shall comply with
the regulations outlined in
Chapter 159, Swimming Pool Regulations. To be written and submitted at the same
time as this chapter.
   (F)   Maintenance. All fences, or decorative posts shall be maintained in a
structurally sound and attractive manner.
(Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17; Am. Ord. 4232, passed 3-24-25)
§ 158.08 LOCATION.
   (A)   Yards. Fences or decorative posts may be located in any required yard.
   (B)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Right-of-way. No fence, wall, or decorative post shall be located
in any right-of-way.
      (2)   Property line. Fences may be located on any property line abutting
a side or rear yard.
         (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner
constructing or installing any fence to determine the location of all property
lines affected by the fence. It is recommended that property lines be located
by way of a licensed land survey.
         (b)   Any fence found to be installed past the boundaries of the
property lines of the property owner constructing or installing a fence shall
be removed immediately at such person’s expense.
   (C)   Non-residential abutting residential. On all business or manufacturing
properties adjacent to a residentially zoned property or property used for
residential purposes as of the passing of this section, fences may be located
on any property line abutting a rear or side yard, but shall be located no
closer than the required front yard setback of the abutting residential
property. Except that a fence in the required front yard setback shall be
installed in compliance with §
158.07 herein.
   (D)   Public utilities. Public utility uses such as transformer substations,
or other hazardous uses, shall be fenced to a height of not less than six feet.
When the lot line of such utility use coincides with a lot line in a
residential district, the fencing installed shall provide adequate screening.
The screening shall be a privacy fence or an open or semi-open fence with
shrubbery, maintained to keep a clean and trimmed appearance, to a height of
not less than six feet. When a public utility use fronts on a public street,
similar fencing and landscaping shall be required.
   (E)   Near structures on adjacent property. No fence shall be located in
such a manner that it prohibits the normal maintenance of structures located on
adjacent property.
   (F)   Vision clearance on corner lots. In any required front, side, rear or
transitional yard of a corner lot, no structure, planting or other obstruction
to vision of drivers of motor vehicles, located within 20 feet of the
intersecting right-of-way lines bordering such corner lot, shall exceed a
height of four feet above grade and shall have a minimum 50% visibility. In any
case where a motorist may have to have visibility through two sections of fence
on the same property that are installed parallel to each other the combined
visibility of the fence panels shall be a minimum of 50%.
   (G)   Easements. Fences installed on public/utility easements shall be of a
removable nature. Any fence of a permanent nature on an easement shall be
removed at the owner’s expense at the request of any public utility or the
city.
   (H)   Vision clearance at alleyways and public or private driveways or
entrances. The Building Official may restrict the installations of fences near
alleyways and public or private driveways or entrances as required in the
interest of vision clearance and driver and pedestrian trafic.
(Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17; Am. Ord. 4232, passed 3-24-25)  Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The provisions of §
10.99 shall apply to this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violating the regulations set forth in this chapter shall
be fined in a sum of not less than $50 and not to exceed $500 for any one
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day
during which a violation continues or exists.
(Ord. 3875, passed 3-27-17)
CHAPTER 159: SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS
Section
   
159.01   Title
   
159.02   Purpose and intent
   
159.03   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
159.04   Amendments; modifications
   
159.05   Nonconforming pools
   
159.06   Definitions
   
159.07   Permits required; compliance with codes
   
159.08   Location
   
159.09   Barriers
   
159.10   Operation and maintenance
 
   
159.99   Penalty
§ 159.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Swimming Pool
Regulations of the City of Kewanee.
(Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17)
§ 159.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the installation, maintenance of
swimming pools in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the
general welfare of the public. Every swimming pool constructed, installed and
maintained hereafter shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17)
§ 159.03 INTERNATIONAL POOL AND SPA CODE.
   A certain document which is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the
city being marked and designated as the “International Pool and Spa Code,” 2021
Edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by
the city.
(Ord. 4233, passed 3-24-25)
§ 159.04 AMENDMENTS; MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Replace Section 305.1 with the following:
      305.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to the design
of barriers for restricting entry into areas having pools and spas. Where spas
or hot tubs are equipped with a lockable safety cover complying with ASTM
F1346, the areas where those spas or hot tubs are located shall not be required
to comply with Sections 305.2 through 305.7.
   (B)   Delete Section 305.2.4 and Section 305.2.4.1.
(Ord. 4233, passed 3-24-25)
§ 159.05 NONCONFORMING POOLS.
   Any permanent above ground pool which meets the definitions herein of
permanent above ground pool and any in-ground pool which was installed prior to
the adoption of this chapter which fails to meet any of the applicable
requirements of this chapter, excluding requirements related to maintenance and
safety may be considered a legal nonconforming pool and may be permitted to
continue in such status until it is either abandoned or removed by its owner.
(Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 4233, passed 3-24-25)
§ 159.06 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERMANENT ABOVE GROUND POOL. An above ground or on-ground pool having rigid
metal or composite sides with vertical supports evenly spaced around the
perimeter of the pool and a top rail or cap around the perimeter of the pool.
PERMANENT ABOVE GROUND POOLS shall have at minimum one skimmer opening and one
inlet connected to adequately sized circulation equipment.
   PORTABLE SWIMMING POOL. On-ground storable pool.
   TEMPORARY POOL. A pool which is installed for a period of not more than 180
days and removed from site and/or placed in storage. TEMPORARY POOL shall mean
on-ground storable swimming pool.
(Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 4233, passed 3-24-25)
§ 159.07 PERMITS REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances within the
city without first obtaining from the Building Official a permit in writing to
do so, except those pools specifically exempt. This includes all above ground
pools which exceed either 5,000 gallons or are capable of greater than 24
inches in water depth. Where applicable, all work shall conform to the current
adopted building code pursuant to §
150.015 of this code.
   (B)   On-ground storable swimming pools which exceed 5,000 gallons or are
capable of greater than 24 inches in water depth shall require a permit. The
permit is applied for and purchased one time and is good for only the pool
structure, address and owner that the permit was originally applied for. This
permit is not transferable to another address, person or pool structure. In the
event that a pool different from the one originally applied for is installed,
then a new permit application and fee shall be submitted to the Building
Official. This same process shall be followed should the owner of the pool move
to a different address and wish to install the pool at the new location or if
the pool changes ownership. If the owner of the pool wishes to change the
location of the pool upon the original property, this too shall require a new
permit application and fee.
   (C)   Exempt pools. Storable and temporary swimming pools less than 5,000
gallons and are not capable of water depth of greater than 24 inches that are
drained and stored when not in use shall be exempt from required permits but
shall comply with all other sections of this chapter which may require other
permits to be obtained from the Building Official.
(Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 4233, passed 3-24-25)
§ 159.08 LOCATION.
   (A)   All swimming pools authorized by permit shall be located at least
eight feet from any structure excluding fences and decks. Swimming pools and
any attached or functionally related deck shall comply with the required yard
setbacks for the relevant zoning district.
      (1)   Exception. Swimming pools may be located within three feet of an
accessory upon the same parcel and ownership as the swimming pool but not
closer than eight feet to an accessory structure upon a neighboring parcel.
   (B)   Swimming pools and any attached or functionally related deck shall
comply with the required yard setbacks for the relevant zoning district.
   (C)   No pool shall be located within a drainage or utility easement.
   (D)   Swimming pools shall not be located in a required yard adjacent to a
street right-of-way. Exception: The Building Official may grant permission for
a swimming pool to be located in a required yard adjacent to a street right-of-
way if the following exists:
      (1)   There exists no rear yard or side yard not adjacent to a street
right-of-way with adequate square footage to allow for swimming pool
installation and required setbacks for the relevant zoning district.
      (2)   The swimming pool complies with all other required setbacks for the
relevant zoning district.
      (3)   Fencing is installed in compliance with the regulations of this
chapter and that of
Chapter 158.
   (E)   Equipment. All pumps and filtration equipment shall comply with the
same setback requirements for the relevant zoning district but not less than
eight feet whichever is greater.
(Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 4233, passed 3-24-25) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.09 BARRIERS.
All pools capable of greater than 24 inches of water depth shall be completely
enclosed by a fence of not less than 48 inches in height above grade in
compliance with
Chapter 158 and Section 305 of the International Pool and Spa Code.
(Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 4233, passed 3-24-25) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.10 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The provisions of this section apply to circulation systems for swimming
pools.
   (A)   Maintenance of swimming pool equipment. All equipment required for
circulation, filtration, fencing, decking and including all other components of
the swimming pool and its required structural components by this code or the
swimming pools manufacturer must be maintained in good operational condition.
All mechanical equipment must be kept in good operational condition as to not
cause excessive noise.
   (B)   Swimming pools must be kept free of by waste, dirt, refuse, plant
growth, insects or any other means of contamination.
   (C)   All pool and spa components must be kept in compliance with the
adopted International Pool and Spa Code.
   (D)   Electrical requirements.
      (1)   All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in
conjunction with swimming pools shall be in conformance with the city
electrical code.
      (2)   No current-carrying electrical conductors shall cross swimming
pools either overhead or underground or within an area so as to endanger
occupants.
      (3)   All metal fence enclosures or railing near or adjacent to private
residential swimming pool which might become electrically alive as a result of
contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause shall be
effectively grounded.
(Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 4233, passed 3-24-25)
§ 159.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The provisions of §
10.99 shall apply to this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violating the regulations set forth in this chapter shall
be fined in a sum of not less than $50 and not to exceed $500 for any one
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day
during which a violation continues or exists.
(Ord. 3876, passed 2-27-17)
CHAPTER 160: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REGULATIONS
General Provisions
   
160.01   Purpose and intent
   
160.02   Definitions
   
160.03   Individuals installing solar energy systems require certification
Permits, Fees, and Standards
   
160.15   Permits required for roof/building-mounted small solar energy systems
   
160.16   Permits required for ground-mounted small solar energy systems
   
160.17   Permits required for large solar energy systems
 
   
160.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 160.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations for the location, installation, operation, and maintenance of solar
energy systems. Solar energy systems include photovoltaic, thermal collector,
or any other solar powered system to be installed on property within the limits
of the city.
(Ord. 3930, passed 5-29-18)
§ 160.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GLARE. The effect produced by light with an intensity sufficient to cause
annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
   PHOTOVOLTAIC CELL. A semiconductor device that converts solar energy
directly into electricity.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR. A professionally manufactured device, structure, or part of
a device or structure, for which the primary purpose is to transform solar
radiant energy into thermal, mechanical, or electrical energy.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE. Any part of a solar collector that absorbs solar
energy for use in the collector's energy transformation process. Collector
surface does not include frames, supports, and mounting hardware.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-INTEGRATED. A building-mounted solar energy
system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather
than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an
architectural or structural part of the building. BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR
ENERGY SYSTEMS include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic cell or hot water
systems that are contained within roofing materials, skylights, shading
devices, and similar architectural components.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-MOUNTED. A solar energy system in which all
parts are professionally mounted on the roof of a principal building or
accessory structure. A BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM includes building
integrated solar energy systems, flush- mounted solar energy systems, and non-
flush-mounted solar energy systems.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, FLUSH-MOUNTED. A building-mounted solar energy system
that is mounted to a finished roof surface where the solar collector, once
installed, projects no further than six inches in height beyond the roof
surface.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED. A free-standing solar energy system
that is placed, affixed, or mounted to the ground.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE. A solar energy system that contains multiple
solar collectors and is primarily used to produce energy to be sold
commercially.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, NON-FLUSH-MOUNTED. A building-mounted solar energy
system that is mounted to a finished roof surface where the solar collector,
once installed, projects more than six inches in height beyond the roof
surface.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SELF-CONTAINED. A professionally manufactured device
that utilizes solar collector(s) to produce small amounts of power that are
generated exclusively for the device. A SELF-CONTAINED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM is
typically located in areas that are not in close proximity to a utility power
source. Examples of these types of SELF-CONTAINED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS include,
but are not limited to, light poles in parks for security or safety reasons,
pedestrian street crossing signs that alert oncoming traffic of the crossing,
natural resource observation systems (such as tracking flood level depths),
pumps that aerate an isolated pond, and attic fans mounted on a roof that are
used for ventilation purposes.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL. A professionally manufactured system accessory
to the principal use that utilizes solar collectors to convert solar energy
from the sun into thermal, mechanical, or electrical energy for storage and
use, and is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
Energy produced in excess of on-site consumption may be sold back to the
electric utility service provider that serves the proposed site for use with
the existing energy grid.
(Ord. 3930, passed 5-29-18)
§ 160.03 INDIVIDUALS INSTALLING SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS REQUIRE CERTIFICATION.
   Individuals engaged in the business of installing solar energy systems shall
show proof of valid distributed generation installer certification as required
by the Illinois Commerce Commission. Individuals having acquired a distributed
generation installer certification may perform work required to install solar
energy systems after receiving and paying for an approved permit to install.
(Ord. 3930, passed 5-29-18) Penalty, see §
160.99
PERMITS, FEES, AND STANDARDS
§ 160.15 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR ROOF/BUILDING-MOUNTED SMALL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Except as authorized by the City Council for public utility and/or
public infrastructure purposes, solar energy systems shall only be permitted if
accessory to a principal building and/or principal use.
   (B)   Roof and building-mounted solar energy systems shall have the mounting
method documented on the provided plans. Site plans shall be signed and stamped
by a licensed design professional.
   (C)   (1)   Any person seeking to erect, construct, install, or maintain a
small solar energy system on property located within the city limits of the
city shall obtain an electrical and building permit prior to the installation
of any solar energy system.
      (2)   A licensed design professional shall stamp all plans and
specifications for the proposed small solar energy system. These plans shall
include certification, signed and stamped from said professional, that the
structure on which the solar system is being installed will support the
proposed solar energy system; and
   (D)   Maximum permitted height and building projection/extension.
      (1)   For properties zoned residential:
         (a)   The small solar energy system shall conform to the height
regulations of the zoning district in which the property where the system is to
be installed, mounted, and/or built is located; and
         (b)   Non-flush-mounted solar energy systems shall not extend above
the highest point on the roof line.
      (2)   For properties zoned business or manufacturing.
         (a)   The small solar energy system shall conform to the height
regulations of the zoning district in which the property where the system is to
be installed, mounted, and/or built is located; and
         (b)   Non-flush-mounted solar energy systems shall not extend above
the highest point on the roof line or a parapet wall.
(Ord. 3930, passed 5-29-18; Am. Ord. 4234, passed 3-24-25) Penalty, see §
160.99
§ 160.16 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR GROUND-MOUNTED SMALL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Except as authorized by the City Council for public utility and/or
public infrastructure purposes, solar energy systems shall only be permitted if
accessory to a principal building and/or principal use.
   (B)   Any person seeking to erect, construct, install, or maintain a ground-
mounted small solar energy system on property located within the city limits
shall obtain an electrical and building permit prior to the installation of any
solar energy system.
   (C)   A licensed design professional shall stamp all plans and
specifications for the proposed small solar energy system. These plans shall
include certification, signed and stamped from said professional, that the
mounting system for the proposed ground-mounted solar system is being installed
will support the proposed solar energy system and meet all climatic and
geographic design criteria established in §
150.017, and;
   (D)   Setbacks; height requirements.
      (1)   Setbacks: residential.
         (a)   Front yard. Solar energy systems shall not be located within any
required front yard setback. They may be located in a front yard (beyond the
required front setback line) subject to receiving a variance from the Zoning
Board of Appeals and approval of the City Council.
         (b)   Side yard. Solar energy systems shall be located no closer than
six feet to the side lot lines when located within the side yard along the side
of the principal building or in the front yard with the required variance.
         (c)   Rear yard. Solar energy systems may be located no closer than
three feet from the side lot line and five feet from the rear lot line when the
solar energy system is located in its entirety in the back yard behind the
principal building.
         (d)   Proximity to other structures. Solar energy systems shall not be
closer than six feet to other structures whether on the same parcel or an
adjacent parcel.
         (e)   Corner lot. On corner lots there shall be maintained a side yard
of not less than 15 feet on the side adjacent to the street which intersects
the street upon which the principal building maintains frontage, and in the
case of a reversed corner lot, no solar systems on a reversed corner lot shall
project beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear.
         (f)   Easements, utilities, and rights-of-way. No portion of any solar
energy system shall extend into any easement, right-of-way, or public way,
regardless of the above stated exceptions and regulations for setback and yard
requirements.
      (2)   Setbacks: business and manufacturing. Setbacks for solar energy
systems located in business or manufacturing zoning districts shall comply with
all setbacks set forth in the zoning regulations, with exception to a business
or manufacturing zoned lot that is adjacent to a residential zoned lot. In that
case, the solar energy system installed on a business or manufacturing zoned
lot must comply with the setbacks defined above for residential property.
      (3)   Lot coverage.The footprint of a ground-mounted solar energy system
will be taken into account with all other structures when calculating lot
coverage as defined in the zoning regulations.
   (E)   Maximum permitted height. Residential. Ground-mounted solar energy
systems shall extend no taller than 12 feet from grade when located in a side
or rear yard, four feet when located in a front yard, and only after having
obtained the required variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals and approval
from the City Council.
   (F)   Fences required. A fence with a minimum height of 48 inches and a
lockable gate shall be required around all ground-mounted solar energy systems.
The fence material must be in compliance with the fence regulations of the
city.
   (G)   Self-contained solar energy systems. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to a self-contained solar energy system, provided, however,
that a self-contained solar energy system(s) shall be limited to an aggregate
solar collector surface area of less than or equal to six square feet.
(Ord. 3930, passed 5-29-18; Am. Ord. 4234, passed 3-24-25) Penalty, see §
160.99
§ 160.17 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR LARGE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   Large solar energy systems shall only be permitted in manufacturing
districts and shall require a special use permit recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved by the City Council. The application for the special
use permit shall include plans stamped by an Illinois licensed engineer and
include all details for placement, height, and setbacks. The Plan Commission
and City Council may place stipulations on the special use permit for screening
or other stipulations depending upon adjacent properties and zoning.
(Ord. 3930, passed 5-29-18) Penalty, see §
160.99
§ 160.99 PENALTY.
   The provisions of §
10.99 shall apply to this chapter.
(Ord. 3930, passed 5-29-18)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
   
I.   VACATIONS
   
II.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
   
III.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
   
IV.   ANNEXATIONS
   
V.   REAL ESTATE SALES
   
VI.   SPECIAL USES
   
VII.   VARIANCES
   
VIII.   EASEMENTS
   
IX.   ACCEPTANCES OF PLATS
   
X.   DEDICATIONS
   
XI.   BONDS
   
XII.   NAMING AND RENAMING OF STREETS
   
XIII.   TRANSFER OF LANDS
TABLE I: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
                      Vacating that portion of North Boss Street lying north of
2825      4-28-93     the north line of West Fifth Street, also described as
                      the North 57.00 feet of North Boss Street.
                      Vacating the East 142.5 feet of the alley running East
2857      10-12-93    and West between Smith and Dwight Streets at a distance
                      of 140 feet South of Division Street.
                      Vacating parts of streets and alleys in the portion of
                      Zang's subdivision. The alley lying North of lots nine
                      and ten in Block Two; the street lying South of Lots
2858      10-12-93    eight, nine and ten in Block Two; the alley lying North
                      of Lots eight, nine and ten in Block Three; the street
                      lying South of lots eight, nine and ten in Block Three;
                      and the alley lying South of lots one, two and three in
                      Block Four.
                      Vacating the 18 foot wide alley running from the 200
                      block of Tenney Street with two right angles to Blish
2861      11-8-93     Avenue and the 16 foot wide alley running from the 200
                      block of Blish Avenue with one right angle to Mill
                      Street.
                      Vacating the South 192 feet of the alley running North
                      and South between East First Street and East Central
2863      11-22-93    Boulevard, which is the portion of the alley lying East
                      of lots six, seven and eight of Block Two of Blish
                      Addition to the city.
2966      4-24-95     Vacating the alley running east and west, south of Marion
                      Street, in Block Three of Simpson's Third Addition.
                      Vacating the alley lying east of lot 11 and west of Lot
2975      6-12-95     10 and Lot 10 extended, all in Block 2 of Rockwell's
                      addition to the city.
                      Vacating the alley lying north of the 800 block of East
2976      6-12-95     7th Street, which is bounded by the East Line of Lot 6
                      and the West Line of Lot 7 all in Gunther's Subdivision.
2978      6-26-95     Vacating part of the 100 Block of East South Street.
2989      8-28-95     Vacating the right-of-way on Burger King Property in the
                      Northwest Quarter of Section 10 Wethersfield Township.
                      Vacating the alley running east and west, in the block
3055      5-13-96     bounded by June Street, Harrison Street, Seventh Street,
                      and Monroe Street in Block 3 of McMullen's Addition.
                      Vacating a portion of the alley running north and south
3060      5-28-96     on the west side of the 100 block of North Vine Street in
                      Block 3 of Bauer's Third Addition.
                      Vacating a portion of the valley running north and south
3064      6-10-96     in the city block bounded by Main Street, Third Street,
                      Burr Boulevard, and Second Street, in Block 15 of the
                      original Town of Berrien, now City of Kewanee.
                      Vacating an alley running east and west, in the block
3065      6-10-96     bounded by Church Street, Dodge Street, Page Street, and
                      Miner Street, in Block 16 of West End Addition to Village
                      of Wethersfield, now City of Kewanee.
                      Vacating an alley in Block Three, an alley in Block Two,
3093      12-9-96     and a portion of Washington Street in Block Two in
                      O'Neill's Second Subdivision.
                      Amending Ord. 3093, vacating an alley in Block Three;
                      that portion of the alley lying between Adams Street and
                      Washington Street, on the North side of Lot One of Block
                      Two; that portion of the alley lying on the North side of
3095      12-23-96    Lot 10 of Block One; the entire alley lying on the West
                      side of Lot One of Block One and continuing on to the
                      South side of Lot One of Block One; and a portion of
                      Washington Street in Block Two in O'Neill's Second
                      Subdivision.
                      Vacating an alley in Blish Place Addition, an alley in
3110      7-28-97     Thompson Addition, a portion of Mill Street and a portion
                      of Knox Street in Thompson Addition.
3127      10-27-97    Vacating a part of North Jackson Street in O'Neill's
                      Second Subdivision.
Res. 3934 7-28-97     Vacating the plat and declarations of restrictions of
                      Country Club Estates, Inc., Third Addition, Phase 1.
                      Vacating a portion of Pine Street lying in Block 4 of
3177      9-14-98     West End Addition beginning at a point on the west end of
                      the south line of Lot 13.
                      Vacating an alley running east-west between Ridyard and
3190      12-14-98    East streets, and located just north of Pleasant Street
                      in Eddy's Subdivision of block three, Sloan's Addition,
3225      8-9-99      Vacating an alley running north-south, located in the 400
                      block of East Eleventh Street, in Bauer's Third Addition.
                      Vacating a portion of Knox Street located between Blocks
3248      5-8-00      7 and 14, all in West End addition to the Village of
                      Wethersfield, now a part of the city.
                      Vacating an alley running North and South, located on the
3249      5-8-00      South side of the 1200 Block of East Tenth Street, in
                      Block One of Simpson's Fifth addition.
3269      8-28-00     Vacating a part of an alley running North and South, in
                      Gunther's Subdivision of Lot One.
3363      9-23-02     Vacating a portion of Junior Avenue lying south of Dewey
                      Avenue.
3502      3-27-06     Vacating a portion of Bunn Avenue lying east of Harbour
                      Street.
                      Vacating the 100 block of South Valley Street running
3528      2-12-07     from the north line of New Street to the south line of
                      West First Street.
                      Vacating a strip of right-of-way on the west side of the
3602      4-13-09     southerly part of the 600 block of Hollis Place, adjacent
                      to land owned by James and Rebecca Lindbom at 204 West
                      South Street.
3615      7-13-09     Vacating the 200 block of North Adams Street.
                      Vacating a public alley running north-south in the city
3649      7-12-10     block bounded by Harrison Street, McMullen Avenue, See
                      Street, and June Street.
                      Vacating part of a street in the 100 block of E. Fifth
3713      8-27-12     Street located west of Burr Street and east of the alley
                      first west of Burr Street.
3775      9-22-14     Vacating a portion of Flora Avenue lying north of Mill
                      Street.
3793      4-13-15     Vacating part of a street in the 500 block of N. Burr
                      Street.
3795      5-11-15     Vacating a portion of an alley located on the east side
                      of 920, 924, and 926 Harbour Street.
3813      11-9-15     Vacating a portion of Burr Street running north to south
                      between East 5th Street and East 6th Street.
3821      12-14-15    Vacating an alley running north to south between East 6th
                      Street and the railroad right-of-way.
                      Vacating a public alley running north-south in the city
3844      7-25-16     block bounded by Ross Street, North Grove Street, Fourth
                      Street and Fifth Street.
3896      8-14-17     Vacating a portion of an alley located on the east side
                      of 918 and 930 Harbour Street.
                      Vacating a public alley running north-south in the city
3953      1-14-19     block bounded by Main Street, East Tenth Street, North
                      Burr Street, and North East Park.
                      Vacating a public street running west-east in the city
4081      11-11-21    block bounded by Valley Street, West Second Street and
                      Union Street.
4103      7-8-22   Vacating the north 135 feet of Cottage Street running
                      north-south between IL 81/6th Street and 5th Street.
                      Vacating the eastern most 125 feet of the east-west
4119      12-12-22    public alley connecting Main Street to Tremont Street
                      between 8th Street and 9th Street.
                      Vacating a public alley running east-west in the city
4174      4-8-24      block bounded by Rice Street, N. West Street, W. Sixth
                      Street, and W. Seventh Street.
                      Vacating the alley between Third and Fourth Streets east
4190      6-24-24     of the east right-of-way line of May Street and vacating
                      Fourth Street east of the east right-of-way line of May
                      Street.
                      Vacating a portion of the alley between Jackson Street
                      and Washington Street east of the property defined as
4256      11-10-25    parcel number 20-32-252-001 and west of the property
                      defined as parcel number 20-32-252-006 with the southern
                      border of the vacated section to continue west in line
                      with the southern border of parcel number 20-32-252-006.
                     
 
TABLE II: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
     9-23-  Rezoning certain property located at 204 North Chestnut Street and 210
2759 91     North Chestnut Street from B-1 Business District, Limited Retail, to B-
            2 Business District, General Retail.
2845 8-23-  Zoning certain lots recently annexed as indicated in the following
     93     descriptions:
Property owned by Mr. Louis Little is zoned as R-1 (One Family Dwelling District).
Property owned by Glen Andres, et. al. (901 S. Tenney) is zoned as B-3 (Business and
Wholesale District).
Property owned by Irvin Kelman (900 S. Tenney) is zoned as B-4 (Business District).
            Added to the Kewanee Enterprise Zone is Outlot A of Andrew's Subdivision,
2846 8-23-  plus Lot 1 of Andrew's Subdivision and Lots 1 and 2 in Block 4 of Zang's
     93     Subdivision plus one-half of a 50 foot alley on the North side thereof and
            one-half of a 20 foot alley on the South side thereof.
2849 9-27-  The following described properties are zoned as indicated:
     93
Property known as 720 Tenney Street (old Aldi's building lot) is zoned as B-3.
Property known as 730 Tenney Street (Walmart lot) is zoned as B-3.
Property known as 800 Tenney Street (Farm King lot) is zoned as B-3.
Property known as 1106 N. Main Street (Young lot) is zoned as B-3.
2869 11-22- Lots three and four of Block Three of Simpson's Third Addition known as 913
     93     Marion Street is rezoned from R-2 to B-3.
2870 11-22- Rezoned from R-2 to B-3 is the property known as 615 N. Burr Street.
     93
2878 2-14-  Rezoning properties along Tenney Street, Burlington Avenue, and Division
     94     Street.
2904 6-27-  Zoning properties annexed into the city, being part of the northwest
     94     quarter of Section 10, Township 14 north, Range 5 east as B-3.
2905 6-27-  Rezoning properties known as 523 through 527 Tenney St. as B-3.
     94
2914 8-22-  Rezoning property known as 715 Dewey Avenue from R-2 to R-4.
     94
2935 11-7-  Rezoning property known as 213 S. Main Street, from B-2/R-5 to B-2.
     94
2979 6-26-  Rezoning property at the Southwest corner of College and Willard Streets by
     95     request of Anthony J. and Lisa M. Rashid from R-5 to B-3.
2992 9-11-  Rezoning the YMCA at 315 W. First Street from R-5 to B-1.
     95
3007 10-10- Rezoning 157 W. South Street from R-1 to B-3 by request of Louis Little.
     95
3015 11-20- Rezoning from R-3 to B-3 the property at 1205, 1209, 1211 Knox and 1236 W.
     95     Church Streets by request of James L. and Lisa R. Reed.
3023 12-4-  Rezoning at 515 E. Third Street from R-5 to B-1.
     95
3028 1-8-96 Rezoning 800 W. Sixth Street from R-3 to R-5.
3037 2-27-  Rezoning property at the southwest corner of Hollis and Garfield Streets
     96     from R-1 to R-2.
3038 3-11-  Rezoning 314 W. Central Blvd. from R-5 to B-1.
     96
3058 5-28-  Rezoning property at 1319 W. Sixth St. from R-3 to M-1.
     96
3059 5-29-  Rezoning property at 206 W. 4th St. and 401 N. Tremont St. from M-1 to M-2.
     96
3062 5-28-  Rezoning property at 1104 Page St. from B-3 to R-1.
     96
3068 7-22-  Rezoning property at 1112 - 1142 Page Street from B-3 to R-1.
     96
3069 7-22-  Rezoning property at 414 N. Chestnut St. from M-1 to M-2.
     96
3077 8-26-  Rezoning property at 1315 N. Sixth St. from R-3 to B-3.
     96
3096 1-27-  Rezoning property located at 114 N. Chestnut Street from B-2 to B-4.
     97
3100 3-10-  Rezoning property located at 217 Blish Street, 235 Blish Street, 237 Blish
     97     Street and 244 Tenney Street from R-2 and B-1 to B-3.
3113 7-28-  Adding to the Kewanee Enterprise Zone a 12.05 acre tract of land beginning
     97     at the northwest corner of Lot 10 of Country Club Estates, 1st Addition.
3115 7-28-  Rezoning property beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 10 of Country
     97     Club Estates, 1st Addition, from R-2 to R-5.
3129 10-27- Rezoning property at 326 and 328 W. Fifth Street from B-3 to R-1.
     97
3138 12-22- Granting a request to William Grice by rezoning property located at 308 and
     97     310 South Main Street.
3141 1-12-  Rezoning property located at 301 West First Street from B-2 to B-4
     98
3151 4-13-  Rezoning property located at 2021 Kentville Road from City of Kewanee R-3,
     98     R-5, M-2, and Henry County AG-1, to R-1 with a Special Use Permit.
3153 4-27-  Granting a request to Nancy Hier by rezoning property located at 515 East
     98     Third from B-1 to R-5.
3182 9-28-  Added to the Kewanee Enterprise Zone are Lots 1, 2 & 3 of Block 8 of
     98     Original Town.
            Granting a request to Noodle Development, on behalf of the owners, by
     12-28- rezoning property located at 110 McKinley Avenue, 112 McKinley Avenue, 502
3193 98     S. Main Street, 508 S. Main Street, 512 S. Main Street, 516 S. Main Street,
            520 S. Main Street, 103 E. Prospect Street, 111 E. Prospect Street, and 119
            E. Prospect Street.
3207 4-26-  Granting rezoning request to Stanford E. Workman for land located at 1101 -
     99     1123 W, Church Street, from B-3 to R-1.
3222 7-26-  Granting rezoning to James Hodge of Kewanee for property located at 719 N.
     99     Main Street and at 718 N. Tremont Street from R-2 and B-3 to B-4.
     9-13-  Granting rezoning to Kewanee Economic Development Corporation for land
3227 99     located at 804, 810, 814, 820, 1024 Coal Street and 1701 through 2001
            Kentville Road from R-1 in part, and B-2 in part to M-2.
     11-8-  Adding to the Kewanee Enterprise Zone certain territory, namely 810, 814,
3229 99     820 and 1024 Coal Street; 1701 and 1703 to 2001 Kentville Road; and 1850
            Lake Street.
            Adding to the Kewanee Enterprise Zone certain territory, namely: Lots 2-16
            inclusive, of Block 6, and the East - West alley located in the block;
            Block 7, and the East-West alley located in the block; Block 14, and the
3256 6-26-  East - West alley located in the block; Block 15, and the East - West alley
     00     located in the Block; that portion of Mill Street located between Block 6
            and Block 7; that portion of vacated Knox Street located between Block 7
            and Block 14; and that portion of Church Street located between Block 14
            and Block 15.
3259 6-26-  Granting rezoning request to James and Lisa Reed for land located at 1236
     00     W. Church Street.
3260 6-26-  Granting rezoning request for land located at 1101 Cambridge Road.
     00
     10-23- Granting rezoning request to Kewanee Economic Development Corporation for
3274 00     land located at 1601 Railroad Avenue from R-1 One-Family Dwelling District
            to M-2 General Manufacturing District.
     2-13-  Granting rezoning request for land located at 605 Tenney Street from M-
3296 01     1 Limited Manufacturing District to B-3 Business Service and Wholesale
            District.
     8-27-  Granting rezoning request for land located at 548 Tenney Street from B-
3320 01     2 General Retail Business District to B-3 Business Service and Wholesale
            District.
     5-28-  Granting rezoning request for land located at 431 Hollis Street and 200 W.
3344 02     Garfield Street from R-1 One-Family Dwelling District to Public Buildings
            and Use District.
3359 8-12-  Zoning properties annexed into the city at 1600 & 1701 Page Street as M-2.
     02
3380 3-10-  Granting rezoning request for land located at at 1126 W. Mill Street from
     03     R-3 One-Family Dwelling District to R-5 Multiple Family Dwelling District.
3390 4-14-  Granting rezoning request for land located at 1220 W. Division Street from
     03     R-2 One-Family Dwelling District to R-5 Multiple Family Dwelling District.
     4-28-  Granting rezoning request for land located at 507 S. Chestnut Street and
3392 03     323 W. Prospect Street from R-4 Two-Family Dwelling District to R-
            5 Multiple Family Dwelling District along with a special use permit.
3406 7-14-  Granting rezoning request for land located at 925 Tenney Street to B-
     03     3 Business Service and Wholesale District.
     12-22- Granting rezoning request to Wise Inc., and Louis Little for land located
3421 03     at 230 W. South Street from R-1 One-Family to B-3 Business Service and
            Wholesale District.
3440 6-28-  Granting rezoning for 604 W. First Street from R-5 to B-3.
     04
     9-13-  Granting a request to Richard Lewis and Diana Lewis, rezoning the land
3449 04     commonly known as 120 N. Lexington Avenue from B-3 Business Service and
            Wholesale District to B-4 Business District.
     6-26-  Granting a rezoning request to Jon and Stephanie Wille and Susan Smithson,
3513 06     rezoning the property commonly known as 505 Tenney Street from B-2 General
            Retail Business District to B-3 Business Service and Wholesale District.
            Adding to the Kewanee Enterprise Zone: a three-feet-wide continuous strip
            of right-of-way, comprising the easterly-most three feet of right-of-way
            for Illinois Highway 78, from the northern city limits to the north line of
            the Iowa Interstate Railroad adjacent to Illinois Highway 78 in Annawan,
     11-17- Illinois; and a three-feet-wide continuous strip of land comprising the
3522 06     northerly-most three feet of railroad right-of-way of the Iowa Interstate
            Railroad, from its intersection with Illinois Highway 78, proceeding
            easterly to the easternmost village limits of Annawan, Illinois; and
            private land, comprising approximately 176 acres, owned by Patriot
            Renewable Fuels, LLC, located on the east boundary of Annawan, north of
            Iowa Interstate Railroad and south of Interstate Highway 80.
3549 8-13-  Granting the request of the land owner Bonnie Nazer to change the zoning
     07     for 106 South Washington Avenue from M-2 to R-3.
     10-9-  Adding parts of the City of Galva and Henry County, containing 192.4516,
3556 07     0.6187, 5.3231 and 2.1712 acres, more or less, to the existing certified
            enterprise zone in the City of Kewanee.
3567 3-10-  Granting request for rezoning land at 600 North Lexington Avenue and 615
     08     Madison Avenue from Public Use to B-3.
3590 10-27- Granting request for rezoning land at 623 North Adams from M-1 Limited
     08     Manufacturing to R-3 One-Family Dwelling.
3629 2-8-10 Granting request for rezoning of land at 114 E. Prospect Street and 435
            Prospect Place from R-5 Multiple Family Dwelling to B-2 General Business.
     9-13-  Granting request for rezoning of land at 918 and 924 Rose Street from R-
3653 10     4 Two-Family Dwelling Residential District to B-3 Business Service and
            Wholesale District.
3669 2-14-  Adding territory in unincorporated Henry County to the established Kewanee
     11     Enterprise Zone.
     6-13-  Granting rezoning request to Cleverette G. Conley, Jr. and Jaime Conley,
3677 11     for rezoning land located at 205, 207 and 209 E. Sixth Street from M-
            1 Limited Manufacturing to R-3 One-Family Dwelling.
3682 7-11-  Adding territory in unincorporated Henry County to the established Kewanee
     11     Enterprise Zone.
     11-28- Granting request for rezoning land located at 813 E. Third Street, from R-
3688 11     4 Two-Family Dwelling Residential to B-3 Business Service and Wholesale
            District.
3696 2-13-  Granting request for rezoning land located at 625 N. Adams Street, from M-
     12     1 Limited Manufacturing to R-3 One-Family Dwelling Residential District.
3698 2-27-  Adding territory in unincorporated Henry County to the established Kewanee
     12     Enterprise Zone.
3704 5-29-  Granting request for rezoning land located at 620 Andrews Avenue, from R-
     12     2 One-Family Dwelling Residential to M-2 General Manufacturing District.
            Granting request for rezoning land located at 100 N. Main Street from B-
3710 7-9-12 2 General Retail Business District to B-3 Business Service and Wholesale
            District.
     11-13- Granting conditional rezoning request for land located at 216 W. Eleventh
3715 12     Street from Henry County B-3/1 District to Kewanee M-1 Limited
            Manufacturing District.
3728 3-11-  Granting conditional rezoning request for land located at 1116 N. Main
     13     Street, to B-3 Business Service in the event it is annexed to the city.
3741 7-8-13 Granting a rezoning request for land located at 1051 N. Main Street, from
            B-1 Limited Retail Business to R-2 One-Family Dwelling Residential.
     10-15- Granting a rezoning request to Cernovich Holdings, for land located at 617
3748 13     and 619 E. Sixth Street, from R-4 Two-Family Dwelling Residential to M-
            1 Limited Manufacturing.
3854 11-4-  Granting a rezoning request for land located at 315 W. Second Street, from
     16     B-3 Business and Wholesale to B-4 Business.
     2-27-  Granting a rezoning request for the east 25 foot of even width off the
3873 17     entire east line of land located at 144 Junior Avenue from R-2 One-Family
            Dwelling to R-5 Multiple Family Dwelling.
3889 6-26-  Granting a rezoning request for land located at 212 N. Burr Blvd. from B-
     17     1 Business, Limited Retail, to B-3 Business Service and Wholesale.
            Granting the following zoning requests:
               (1)   618 and 626 Tenney St. from B-2 Business, General Retail, B-
3891 6-26-  3 Business and Wholesale and M-1 Manufacturing to B-3 Business and
     17     Wholesale; and
               (2)   150 E. South St. from M-1 Manufacturing to B-3 Business and
            Wholesale.
3915 12-26- Granting a rezoning request for land located at 110 E. 10th Street, from R-
     17     2 One-Family Dwelling to B-3 Business Service and Wholesale District.
034  11-30- Granting a rezoning request for land located at 117 E. Central Blvd, from
     20     R-5 Multiple-Family Dwelling to B-2 Business.
4050 4-26-  Granting a conditional rezoning request to Tom Greiner for land located at
     21     1109 N. Main Street.
            Granting a rezoning request for land located at the southeast corner of
4105 8-8-22 West Church Street and Bronson Street Parcel Number 25-05-285-005 from B-
            3 Business and Wholesale to R-1 One-Family Dwelling.
     2-27-  Granting a rezoning request for land located at 417 East Second Street,
4125 23     Parcel Number 20-33-278-003, from R-5 Multiple Family Dwelling to B-
            3 Business Service and Wholesale.
4157 11-13- Granting a rezoning request for land located at 814 E. Second Street from
     23     R-4 Two-Family Dwelling to B-3 Business and Wholesale.
4192 8-12-  Granting a rezoning request for land located at 1140 West Church Street
     24     from R-3 One-Family Dwelling to M-1 Manufacturing.
4193 8-12-  Granting a rezoning request for land located at 1102 West Church Street
     24     from R-3 One-Family Dwelling to M-1 Manufacturing.
           
 
TABLE III: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date     Description
         Passed
                  The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the
3707     10-12-93 Environmental Science & Engineering (ESE), Inc., for the second phase of
                  identifying the environmental risk associated with the ex-Walworth property.
                  The City Manager is authorized to execute with Ratliff Brothers Contracting and
                  carry out the provisions of the agreements as contained in the bid
3709     10-25-93 specifications to include the notice of award, notice to proceed, and the
                  contract for the construction of an 800 foot sewer extension from Midland Plaza
                  lift station to the South.
3716     12-13-93 Adoption of the “Articles of Agreement of the Bi-State Regional Commission” as
                  amended on April 28, 1993 and thereby continue membership in the Commission.
3717     1-10-94  The City Manager is authorized to enter into a contract with the Kewanee
                  Hospital Hospice Program for ambulance service.
3721     2-28-94  The City Manager is authorized to sign a mutual aid assistance agreement with
                  Stark County Ambulance Service, Inc.
                  The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Illinois
3730     4-25-94  Department of Transportation (IDOT) for removal of architectural barriers along
                  state routes.
3739     6-13-94  The City Manager is authorized to sign a contract for the engineering, design,
                  plans, and bidding for the South Street and Tenney Streets intersection.
3743     7-11-94  The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with McNeill Asphalt
                  Company for the completion of the 1994 Street Maintenance Program.
                  The City Manager is authorized to sign a contract between the city and the
3745     7-25-94  American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, Council 31, AFL-
                  CIO and Local 764.
3756     10-24-94 The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with McNeill Asphalt
                  Company for reconstruction of South Street.
3758     11-7-94  The City Manager is authorized to execute a sales agreement with KEDC for the
                  property at 200 E. South St.
                  The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with Johnson
3759     11-7-94  Contracting Company, Inc. for installation of two boilers at the waste water
                  treatment plant.
3768     2-13-95  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a revised contract with McClure
                  Engineering Associates, Inc.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to sign all loan application forms and documents
3771     2-13-95  related to obtaining a loan from the Water Pollution Control Revolving Fund for
                  the construction of sewage works.
3773     2-27-95  Authorizing the City Manager to sign an agreement with IDOT for improvements to
                  Tenney Street between Mill and Garfield Streets.
3775     3-13-95  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement with McClure Engineering
                  for preliminary engineering for downtown streets.
3779     4-24-95  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with IDOT for maintenance of
                  state routes within the city.
3785     5-8-95   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Yaste, Inc., for
                  installation of storm sewers at Lyle Street.
3787     5-22-95  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Laverdiere
                  Construction, Inc., for installation of sanitary sewer manholes.
3789     6-5-95   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Laverdiere
                  Construction, Inc., for installation of a sanitary sewer across Tenney Street.
3791     6-12-95  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Yaste Inc. for two
                  contracts for sewerage system improvements.
3795     6-12-95  A Cooperative Agreement for the Formation of the Bi-State Drug and Alcohol
                  Testing Consortium allowing the city to become a member.
3805     9-11-95  Authorizing the Mayor to execute an annexation agreement with Louis T. Little
                  Revocable Trust, Louis T. Little, Trustee.
                  The City Manager is authorized to execute for the city individual participation
3808     10-10-95 agreements with each employee requesting participation in the IMRF endorsed
                  NACo deferred compensation program.
3819     11-27-95 Awarding a contract for vehicle fuel delivery to Henry Service Co. for one
                  year.
3824     12-18-95 Awarding a contract for clean up of a former UST site to Tech Services Company,
                  Inc.
3827     1-8-96   Entering into a lease agreement for the rental of office space to house the
                  Public Works Director, HBZ Officer, City Engineer, and their support staff.
3830     1-22-96  Entering into an agreement with Willard L. Jones, Terry L. Jones, and Michele
                  A. Jones for their installation of a sewer line.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Block Wastewater
3840     3-25-96  Treatment Contracting, Inc. (BOCK) for the management and operation of the
                  wastewater treatment plant.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Leander Land
3848     4-22-96  Company for Contract No. 4 (Excess Flow Lagoon) for sewerage system
                  improvements.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Laverdiere
3849     4-22-96  Construction for Contract No. 3 (Central Area Relief Sewer) for sewerage
                  systems improvements.
3850     4-22-96  Authorizing the City Manager to sign a contract between the city and the
                  Kewanee Firefighters Union Local 513.
3851     4-22-96  Authorizing the City Manager to sign an agreement with the Housing Authority of
                  Henry County to enhance security.
3852     4-22-96  Authorizing the City Manager to sign an agreement to extend city water service.
3853     4-22-96  Authorizing the City Manager to sign an agreement for maintenance and utility
                  service to the Kewanee Railroad Shelter.
3854     4-22-96  Authorizing the City Manager to sign a solid waste disposal agreement with the
                  Village of Sheffield.
3863     5-13-96  Authorizing the City Manager to sign an agreement to repave a portion of the
                  alley running west from the 200 block of North Tremont St.
3864     5-13-96  Accepting a bid for Kewanee Water Main Replacement (CDAP-24716 of January,
                  1996).
3867     5-28-96  Authorizing the City Manager to direct J.F. Edwards Construction Company to
                  repair traffic signals at intersection of Main and Third Streets.
3868     5-28-96  Approving the bid of Ratliff's Bros. & Co. to replace the storm sewer culverts
                  in the 400 Block of Chestnut St. and the 400 block of Tremont St.
3869     6-10-96  Authorizing the City Manager to sign a Solid Waste Disposal Agreement with the
                  Village of Annawan.
3873     6-24-96  Entering into an agreement with Ratliff Bros. & Co., Inc. and Ince's scrapyard
                  for the installation of a sewer line.
3877     8-12-96  Awarding the 1996 Road Maintenance Program to McNeill Asphalt Co.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to sign a side letter of agreement to the existing
3879     8-26-96  contract between the city and Kewanee Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council/
                  Lodge No. 233.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to sign loan agreement forms and documents related
3880     9-9-96   to a loan from the Water Pollution Control Revolving Fund for the construction
                  of sewage treatment works.
3882     9-9-96   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Pipeliner Systems,
                  Inc. for sewerage system improvements.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to sign a side letter of agreement to the existing
3884     9-23-96  contract between the city and Kewanee Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council/
                  Lodge No. 233.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with United Science
3888     10-15-96 Industries, Inc. for installation of monitoring wells at former municipal
                  landfill site.
3889     10-15-96 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with M&O Environmental
                  for removal of asbestos at the location of the former Walworth Foundry.
3892     11-4-96  Entering into an agreement with Mark R. Kubiak for installation of a sewer line
                  extension.
3895     11-25-96 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Henry Service
                  Company for furnishing of vehicle fuel to the city.
3902     1-13-97  Authorizing the City Manager and City Attorney to negotiate and purchase
                  property for a public purpose.
                  Authorizing the Mayor, City Clerk and City Manager to execute a side letter of
3926     6-23-97  agreement with Local 513 regarding a FLSA policy; authorizing the City Manager
                  to make restitution of one year's back pay to all affected firefighters at
                  amounts verified and agreed upon between the City Manager and Local 513.
3928     7-14-97  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a contract for the construction of a
                  new public works facility with American Eagle Buildings.
3932     7-14-97  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a three-year contract with AFSCME Local
                  764.
                  Authorizing the City Manager and Mayor to execute documents necessary for a
3935     8-11-97  loan from the Revolving Loan Fund to Pipin Industries (The Kewanee
                  Corporation).
3937     9-8-97   Awarding a contract for relocation of signs to Yates Electric Inc.
3943     9-22-97  Authorizing the City Manager and City Attorney to negotiate and purchase
                  property (parcel ID #20-34-376-002-0021) for a public purpose.
3945     10-27-97 Instructing City staff to execute sale of various vehicles and equipment deemed
                  no longer necessary for city operations.
3947     11-10-97 Authorizing the City Manager and Mayor to execute a loan from the Revolving
                  Loan Fund to Elm Street Industries, Inc.
3948     12-8-97  Authorizing the purchase of an ambulance from Wheeled Coach.
3949     12-8-97  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Gateway Co-op for
                  furnishing of vehicle fuel to the city.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Woltil's Heating
3952     1-12-98  and Air Conditioning, Inc. to furnish and install radiant heat for the city at
                  the new public works garage.
                  Establishing the terms of an economic incentive agreement that will result in
3959     3-9-98   the transfer of ownership of real estate located at 103 South Chestnut Street
                  to the Kewanee Economic Development Corporation.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Country Leasing
3960     3-9-98   under state contract number 41830 for leasing two vehicles for use by
                  investigators of the City Police Department.
                  Accepting the low bid for sidewalk removal and replacement, slope work and
3963     3-23-98  approving a repayment plan for bridgeway at their construction site along Sixth
                  Street.
3970     4-27-98  Authorizing the City Manager and the Mayor to committ funds from the Revolving
                  Loan Fund to Boss Manufacturing Company.
3971     5-11-98  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a three year agreement with Eagle
                  Enterprise Recycling.
3972     5-11-98  Accepting the terms and conditions of an intergovernmental agreement with the
                  Illinois Capital Development Board and Department of Corrections.
3978     - -      Accepting the construction plans for the proposed municipal building and
                  authorizing to seek competive bids.
3979     6-8-98   Selecting McClure Engineering for design and construction monitoring services
                  as required for the CDAP Water Main Project Phase 5.
3982     7-27-98  Accepting the bid from Williams Brothers Construction for the construction of
                  the proposed municipal building and authorize the execution of contracts.
3985     8-10-98  Accepting a bid from Visu-Sewer for joint sealing a section of East Street.
3990     9-28-98  Accepting a bid from Walker Excavating to replace a water main.
3991     9-28-98  Authorizing the purchase of real estate commonly referred to as the Walworth
                  Site.
3992     9-28-98  Authorizing the purchase of real estate at 205 East Oak Street.
3994     10-13-98 Authorizing the City Manager to purchase a one-ton truck chassis for use by the
                  Street Division.
                  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a side letter of agreement with AFSCME
3996     10-13-98 Local 764 amending the current contract in response to early retirement
                  incentive negotiations.
3999     10-13-98 Accepting a bid from Laverdiere Construction for miscellaneous sewer repairs.
4000     10-26-98 Authorizing the City Manager to purchase a three-quarter ton pick-up truck for
                  use by the Cemetery Division.
4001     10-26-98 Accepting a bid from Walker Excavating for the installation of a sewer main.
4003     11-9-98  Accepting a bid from Sturtevant Construction for improvements at the Public
                  Works Yard.
4004     11-9-98  Accepting a bid from Ratliff Brothers to dredge a portion of Windmont Park
                  Lake.
4005     11-9-98  Awarding water main installation work to Ratliff Brothers & Company, Inc.
4006     11-9-98  Awarding demolition work to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc.
4012     12-14-98 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement for a disposal service
                  from the Kewanee Transfer Station.
4013     12-14-98 Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement for disposal service at
                  the Kewanee Transfer Station.
4016     12-14-98 Authorizing the City Manager to enter an agreement with Cooperative Gas & Oil
                  for furnishing of vehicle fuel to the city.
4028     2-22-99  Authorizing City Manager to execute necessary agreements with Insituform
                  Technologies, Inc. for relining a portion of Vine St. sanitary sewer.
                  Authorizing entering into a Grant Agreement with the Illinois Housing
4029     2-23-99  Development Authority (IHDA) for the purpose of funding a single family owner-
                  occupied housing rehabilitation program.
                  Authorizing entering into an agreement with the State of Illinois for the
4030     2-23-99  resurfacing of Illinois 78, Federal Aid Route 22, State Section (126, 127) RS-
                  2, City Section 99-00098-00-RS.
4033     3-8-99   Authorizing City Manager to execute a three year contract with Fire Fighters
                  Local 513.
                  Establishing terms for continued audit services with Doyle & Kennan, P.C. for
4038     3-22-99  professional auditing services for an annual audit of the city for Fiscal Year
                  99/00.
4051     5-10-99  Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with the Henry County Health
                  Department.
4053     5-24-99  Authorizing Mayor to execute a contract with Bi-State Regional Commission to
                  prepare an OSLAD grant.
4054     6-14-99  Authorizing Mayor to execute a contract with Bi-State Regional Commission to
                  conduct an income survey.
4058     7-12-99  Awarding demolition work to River City Demolition, Inc.
4059     7-12-99  Awarding demolition work to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc.
4060     7-26-99  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract with Bi-State Regional Commission
                  for the update of the Comprehensive Plan.
4061     7-26-99  Approving a development agreement for Mill Creek Station Subdivision.
4064     7-26-99  Awarding replacement of the bar screen at Kewanee Waste Water Treatment Plant
                  to Gasvoda & Associates, Inc.
4066     8-9-99   Awarding demolition work to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc.
4067     8-9-99   Awarding installation of paving and related improvements at City Hall site 401
                  E. Third Street to Ratliff Brothers & Company, Inc.
4068     8-9-99   Authorizing the City Manager to execute necessary agreement with GTE Network
                  Systems for the installation of a phone system at the new municipal building.
Res.     10-25-99 Resolving to accept a proposal form McClure Engineering for the update of The
4079              Water Facilities Plan.
Res.     10-25-99 Resolving to establish the terms for janitorial services with Rodney Drawyer.
4080
Res.     11-8-99  Resolving to accept a proposal from Lafayette Nursery for the installation of
4081              landscaping at the new Municipal Building, 401 East Third Street.
Res.     11-8-99  Resolving to authorize the utilization of budgeted set-aside monies for the
4082              upgrading of a central computer server and network.
Res.     11-22-99 Resolving to approve an amendment of an agreement with the Kewanee Community
4085              Fire Protection District.
Res.     12-13-99 Resolving to authorize the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Gateway
4090              Coop for furnishing of vehicle fuel to the City.
Res.     1-10-99  Resolving to approve agreements with McClure Engineering for engineering
4093              services.
Res.     2-14-00  Authorizing the use of city right of way for the installation of parking.
4104
Res.     2-28-00  Authorizing the City Manager to purchase property in the 300 Block of the North
4106              Elm Street, or institute condemnation proceedings in lieu thereof.
Res.     2-28-00  Accepting a grant from the Illinois Housing Development Authority (IHDA) for
4110              the Single Family Owner-Occupied housing Rehabilitation Program.
Res.     3-27-00  Authorizing an agreement with the Ratliff Brothers and Company, Inc., to
4112              perform grading and related site work at the former Walworth Site.
Res.     3-27-00  Authorizing an agreement with Laverdiere Construction, Inc., to install storm
4113              and sanitary sewers on Elm Street and Grace Avenue near Walworth Resubdivision.
Res.     3-27-00  Authorizing an agreement between the city and St. Mary's Catholic Church of
4114              Kewanee for care of the burial grounds.
Res.     4-10-00  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a three year contract with FOP Lodge
4117              23.
Res.     4-24-00  Authorizing an agreement with Advanced Asphalt Inc., to supply materials for
4118              and perform general maintenance on city streets and highways.
Res.     4-24-00  Authorizing an agreement with Advanced Asphalt Inc., to construct downtown
4119              parking lot improvement.
Res.     5-8-00   Accepting staff recommendation concerning the purchase of an aerial platform
4121              fire apparatus.
Res.     5-8-00   Awarding demolition work to Ratliff Brothers and Company, Inc.
4123
Res.     5-22-00  Accepting a proposal from Bi-state Regional Commission for the administration
4124              of a recent CDAP award for sewer installation.
Res.     5-22-00  Authorizing for the submittal of an OSLAD grant application.
4125
Res.     5-22-00  Authorizing the use of city right of way for the installation of parking and
4126              loading.
Res.     6-12-00  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a four year contract with AFSCME Local
4127              764.
Res.     6-26-00  Awarding demolition work to Ratliff Brothers and Company, Inc.
4128
Res.     7-24-00  Awarding the bid for preparation and seeding of approximately 8 acres of the
4134              former Walworth site to Central Landscaping.
Res.     7-24-00  Authorizing acceptance of a quit claim deed for land located in the Southeast
4135              Quarter of Section 34, Township 15 North, Range 5 East of the 4th P.M.
Res.     8-28-00  Approving the transfer of the cable franchise to Insight Communications of
4139              Indiana, LLC.
Res.     9-11-00  Authorizing the City Manager to establish maintenance agreements for various
4143              equipment and facilities located at 401 E. Third Street, City Hall.
Res.     10-10-00 Authorizing an agreement to allow Boswell Distributing to construct a loading
4151              dock on a city right-of-way.
Res.     11-13-00 Authorizing an agreement with the owners of Reecy's East Mobile Home Park
4158              located at 1119 Lake Street.
Res.     12-11-00 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Goldstar FS for
4166              furnishing vehicle fuel to the city.
Res.              Authorizing an agreement with McClure Engineering Associates, Inc. for
4169     1-8-01   preparation of plans for 2001 Main and Tenney Streets water main replacement
                  project.
Res.     1-8-01   Accepting a proposal from Evans, Froelich, Beth & Chamley to provide legal
4170              services for the establishment of a tax increment financing district.
Res.     2-13-01  Establishing the terms for animal pound services with Kewanee Veterinary
4173              Clinic.
Res.     3-12-01  Authorizing an agreement with the Illinois Department of Corrections for water/
4179              sewer service at the Illinois Youth Center-Kewanee.
Res.     2-13-01  Awarding demolition work at 601 East Third Street to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc..
4180
Res.     3-26-01  Accepting a grant from the Illinois Housing Development Authority for the
4182              single family owner-occupied rehabilitation program.
Res.     4-9-01   Renewing liability and workers compensation insurance with the MICA insurance
4184              pool.
Res.     4-23-01  Accepting low bid of Advanced Asphalt for maintenance of streets and highways
4186              in the city for the fiscal year ending 2002.
Res.     5-14-01  Authorizing an agreement with the Illinois Department of Transportation for
4189              planned improvements to Main and Tenney Streets from Mill to Central Boulevard.
Res.     6-11-01  Awarding demolition work at 512 N. Cottage Street to Newman Excavating, Inc.
4194
Res.     6-11-01  Awarding demolition work at 513 S. West Street to Newman Excavating, Inc.
4195
Res.     6-25-01  Authorizing an agreement with Walker Excavation to install a water main on Main
4196              Street, Tenney Street and Division Street.
Res.     7-23-01  Awarding demotion work at 807 N. Vine Street to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc.
4199
Res.     7-23-01  Awarding demotion work at 321 S. Elm Street to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc.
4200
Res.     7-23-01  Awarding demotion work at 213 Ross Street to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc.
4201
Res.     7-23-01  Engaging McClure Engineering for engineering services.
4202
Res.     8-13-01  Awarding demolition work at 108 N. Adams Street to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc.
4205
Res.4206 8-13-01  Awarding the bid for sanitary sewer system improvements under CDAP grant 00-
                  24234 to G. A. Rich & Sons, Inc.
Res.     8-27-01  Accepting a proposal from Bi-State Regional Commission for the preparation and
4207              submittal of a CDAP grant application.
Res.4208 9-10-01  Supporting the application for a CDAP grant and committing to match funds of
                  the project costs.
Res.     9-10-01  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Grebner Motors for
4210              the purchase of two pick-up trucks.
Res.     9-24-01  Awarding roofing work on Fire Station #2 to R. A. Oldeen, Inc.
4213
Res.     10-9-01  Authorizing a change order with G. A. Rich for the replacement of storm sewer
4214              located in the CDAP project area.
Res.     10-9-01  Authorizing an agreement for a loan from the Revolving Loan Fund to Blue Chip
4215              Industries.
Res.     11-13-01 Awarding lift station refurbishing work for the Lake Street Sanitary Sewer Lift
4218              Station to various firms.
Res.     11-13-01 Authorizing the City Manager to establish agreements with companies desiring to
4219              locate equipment upon city water towers.
                  Accepting public water facilities plan prepared by McClure Engineering and
Res.     12-10-01 authorizing Mayor to engage their services to assist in preparing application
4221              for low interest construction loan program and to negotiate terms for
                  engineering/design service and construction management.
Res.     12-10-01 Authorizing an agreement with Walker Excavating to perform two boring projects
4222              on W. Sixth Street.
Res.     12-10-01 Authorizing City Manager to enter into an agreement with GoldStar FS for
4224              vehicle fuel.
Res.     12-10-01 Awarding demolition work at 200 N. High Street to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc.
4225
Res.              Authorizing two one-year options with Tazewell Recycling and Disposal Facility,
4226     12-10-01 Inc. to continue performing hauling and disposal service for the Solid Waste
                  Transfer Station.
Res.     12-10-01 Approving plans and specifications for improvement of FAP Route 613 (US 34)
4229              Railroad Avenue, Section 10M-1.
Res.     1-14-02  Awarding demolition work at 705 W. Sixth Street to Newman Excavating, Inc.
4232
Res.     1-14-02  Approving plans and specifications for joint city-state improvement of FAU
4233              Route 75720 (South Street and Midland Road).
Res.     2-11-02  Modifying terms of Res. 4215, an agreement for a loan from the Revolving Loan
4236              Fund to Blue Chip Industries.
Res.     3-11-02  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Grebner motors for
4238              the purchase of a pick-up truck.
Res.     5-13-02  Awarding Mill Street Sewer Relining 2002 Project to Visu-Sewer Clean & Seal,
4242              Inc.
Res.     5-13-02  Awarding Fire Station #2 Addition Project to Jensen Construction Co.
4243
Res.     5-28-02  Authorizing an agreement with Advanced Asphalt Company, Inc. to supply
4248              materials for and perform general maintenance on city streets and highways.
Res.     6-24-02  Awarding demolition work at 126 Beach Street, South to Tracy Lynn Trucking,
4250              Inc.
Res.     7-8-02   Authorizing an agreement with Walker Excavating to replace water main on
4252              Railroad Avenue between Florence and Harrison Streets.
Res.     7-22-02  Establishing the terms for actuarial services in determining appropriate
4255              contributions by the city for police and fire pensions.
Res.     8-26-02  Authorizing the paving of a portion of Junior Avenue lying south of Dewey
4260              Avenue by Petersen Development Company.
Res.              Authorizing Phil Good of Good’s Furniture to install a pedestrian crosswalk
4261     8-26-02  across the public alley in the city block bounded by Main Street, Second
                  Street, Tremont Street and Third Street.
Res.     9-9-02   Approving a lease with Miller Media Group for a tower site.
4263
Res.     9-9-02   Resolving to engage the firm of Evans, Froehlich, Beth and Chamley to provide
4264              legal services for the establishment of tax increment financing districts.
Res.     9-23-02  Authorizing an agreement with Laverdiere Construction to relocate sanitary
4266              sewer main on the vacant lot at 615 E. First Street.
Res.     9-23-02  Allowing installation of private monitoring wells in a public right-of-way.
4267
Res.     10-15-02 Authorizing the City Manager to engage McClure Engineering for engineering
4268              services.
Res.     10-15-02 Authorizing an agreement with Jensen Construction Company to erect an addition
4269              on the existing public works building at 415 N. Main Street.
Res.     10-15-02 Authorizing the city’s membership in Julie Inc.
4270
Res.     10-15-02 Authorizing the City Manager to execute a three year contract with FOP Lodge
4271              233.
3367     11-12-02 Instructing city staff to execute sale of various vehicles and equipment deemed
                  no longer necessary for city operations.
Res.     12-9-02  Authorizing the City Manger to enter into an agreement with Gateway Coop for
4276              furnishing vehicle and equipment fuel to the city.
Res.     1-13-03  Awarding demolition work at 1707 W. Third Street to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc.
4279
Res.     1-13-03  Awarding demolition work at 432-434 S. Tremont Street to Tracy Lynn Trucking,
4280              Inc.
Res.     1-13-03  Authorizing the execution of documents to obtain an Illinois Department of
4281              Transportation Utility permit.
Res.     1-27-03  Engaging the fir of Evans, Froehlich, Beth and Chamley to provide legal
4283              services for the establishment of a tax increment financing
Res.     2-10-03  Engaging the firm of Evans, Froehlich, Beth and Chamley to provide legal
4284              services for the issuance of $8.5 million IEPA loan/bonds.
Res.     2-24-03  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a three-year contract with Fire
4287              Fighters Local 513.
Res.     3-10-03  Resolving to commit funds for the purchase of police squad cars in FY 03/04.
4289
Res.     3-10-03  Awarding a bid to Harn R/O for membrane filtration equipment to be used in the
4290              reverse osmosis water treatment project.
Res.     3-10-03  Amending Res. 4114, an agreement between the city and St. Mary’s Catholic
4291              Church for care of burial grounds.
Res.     3-24-03  Authorizing the City Manager and the Mayor to commit funds from the Revolving
4292              Loan Fund to Boss Manufacturing Company.
Res.     3-24-03  Authorizing an agreement with Advanced Asphalt Company, Inc. to supply
4294              materials for and perform general maintenance on city streets and highways.
Res.     3-24-03  Awarding a bid to Laverdiere Construction for the reverse osmosis water
4295              treatment project.
Res.     3-24-03  Awarding a bid to Layne Western for the reverse osmosis treatment project.
4296
Res.     3-24-03  Awarding a bid to Chicago Bridge and Iron for the reverse osmosis water
4297              treatment project.
Res.     4-28-03  Resolving for maintenance of streets and highways by the city for fiscal year
4304              2003-2004.
3394     5-12-03  Authorizing the city to enter into and perform a loan agreement with the
                  Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
Res.     5-27-03  Authorizing an agreement with the Illinois Department of Transportation for a
4310              Tarp and STU-funded project.
Res.     5-27-03  Authorizing the purchase of utility tractor and rotary finish motor for the
4312              Kewanee Grounds Maintenance Department.
Res.     6-9-03   Authorizing an agreement with McClure Engineering Associates, Inc. For
4315              preparation of plans for South and Hollis Sanitary Sewer Lift Station Project.
Res.     7-14-03  Authorizing the purchase of rotary finish motor for the Kewanee Grounds
4317              Maintenance Department.
Res.     7-14-03  Authorizing an agreement with Walker Excavating Co. to perform a directional
4318              boring project for water main along U.S. 34 and IL 78.
Res.     8-25-03  Authorizing an agreement with Insituform Technologies USA, Inc. to perform
4324              Sanitary Sewer Relining Summer 2003 Project.
Res.     8-25-03  Authorizing an agreement with Jensen Construction Co. to perform the Waste
4325              Water Treatment Plant and Transfer Station Roofing Project.
3412     9-22-03  Instructing City staff to execute sale of various vehicles and equipment deemed
                  no longer necessary for city operations.
Res.     9-22-03  Supporting the application for a CDAP grant and committing to match funds for
4328              installation of sanitary sewer collection systems.
Res.              Authorizing an agreement with McClure Engineering Associates, Inc. for
4329     9-22-03  engineering services relating to the 6th and Main Water Main Replacement
                  Project.
Res.     9-22-03  Authorizing the purchase of a sludge spreader for the Kewanee Waste Water
4330              Treatment Plant.
Res.     10-14-03 Resolving to obtain additional right-of-way on Hollis Street to be used as the
4332              location for the proposed South and Hollis Sanitary Sewer Pump Station.
Res.     10-14-03 Awarding South Sanitary Sewer Pump Station to G.A. Rich and Sons, Inc.
4333
Res.              Authorizing the extension of an option with Tazewell Recycling and Disposal
4335     11-10-03 Facility to perform hauling and disposal services for the Kewanee Solid Waste
                  Transfer Station.
Res.     11-24-03 Establishing the terms for actuarial services in determining appropriate
4336              contributions by the city for police and fire pensions.
Res.     12-8-03  Authorizing the City Manager to enter onto an agreement with Gold Star FS for
4338              furnishing vehicle and equipment fuel to the city.
Res.     12-8-03  Awarding demolition work at 415 Hollis Street to Tracy Lynn Trucking, Inc.
4339
Res.     12-8-03  Allowing installation of private monitoring wells in a public right-of-way.
4340
Res.              Authorizing the submission of an advisory referendum question on the taxpayer
4341     12-8-03  action amendment to be submitted to the voters of the city at the general
                  primary election, March 16, 2004.
Res.     12-22-03 Authorizing the funding for the installation of a sanitary sewer in the 300
4342              Block of West Fourth Street.
                  Establishing tax increment financing for the East and 11th 2004 Redevelopment
3447     9-13-04  Project Area by setting up a Special Tax Allocation Fund to be funded by ad
                  valorem taxes from levies upon real property in the redevelopment area and such
                  funds shall be used to pay redevelopment project costs and obligations.
                  Entering into an economic incentive agreement with Sullivan Foods to operate a
3448     9-13-04  full service grocery store and the city to return ½ of the 1% sales tax derived
                  from sales over a period of seven years.
3545     7-9-07   Authorizing the construction and improvement of a sidewalk on property located
                  adjacent to 1112 West Fourth Street.
3648     7-12-10  Authorizing the city to execute, enter into and perform a loan agreement with
                  the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
                  Declaring a certain vehicle excess property and no longer required in the
3678     6-13-11  operations of the city and directing the City Manager to dispose of said excess
                  property.
                  Declaring certain items in the possession of the Police Department excess
3684     8-22-11  property and no longer required in the operations of the city and directing the
                  City Manager to dispose of said excess property.
3703     5-29-12  Authorizing the city to execute, enter into and perform a loan agreement with
                  the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
                  Authorizing the establishment of tax increment financing “interested parties
3766     6-23-14  registry” and adopting registration rules for such registries for the Downtown
                  Tax Increment Financing District.
3772     8-11-14  Authorizing an addendum to the Mutual Aid Box Alarm System agreement.
3786     1-12-15  Approving the redevelopment plan and projects for the Kewanee Downtown Tax
                  Increment Financing District.
3787     1-12-15  Designating the redevelopment project area for the Kewanee Downtown Tax
                  Increment Financing District.
3788     1-12-15  Adopting tax increment allocation financing for the Kewanee Downtown Tax
                  Increment Financing District.
                  Providing for and approving the first amendment to the Kewanee Lininger
3790     2-23-15  Industrial Park 2002 TIF District redevelopment project area, plan and
                  projects.
3857-    11-14-16 Adopting intergovernmental agreement establishing Kewanee/Henry County
2016              Enterprise Zone.
3904-    11-13-17 Adopting intergovernmental agreement establishing Kewanee/Henry County
2017              Enterprise Zone.
3919     2-26-18  Approving and authorizing the execution of a tax increment financing (TIF)
                  district redevelopment agreement with Dark Phase Designs.
3920     2-26-18  Approving and authorizing the execution of a tax increment financing (TIF)
                  district redevelopment agreement with Jackson Peck Financial Group.
3926     5-14-18  Approving and authorizing the execution of a tax increment financing (TIF)
                  district redevelopment agreement with Gustafson Ford, LLC.
                  Declaring certain items (75 abandoned and unclaimed bicycles) excess and no
3937     7-23-18  longer required in the operations of the city and directing the City Manager to
                  dispose of same.
Res.     10-9-18  Authorizing a cable tv franchise agreement with Comcast of Illinois/ Indiana/
3944              Ohio LLC.
3946     11-13-18 Approving and authorizing the execution of a tax increment financing (TIF)
                  district redevelopment agreement with L&L of Sterling, LLC.
3947     11-13-18 Approving and authorizing the execution of a tax increment financing (TIF)
                  district redevelopment agreement with Broken Chimney, Inc., d/b/a The Station.
3974     7-22-19  Approving and authorizing the execution of a tax increment financing (TIF)
                  district redevelopment agreement with Dooley Bros. Plumbing & Heating, Inc.
3975     8-12-19  Approving and authorizing the execution of a tax increment financing (TIF)
                  district redevelopment agreement with Dale Matthews, d/b/a The Broken Chimney.
Res.     9-9-     Authorizing an agreement with M.E.R.C. Construction Inc. of Wyoming, Illinois.
5185     19   
Res.     10-28-19 Authorizing the Fire Chief to execute an intergovernmental agreement with the
5189              Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services.
Res.     11-25-19 Authorizing the City Manager or his designee to execute an agreement with Black
5192              Hawk College.
Res.     12-19-19 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Michlig Energy.
5195
Res.     1-13-20  Authorizing the Mayor, City Manager, City Attorney, and City Clerk to execute
5198              power purchase agreement disclosure forms.
Res.     1-27-20  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an intergovernmental agreement with
5200              Henry County.
4000     4-13-20  Authorizing the execution of a professional services agreement between the city
                  and Jacob & Klein, Ltd. and the Economic Development Group, Ltd.
Res.     5-11-20  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a right-of-way agreement with Cambridge
5207              Telecommunications Services, Inc.
Res.     4-27-20  Accepting a proposed amendment to a professional services agreement with Dixon
5211              Engineering.
Res.     4-27-20  Authorizing a contract with Performance Piplining, Inc.
5212
Res.     5-11-20  Authorizing the City Manager, or his designee, to execute a renewal to the
5216              agreement with Neponset Fire Protection District.
Res.     5-26-20  Executing a contract with Porter Brothers Asphalt & Sealing, Inc.
5225
Res.     6-15-20  Change Order #1 to contract with Performance Pipelining, Inc.
5229
Res.     6-15-20  Amending existing agreement between the city and Saint John Paul II Parish of
5230              Kewanee.
Res.     7-13-20  Accepting a 2020 standard agreement from Crawford, Murphy, and Tilly, Inc.
5235
Res.     7-27-20  Accepting a preliminary engineering services agreement from Hutchinson
5238              Engineering, Inc.
Res.     7-27-20  Accepting a preliminary engineering services agreement from IMEG Corp.
5239
Res.     8-10-20  Accepting a 2020 standard agreement for professional services from Crawford,
5241              Murphy, and Tilly, Inc.
Res.     9-14-20  Authorizing a contract with Ratliff Brothers & Company, Inc.
5242.1
Res.     8-10-20  Authorizing an agreement with R.A. Oldeen, Inc.
5244
Res.     9-28-20  Approving an agreement with American Steel Company, Inc.
5245
Res.     10-26-20 Approving an agreement with Ecology Solutions.
5247
Res.     11-16-20 Change Order #1 to a contract with L.C. United Painting Co., Inc.
5251
Res.     11-16-20 Approving an agreement with Lakeshore Recycling Systems.
5252
Res.     11-30-20 Executing a contract with G&L Tank Sandblasting and Coating LLC.
5256
Res.     11-30-20 Amendment to an agreement with Dixon Engineering.
5257
Res.     11-30-20 Authorizing an agreement with Access Systems.
5260
Res.     12-28-20 Authorizing an agreement with Cottingham & Butler.
5263
Res.     12-28-20 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Michlig Energy.
5264
Res.     1-11-21  Amending an agreement with Lakeshore Recycling Systems.
5266
Res.     1-11-21  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a side letter of agreement to the
5267              collective bargaining agreement with Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No. 233.
Res.     3-22-21  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a four-year collective bargaining
5275              agreement with Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 233.
Res.     4-12-21  Awarding a contract to All Seasons Lawn Care of Atkinson, Il.
5276
Res.     5-10-21  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a renewal to the agreement with
5278              Neponset Fire Protection District.
Res.              Authorizing the City Manager to execute a side letter of agreement to the
5279     5-10-21  existing collective bargaining agreement with International Association of Fire
                  Fighters Local 513.
Res.     5-10-21  Executing a contract with Laverdiere Construction, Inc.
5280
Res.     5-24-21  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a three-year agreement with Henry
5281              County Humane Society.
Res.     7-26-21  Authorizing the Mayor or City Manager to execute a facility usage agreement
5285B             with Kewanee School District #229.
Res.     6-14-21  Authorizing an agreement for emergency repairs to the electrical system at the
5286              wastewater treatment plan.
Res.     7-26-21  Authorizing the Mayor or City Manager to execute a facility usage agreement
5286B             with Wethersfield School District #230.
Res.     8-23-21  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an intergovernmental agreement with the
5290              Kewanee Park District.
Res.     8-23-21  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement with CMT.
5293
                 
Res.     9-24-21  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a right-of-way agreement with Gustafson
5297              Ford.
Res.     10-25-21 Authorizing the City Manager to execute an intergovernmental agreement with the
5301              State of Illinois.
Res.     10-25-21 Authorizing the City Manager to execute a lease agreement with Nextlink
5302              Internet.
Res.     10-25-21 Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement with Hutchison
5303              Engineering.
Res.     11-8-21  Authorizing the City Manager to extend agreements with the State Bank of Toulon
5305              and IH Mississippi Valley Credit Union (IHMVCU).
Res.     11-22-21 Authorizing the City Manager to execute an amended public service agreement
5310              with the Chamber of Commerce.
Res.     11-22-21 Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement with Dooley Brothers
5311              Plumbing.
Res.     12-13-21 Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement for budgeting software.
5320
Res.     1-10-22  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Michlig Energy.
5322
Res.     2-28-22  Authorizing a purchase agreement with Union Federal Savings & Loan.
5328
Res.     3-14-22  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a three-year collective bargaining
5329              agreement with International Association of Fire Fighters Local 513.
Res.              Authorizing the City Manager to execute a three-year collective bargaining
5330     3-14-22  agreement with American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees
                  Local 764.
                 
Res.     3-14-22  Authorizing lease agreements with Martin Equipment/John Deere and Birkey’s/
5331              Case Construction.
Res.     3-28-22  Amending the development agreement with Hype, Inc.
5335
4096     4-11-22  Authorizing the execution of a tax increment financing agreement by and between
                  the city and Raskustro, LLC.
Res.     4-11-22  Awarding a contract to All Season’s Lawn Care.
5337
Res.     5-9-22   Authorizing the City Manager or his designee to execute an agreement with Carl
5345              Sandburg College.
Res.     5-23-22  Authorizing a purchase agreement with Peoples National Bank.
5347
Res.     5-23-22  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement with Hutchison
5349              Engineering.
Res.     5-23-22  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement with the American Job
5350              Center.
Res.     8-8-22   Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement with Crawford, Murphy &
5355              Tilly, Inc.
Res.     8-8-22   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an intergovernmental agreement with
5356              Kewanee Community School District 229.
Res.     8-8-22   Authorizing a reciprocal reporting agreement between Kewanee School District
5358              229 and the Kewanee Police Department.
Res.     8-22-22  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement with Hutchison
5360              Engineering.
4106     8-22-22  Authorizing the execution of a tax increment financing agreement by and between
                  the city and JKL Enterprises.
Res.     11-14-22 Authorizing the City Manager and Fire Chief to execute an amended agreement
5374              with Kewanee Community Fire Protection District.
Res.     11-14-22 Authorizing the City Manager to execute an amendment to an agreement with
5375              Hutchison Engineering.
4114     11-28-22 Authorizing the execution of a tax increment financing agreement by and between
                  the city and John Miskinis.
Res.     12-27-22 Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement with Entec Services.
5380
Res.     12-27-22 Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement with Michlig Energy.
5382
Res.     2-13-23  Ratifying the extension of an agreement with the State Bank of Toulon.
5387
Res.     2-13-23  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement with Revize Software
5388              Systems, LLC.
4121     2-27-23  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF district redevelopment
                  agreement between the city and Midland Plaza, LLC.
Res.     2-27-23  Authorizing an amendment to the existing agreement between the city and Saint
5389              John Paul II Parish of Kewanee.
4133     3-27-23  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF district redevelopment
                  agreement between the city and Wager Brothers, Inc.
4134     4-24-23  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF district redevelopment
                  agreement between the city and JSLK Management, LLC.
4140     7-10-23  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF agreement between the city and
                  VanDeVelde Wellness Center.
4142     7-24-23  Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement for participation in the Mutual Aid
                  Box Alarm System.
4144     8-14-23  Authorizing the Mayor to execute an intergovernmental agreement with the
                  Kewanee Park District.
4177     4-22-24  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF redevelopment agreement
                  between the city and 104 W. First, LLC.
4182     5-13-24  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF redevelopment agreement
                  between the city and Conè Properties.
4188     5-28-24  Approving and authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement
                  between the city and Wethersfield Community Unit School District #230.
4195     8-12-24  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF redevelopment agreement
                  between the city and Ken Westefer.
4199     9-9-24   Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF redevelopment agreement
                  between the city and The Players Edge USA.
4218     12-9-24  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF redevelopment agreement
                  between the city and Hype Inc.
4219     12-9-24  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF redevelopment agreement
                  between the city and Cerno Properties.
4237     5-27-25  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF redevelopment agreement
                  between the city and Vandevelde Wellness Center, S.C.
4239     6-9-25   Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF redevelopment agreement
                  between the city and Flemish American Club.
4243     7-14-25  Approving and authorizing the execution of a TIF redevelopment agreement
                  between the city and KTown Real Estate, LLC.
4252     10-14-25 Approving the termination of the Kewanee Kentville Road 2001 TIF district
                  redevelopment project area, plan and projects.
                 
 
TABLE IV: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Annexation of land described in an attachment to this
2844     8-23-93     ordinance which can be found in the Office of the City
                     Clerk.
2854     10-12-93    Annexation of Aldi's Supermarket and vicinity located on
                     the West side of Highway 34 near the South city limit.
                     Annexation of land described in an attachment to this
2894     5-23-94     ordinance which can be found in the Office of the City
                     Clerk.
Res.     5-23-94     Authorizing Mayor to enter into annexation
3733                agreement with Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
                     Annexing property described as a part of the south one-
2916     8-22-94     half of the southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 15
                     north, Range 5 east, totaling 7.37 acres.
                     Annexing Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4 of Fredeen's Subdivision of
2984     7-24-95     the North Half of Block 10 of Fisher's Subdivision of the
                     Northeast Quarter of Section 34, Township 15 North, Range
                     5 East of the 4th P.M.
                     Annexing that part of Lot 7 of Block 2 lying South of the
                     city limit in Zang's Subdivision of the East Half of the
2996     9-11-95     Northeast Quarter of Section 9 and 3 acres of the West
                     side of the Northwest Quarter of section 10 all in
                     Township 14 North, Range 5 East of the 4th P.M. with Louis
                     T. Little as owner and a zoning classification of B3.
                     Annexing Lots 7 and 8 of Fredeen's Subdivision of Block 10
3014     11-3-95     of Fischer's Subdivision in the Northeast Quarter of
                     Section 34, Township 15 North, Range 5.
                     Annexing Lots 20, 21, and 22 of Fredeen's Subdivision of
3031     1-22-96     the North Half of Block 10 of Fisher's Subdivision of the
                     Northeast Quarter of Section 34, Township 15 North, Range
                     5 East of the 4th P.M.
                     Annexing Lots 15 and 16 of Freeden's Subdivision of Block
3080     9-9-96      10 of Fischer's Subdivision of the Northeast Quarter of
                     Section 34, Township 15 North, Range 5 East of the 4th
                     P.M.
3083     11-4-96     Annexing tracts of land as follows:
(1) Eleven acres in the West Half of the South-east Quarter of Section 34 in
Township 15 North, Range 5 East of the 4th P.M.
(2) Lot Two of Otley's First Addition in Section 34, all in Township 15 North,
Range 5 East of the 4th P.M.
(3) Part of Lot Three of Otley's First Addition of Section 34, Township 15
North, Range 5 East of the 4th P.M.
                     Annexing a part of the East Half of the Northeast Quarter
3149     5-4-98      of Section 28, Township 15 North, Range 5 East of the 4th
                     P.M.
3150     4-13-98     Annexing a part of the Southwest Quarter of Section 26 in
                     Township 15 North, Range 5 East of the 4th P.M.
                     Annexing property that lies south of South Pleasantview
3196     1-25-99     Cemetery, north of Division Street extended, and east of
                     the area known as Edgewood Drive.
                     Annexing property known as Kewanee Land Development
3197     2-8-99      Company Subdivision, also known as Edgewood Drive (Tract
                     1) and the residential lot near the northwest corner of
                     Tract 1, also known as 502 S. East Street (Tract 2).
                     Annexing the South half of the Southeast Quarter of the
3261     6-26-00     Northeast Quarter of Section 29, Township 15 North, Range
                     5 East of the 4th P.M.
3355     8-12-02     Annexing tracts of land as follows:
                   (1) The Northwest Quarter of Section 5 in Township 14
                     North, Range 5, East of the 4th P.M.
                     (2) 28 acres, being a part of the Northwest Quarter of the
                     Southwest Quarter of Section 5, lying North of the
                   Chicago, Burlington, & Quincy Railroad Company right-of-
                     way, also described as Block 2, 3, 4, and 5 of the Thielen
                     Park Addition to the Village of Wethersfield.
3405     7-14-03     Annexing property commonly known as 925 Tenney Street.
3451     10-25-04    Annexing property commonly known as 1639 Lake Street.
                     Annexing property in trusteeship with C. Kuster, being the
3489     11-28-05    East Half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 8, Township
                     North, Range 5, East of the 4th P.M.
3495     1-9-06      Annexing property owned by D. and M. Davis commonly known
                     as 1631 Lake Street.
3716     11-13-12    Annexing property at 216 W. Eleventh Street.
4062     6-28-21     Annexing property at 1109 N. Main Street.
                    
 
TABLE V: REAL ESTATE SALES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
2875      12-27-93    The following described real estate is to be sold by
                      public sale: 213 N. Elm St.
                      The following described real estate is to be sold by
2860      10-25-93    public sale: 638 North Elm Street, 612 S. Main Street and
                      1122 Roseview Avenue.
2876      1-10-94     The following described real estate is to be sold by
                      public sale: 739 Henry Street and 101 S. Burr.
2897      6-13-94     The following described real estate is to be sold by
                      public sale: 739 Henry Street and 114 Payson Street.
2913      8-22-94     The following described real estate is to be sold by
                      public sale: 535 W. Sixth Street.
2925      9-26-94     The following described real estate is to be sold by
                      public sale: 535 W. Sixth Street and 320 E. Oak Street.
                      The following described real estate is to be sold by
2949      12-12-94    public sale: 519 W. Sixth Street and 615 E. Fourth
                      Street.
                      The following described real estate is to be sold by
3033      2-14-96     public sale: 519 W. Sixth Street, 1724 W. First Street,
                      and 1319 W. First Street.
                      The following described real estate is to be sold by
3072      8-12-96     public sale: 51 W. 65th Street, 608 E. 4th Street, 1103
                      W. Mill Street, 323 Ridyard Avenue.
3244      3-13-00     The following described real estate is to be sold by
                      public sale: 205 E. Oak Street and 918 Rose Street.
3271      9-25-00     The following described real estate is to be sold by
                      public sale: Lot 4, Walworth Resubdivision.
3277      11-13-00    The following described real estate is to be sold by
                      public sale: Lot 1, Walworth Resubdivision.
                      The following described real estate is to be sold by
3305      4-23-01     public sale: excess real estate located at 1122 Rockwell
                      Street.
3336      1-14-02     Directing sale of excess real estate located at 513 S.
                      West Street.
3348      7-8-02      The following described real estate is to be sold by
                      public sale: 200, 202, and 204 North Chestnut Street.
3350      7-22-02     The following described real estate is to be sold by
                      public sale: 138 East South Street.
Res. 4319 7-14-03     Approving repurchase of Lot 1, Walworth Resubdivision
                      from Abilities Plus.
3450      9-13-04     Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 807
                      N. Vine Street.
3452      11-8-04     Directing the sale of excess real estate at 1013 W.
                      Division Street.
3463      3-14-05     Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 821
                      Willow Street.
3672      4-25-11     Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 306
                      Maple Avenue.
3679      6-13-11     Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 824
                      E. Fourth Street.
3681      6-27-11     Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 1319
                      W. First Street.
3839      6-27-16     Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 517
                      Roosevelt Avenue.
3840      6-27-16     Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 603
                      E. third Street.
3907      11-27-17    Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 1119
                      Rose Street.
3908      11-27-17    Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 607
                      N. Tremont Street.
3998      3-9-20      Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 607
                      N. Tremont Street.
3999      3-9-20      Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 3rd
                      and Main.
4006      5-11-20     Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 1119
                      Rose Street.
4009      7-13-20     Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 2nd
                      and Chestnut.
Res. 5285 6-14-21     Purchase of real estate located at 539 West Division.
Res. 5351 6-13-22     Authorizing the execution of documents for the sale of
                      real estate within the Mill Creek Station development.
4113      11-14-22    Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 1st
                      and Chestnut.
                      Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 603
4143      7-24-23     E. Third Street, 211 Regina Court, 231 Regina Court, and
                      two parcels in Mill Creek Station.
4181      5-13-24     Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 309
                      N. Main Street.
4209      10-28-24    Directing the sale of excess real estate located at 1105
                      Roseview Avenue.
                     
 
TABLE VI: SPECIAL USES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
     11-22- A special use is granted to Michael McNaught and Robert Ver Heecke for secured
2862 93     open storage of cars, trailers, RV's, etc. on the property of 300 W. Fourth
            Street.
2915 8-22-  A special use is granted to James and Rose Melbourne at 214 S. Vine Street.
     94
2934 11-7-  A special use is granted to the city at 194 Fisher Avenue.
     94
2946 12-12- A special use is granted to Martin Greenhagen at 802 Elmwood Avenue.
     94
2960 2-13-  A special use is granted to the city at 301 W. First Street.
     95
2990 8-28-  Granting a special use to Kewanee Hospital Association at 719 Elliott Street to
     95     operate a hospital at this address.
2991 8-28-  Granting a special use to Bobby and Connie Ince and their heirs at 1450 Red
     95     Adams Road to run a junkyard.
2992 9-11-  Granting a special use to the YMCA at 315 W. First Street to operate a swimming
     95     pool.
2995 9-11-  Granting a special use to Filemon and Elsie Leon at 321 East Street South to
     95     allow the existing house to be used as a two family dwelling.
3006 10-10- Granting a special use to the city at 194 Fisher Avenue to allow the Police
     95     Department to build and operate an impound yard.
3016 11-20- Granting a special use to Paul and Debra Dvorak at 321 East Street South to
     95     allow the existing house to be used as a two family dwelling.
     3-12-  Granting a special use to the YMCA at 314 W. Central Blvd. to operate a
3039 96     swimming pool, other recreational activities, off-street parking and related
            accessory uses on the premises.
3045 4-9-96 Granting a special use to Frederick and Mary Ann Fleming at 220 N. East Street
            to operate a convenience store selling motor fuel on the premises.
3057 5-29-  Granting a special use to Gladys Durnil to allow the upper level of a house to
     96     be used as an apartment at 1107 N. East Street.
3063 6-11-  Granting a special use to Robert and Karen Davis to operate an elderly care
     96     home at 400 S. Vine Street.
3079 9-9-96 Granting a special use to Frances Smith to operate an elderly board and care
            home at 111 S. Tremont Street
3082 10-15- Granting a special use to Ismael Lopez and Teofila Lopez to allow sale of
     96     alcoholic beverages in a restaurant.
3099 3-10-  Granting a special use to Kathleen Driscoll of Tempe, Arizona at 1022 Lake
     97     Street to operate a boarding house for the elderly.
3111 7-28-  Granting a special use to James E. Kelly at 301 S. Vine Street to operate a
     97     one- chair beauty salon.
     7-28-  Granting a special use to Petersen Development Company, Ltd. of Peoria,
3114 97     Illinois, at 144 Junior Avenue to operate and maintain a sanitarium shelter
            care home.
3121 8-25-  Granting a special use to Connie M. O'Connor of Kewanee at 900 Pleasantview
     97     Avenue to operate an antique and collectible wholesale/ retail sales shop.
3122 8-25-  Granting a special use to Lee O. Barnes of Kewanee at 1210 E. Seventh Street to
     97     operate a car cleaning business.
     11-24- Granting a special use to Frank Dura, Anel Dura, and James Dura of Kewanee at
3133 97     320 W. First Street to operate a bowling alley with a lounge serving alcoholic
            liquor.
3154 4-27-  Granting a special use to Corey Esser and Melissa Esser of Kewanee at 607 North
     98     Main Street.
3163 6-8-98 Granting a special use to the city at 731 Commercial Street.
3171 7-27-  Granting a special use to Tom May at 224 W. Second Street.
     98
3181 9-14-  Granting a special use to Gordon Pointer at 627 E. Second Street.
     98
Res. 11-23- Granting a special use of various city streets for the annual Hardcore Run.
4008 98
3198 2-8-99 Granting a special use to Douglas Tomlinson and David Craddock at 414 S.
            Chestnut Street for a dental office.
3199 2-8-99 Granting a special use to Tom May at 211, 213, 215, 301 East Third Street for
            apartments.
     4-12-  Granting a special use permit to Judy Dolieslager and John Dolieslager at 731
3203 99     S. Tremont Street to allow residential use of the first level of the
            structures.
     7-26-  Granting a special use permit to James Hodge for property located at 719 N.
3222 99     Main Street and at 718 N. Tremont Street to allow vehicle parking accessory to
            a service station.
3228 9-27-  Granting a special use to Jeff & Debra Arch at 111 S. Chestnut Street for
     99     apartments.
     1-24-  Granting a special use permit for a planned residential development to
3242 00     Heartland Development of the Quad Cities, Inc., and Elderly Living Development,
            Inc. for property located at 1850 Lake Street.
     5-22-  Granting a special use permit for a sheltered care facility to Petersen
3253 00     Development Co. LTD. and Petersen Health for property located at 141 Junior
            Avenue, South.
3258 6-26-  Granting a special use permit to Michael and Elizabeth Jones for property
     00     located at 427 Dwight Street.
     8-14-  Granting a special use permit to Michael and Veronique Ahearn, Ismael and
3267 00     Teofila Lopez, and Alain Torres-Goitia for property located at 202 N. Tremont
            Street.
3273 10-10- Amending a special use permit previously issued to Petersen Development Co.,
     00     and Petersen Health Care for property located at 141 Junior Avenue, South.
     10-9-  Granting a special use permit to IPCS Sprint and William Lappin for property
3324 01     located at 215 E. Sixth Street, to construct and operate a telecommunications
            facility.
3325 10-9-  Granting a special use permit to Michael and Veronique Ahearn, for property
     01     located at 204 N. Tremont Street, to allow the sale of alcoholic beverages.
3326 10-9-  Granting a special use permit to the city for property located at 120 W. Eight
     01     Street, to operate a municipal fire station.
3349 7-8-02 Granting a special use permit to Tom May, for property located at 200, 202, and
            204 North Chestnut Street, to operate a beer garden/outdoor café.
3366 10-28- Granting a special use permit to Petersen Development Co., LTD, and Petersen
     02     Health Care for property located at 144 Junior Avenue, south, in the city.
3391 4-28-  Granting a special use permit to Bridgeway Foundation for land located at 1023
     03     Dewey Avenue.
3408 7-28-  Granting a special use permit to Aldi Foods, Inc. for land located at 805
     03     Tenney Street, to allow package sale of alcoholic liquor.
3429 4-26-  Granting a special use permit to John Beaman and Frieda Beaman to allow the
     04     sale or furnishing of alcoholic liquor at 605 N. East Street.
3440 6-28-  Granting a special use permit to Med Tech Sweden, Inc. to operate an orthopedic
     04     splint assembly and distribution business at 602 and 604 W. First Street.
     12-28- Amending Ordinance No. 3324, granting a special use permit to allow TCP
3460 04     Communications, LLC, to operate a telecommunications facility on property
            located at 215 East Sixth Street.
3464 3-28-  Granting a special use permit for the sale of alcoholic liquor in the Sombrero
     05     Loco restaurant on land located at 226 North Tremont Street.
     3-28-  Granting a special use permit for the construction and operation of non-
3465 05     residential, off-street parking facilities on land located at 412 and 416 Pine
            Street.
3469 5-9-05 Granting a special use permit for sale of alcoholic liquor at JoJo’s convenient
            store on land located at 501 N. Main Street.
3474 8-8-05 Granting a special use permit for construction and operation of a multiple
            family dwelling on land located at 1023 and 1025 Cambridge Road.
3478 9-26-  Granting a special use permit for sale of packaged alcoholic liquor at Murphy
     05     USA Gas Station on land located at 724 Tenney Street.
3486 11-28- Granting a special use permit for a one- chair hair salon to M. Swearingen at
     05     502 Willard Street.
3487 11-28- Granting a special use permit for a hospital and accessory buildings and uses
     05     to Kewanee Hospital at 1051 W. South Street.
3488 11-28- Granting a special use permit for a temporary campground at a construction site
     05     to Faith Evangelical Lutheran Church at 620 Hepner Drive.
3494 12-27- Granting a special use permit for operation of a multiple family dwelling to
     05     Endress Property Management at 100 N. Burr Boulevard.
3497 2-13-  Granting a special use permit for an in-home child day care facility to P.J.
     06     Farmer at 214 Birch Place.
3500 2-27-  Granting a special use permit allowing the serving of alcohol to J. Welgat for
     06     the existing restaurant at 200-202-204 N. Tremont Street.
3508 5-8-06 Granting the transfer of an existing special use permit for a gymnastics school
            at 935 North Grace Avenue to Sarah Oldeen.
3513 6-26-  Granting a special use permit for a used auto sales lot to Jon and Stephanie
     06     Wille and Susan Smithson at 505 Tenney Street.
3536 5-29-  Granting a special use permit for sale of alcoholic liquor in Los Ranchitos at
     07     337 Tenney Street.
3546 7-9-07 Granting a special use permit allowing raw coffee bean roasting at 205 W. First
            Street.
     10-9-  Granting a special use permit allowing packaged sale of alcoholic liquor to
3554 07     Trinidad Cervantes and Rafael Cervantes in the grocery store at 304 W. Sixth
            Street.
     1-28-  Granting a special use permit to Abilities Plus for group home for
3565 08     developmentally disabled adults at 808 E. Eleventh Street and changing the
            zoning from M-2 to R-2.
3566 3-10-  Granting a special use permit to Jacoby Enterprises, Inc. to allow sale of
     08     alcoholic liquor at 300 W. Third Street.
3568 3-10-  Granting special use permit to Sen Ting Lin and Joseph Xin Lin to allow sale of
     08     alcoholic liquor at 544 Tenney Street.
3569 3-10-  Granting a special use permit to Jeanna Moore to allow operation of a beauty
     08     shop at 732 S. Chestnut Street.
3573 5-27-  Granting a special use permit to PL Damron’s Catering to allow serving of
     08     alcohol at 206 N. Tremont Street.
3574 5-27-  Granting a special use permit to Moss Management for operation of an outdoor
     08     eating area serving alcohol at 449 Tenney Street.
3608 5-11-  Granting a special use permit to Michael and Carol Durnil to allow a consumer
     09     metal recycling facility at 325 North East Street.
3610 6-8-09 Granting a special use permit for sale of alcoholic liquor in El Cazador
            Restaurant at 226 N. Tremont Street.
3619 9-28-  Granting a special use permit to Albert Couri to allow packaged sales of
     09     alcoholic liquor at 150 E. South Street, Suite D.
3620 11-23- Granting a special use permit to Zepha V. Hutchinson to allow a beer garden and
     09     outdoor eating area for the existing bar at 1001 N. Main Street.
            Granting a special use permit to Open Range and Albert & Margaret Taylor to
3628 2-8-10 allow a wireless communication tower and appurtenant equipment to be erected at
            121 W. Church Street.
            Granting a special use permit to First Equity Group LLC and CVS/Pharmacy to
3629 2-8-10 allow a CVS/Pharmacy store and accessory uses to be erected at 444 S. Main
            Street, 114 E. Prospect Street and 435 Prospect Place.
3630 3-8-10 Granting a special use permit, allowing serving of alcohol, to Miguel A.
            Borbolla for the existing restaurant at 200-202-204 N. Tremont Street.
     4-26-  Granting a special use permit to John & Judy Dolieslager to allow a first level
3632 10     apartment in the existing building on the southwest part of the Lot at 731 S.
            Tremont Street.
3634 5-10-  Granting a special use permit to Laman & Shelly Sauer to allow a beer garden/
     10     outdoor eating area at the existing restaurant at 618 Tenney Street.
     6-14-  Granting a special use permit to John & Judy Dolieslager to allow a first level
3639 10     apartment in the existing building in the middle part of the lot at 731 S.
            Tremont Street.
3640 6-14-  Granting a special use permit to Jacoby Enterprises to allow a beer garden/
     10     outdoor eating area at the existing restaurant at 300 W. Third Street.
3645 6-28-  Granting a special use permit to John C. Beaman, Sr. to allow a beer garden/
     10     outdoor eating area at the existing tavern at 605 N. East Street.
3646 6-28-  Granting a special use permit to John C. Beaman, Sr. to allow a beer garden/
     10     outdoor eating area at the existing tavern at 314 N. Main Street.
3652 9-13-  Granting a special use permit to El Cazador Restaurant to allow the sale of
     10     alcoholic liquor.
3657 9-27-  Granting a special use permit to Walgreens for the sale of alcoholic liquor.
     10
3658 9-27-  Granting a special use permit to Nancy Lock to allow construction and
     10     occupation of an attached one-family dwelling.
3659 9-27-  Granting a special use permit to Larry Poulos for the sale of alcoholic liquor
     10     on land located at 431 N. East Street.
     3-28-  Granting a special use permit to Richard Heinrich and Heidi Heinrich to allow
3670 11     establishment and operation of a beer garden/outdoor eating area for property
            located at 200-202-204 N. Chestnut Street.
            Granting a special use permit to Los Ranchitos, Inc. to allow establishment and
3674 5-9-11 operation of a beer garden/outdoor eating area for property located at 337
            Tenney Street.
3680 6-27-  Granting a special use permit for a one-chair hair salon to Carol Hillier at
     11     134 E. Mill Street.
3683 8-8-11 Granting a special use permit to Shelli Sauer and Laman Sauer allowing serving
            of alcohol for the existing restaurant at 200-202-204 N. Tremont Street.
3710 7-9-12 Granting a special use permit for a used auto sales lot to Joshua Sutton, Lynn
            Sutton and Nancy Sutton at 100 N. Main Street.
3711 7-9-12 Granting a special use permit for establishment of a beer garden/outdoor eating
            area to Patrick Lee and Brandy Lee at 200-202-204 N. Chestnut Street.
3712 8-13-  Granting a special use permit allowing serving of alcohol to Danyale Willage
     12     for restaurant at 200-202-2004 N. Tremont Street.
3714 11-3-  Granting a special use permit for a proposed home for disabled adults to
     12     Abilities Plus at 511 Hollis Street.
3721 1-14-  Granting a special use permit for a used auto sales lot to Eric Ellenberger at
     13     501 Tenney Street.
3722 1-14-  Granting a special use permit for sale of alcoholic liquor to Abdelfattah Asad
     13     at 431 N. East Street.
     5-13-  Granting a special use permit to Stephen Patterson and Nancy Patterson of
3735 13     Orion, IL for property located at 319-329 N. Main Street in the city to allow a
            haunt attraction.
3742 7-8-13 Granting a special use permit to Dale Laube of Toulon, IL for property located
            at 619 Elliott Street in the city to allow a two-family dwelling.
3750 11-25- Granting a special use permit to Los Ranchitos Restaurant for property located
     13     at 600 Tenney Street.
3758 3-10-  Amending a special use permit previously granted to Stephen Patterson and Nancy
     14     Patterson of Orion, IL for property located at 319-329 N. Main Street.
3768 7-14-  Granting a special use permit allowing packaged sale of alcoholic liquor to
     14     Robert W. Miller in the retail store at 150 E. South Street, Suite D.
3785 12-22- Granting a special use permit to Krishna Kanayia, Inc., Ajay Patel and Lalit
     14     Patel, for sale of alcoholic liquor on land located at 431 N. East Street.
3791 3-9-15 Granting a special use permit to Elisabeth Frisby and Lisa Frisby Enterprises
            LLC for property located at 214 S. Main Street.
     8-10-  Granting a special use permit to Mario Perez, Ayala, Evelin Martinez and Tito
3807 15     Martinez, d/b/a Aztecs De Oro Authentic Mexican Restaurant for property located
            at 224 N. Tremont Street.
3809 9-14-  Granting a special use permit to Fernando Anaya, Casco De Oro, LLC, for
     15     property located at 226 N. Tremont Street.
3811 9-30-  Granting a special use permit to Bill Thomas Cox, Big River Entertainment Inc.,
     15     d/b/a Vega’s, for property located at 109 W. Second Street.
3836 6-27-  Granting a special use permit to Anthony and Abigail Segura for property
     16     located at 200-202-204 N. Chestnut Street.
3837 6-27-  Granting a special use permit to James Liichow for property located at 200 S.
     16     Boss Street.
3838 6-27-  Granting a special use permit to Kim Cernovich for Parcel No. 20-29- 300-012.
     16
3853 11-14- Granting a special use permit to Glenna Scott for property located at 222 N.
     16     Burr Boulevard.
3865 12-12- Granting a special use permit to Denise Cook for property located at 831 Lake
     16     Street.
3866 12-12- Granting a special use permit to Zepha Hutchinson for property located at 729
     16     N. Walnut Street.
3878 3-27-  Granting a special use permit to Keith Rentschler, Fork Restaurant Group LLC,
     17     for property located at 150 E. South Street, Suite J.
3879 3-27-  Granting a special use permit to Lalit Patel, Krishna Kanaiya Inc. for property
     17     located at 150 E. South Street, Suite D.
3890 6-26-  Granting a special use permit to Bill Cox, Big River Gaming LLC, for property
     17     located at 202 N. Tremont Street.
3892 7-24-  Granting a special use permit to Abilities Plus for property located at 427 E.
     17     Garfield Street.
3893 7-24-  Granting a special use permit    to Tracy Glasgo for property located at 125 W.
     17     South Street #11.
3900 10-10- Granting expansion of use/change in floor plan to an existing special use
     17     permit for property located at 206 N. Chestnut Street.
3927 5-29-  Granting a special use permit to Dennis Packee for property located at 600
     18     North Main Street.
3928 5-29-  Granting a special use permit to John Willie, d/b/a You’re Approved Auto Sales,
     18     for property located at 525 North Main Street.
3934 7-9-18 Granting a special use permit to Armando Rosas, Rosas LLC, d/b/a Belico, for
            property located at 202 N. Tremont Street.
3939 8-13-  Granting a special use permit to Chelsea O’Connor for property located at 233
     18     West Division Street.
3942 10-9-  Granting a special use permit to John Beaman Sr. for property located at 309
     18     East Third Street.
3956 4-8-19 Granting a special use permit to James Reed III, d/b/a Lemirage, for property
            located at 544 Tenney Street.
3957 4-8-19 Granting a special use permit to Luis Anaya, d/b/a Slotsland LLC, for property
            located at 113 W. Third Street.
3960 5-13-  Granting a special use permit to Jeff Todd, d/b/a Boiler Room, for property
     19     located at 206 N. Chestnut Street.
3961 5-13-  Granting a special use permit to Jeff Todd for property located at 206 N.
     19     Chestnut Street.
3962 5-13-  Granting a special use permit to Andrew Speck for property located at 300 West
     19     Third Street.
3972 7-8-19 Granting a special use permit to Don Grabbe for property located at 831 Lake
            Street.
3981 10-28- Granting a special use permit to Ellie Sabella for property located at 315
     19     Roosevelt Avenue.
3995 2-10-  Granting a special use permit to Wethersfield School District for property
     20     located at 218 East Garfield Street.
4005 4-13-  Granting a special use permit to Nancy Sutton for property located at 133 East
     20     Division Street.
4010 6-29-  Granting a special use permit to Amanda Bond for property located at 118 Poplar
     20     Street.
4015 7-27-  Granting a special use permit to Moises Castaneda for property located at 210
     20     North Elm Street.
4016 7-27-  Granting a special use permit to Melissa Blanks for property located at 1017 &
     20     1019 Dewey Avenue.
4021 9-24-  Granting a special use permit to Balwant Patel, dba Big River Gaming for
     20     property located at 112 W. 2nd Street.
4022 9-24-  Granting a special use permit to Janjay Patel, dba Motel 6 for property located
     20     at 901 Tenney Street.
4024 10-26- Granting a special use permit to Sunpin Energy Services, LLC for property
     20     located at N. 570th and Red Adams Road.
4043 2-8-21 Granting a special use permit to Ray Hayes for property located at 918 Kent
            Street.
4046 3-8-21 Granting a special use permit to Robert Barnes, dba Barnes Trucking for
            property located at 1047 N. Main Street.
4047 3-8-21 Granting a special use permit to Steve Lemanski, dba Top Gem Entertainment for
            property located at 109 W. 2nd Street.
4049 4-12-  Granting a special use permit to Big Slots LLC for property located at 206 N.
     21     Chestnut Street.
4073 9-27-  Granting a special use permit to Dalton and Chandra Kuffel for property located
     21     at 215 East Garfield Street.
4078 11-8-  Granting a special use permit to Karen German for property located at 315
     21     Windmont Road.
4092 3-28-  Granting a special use permit to Chris Woods for property located at 151 Tenney
     22     Street.
4101 6-27-  Granting a special use permit to Nancy Sutton for property located at 1412 W.
     22     Prospect Street.
4126 2-27-  Granting a special use permit to Amy Segura for property located at 124 East
     23     Prospect Street.
4127 2-27-  Granting a special use permit to Dzelil Osmani for Parcel Number 20- 27-352-015
     23     located at the northeast corner of North East Street and East Seventh Street.
4130 4-10-  Granting a special use permit to John & Richard Murray for property located at
     23     139 Tenney Street.
4131 3-27-  Rescinding Ordinance 4046.
     23
4135 5-8-23 Granting a special use permit to John & Richard Murray for property located at
            113 South Grove.
4136 6-12-  Granting a special use permit to Robinson Outdoor, LLC for property located at
     23     630 Tenney Street.
4137 6-12-  Granting a special use permit to Kenneth Westefer for property located at 325
     23     West Fourth Street.
4139 7-10-  Granting a special use permit to EnPower Solutions for property located at 101
     23     Franklin Street.
4146 9-11-  Granting a special use permit to Ellie Sabella for property located at 229 S.
     23     Park Street.
4158 11-13- Granting a special use permit to Tina Chamberlain for property located at 814
     23     E. Second Street.
4172 3-11-  Granting a special use permit to Nichelle and Blair Morey for property located
     24     at 213 E. Kellog Avenue.
4180 5-13-  Granting a special use permit to HVN Capital, LLC for property located at 618
     24     Tenney Street.
4185 5-28-  Granting a special use permit to James Hunt dba Phat Boys BBQ for property
     24     located at 300 W. Third Street.
4186 5-28-  Granting a special use permit to Juan Contreras Jr. for property located at
     24     1100 Lake Street.
4187 5-28-  Granting a special use permit to HVN Capital, LLC for property located at the
     24     southeast corner of Railroad Avenue and Cole Street, PIN 20-27-427-007.
4189 6-10-  Granting a special use permit to Taurean Bond dba Timeout Pub & Grub for
     24     property located at 200 E. Seventh Street.
4204 10-15- Granting a special use permit to Victoria Montes for property located at 925 N.
     24     Tremont Street.
4224 1-27-  Granting a special use permit to Freedom House Inc. for property located at 716
     25     Elliot St.
4231 3-10-  Granting a special use permit to Robert and Ruth Banes for property located at
     25     107 North Main Street.
4245 7-28-  Granting a special use permit to Tracy Glasgo for property located at 605 North
     25     East Street.
4255 10-27- Granting a special use permit to James Steinke, DBA Chrome Gypsy Tattoo for
     25     property located at 600 North Lexington Ave.
4258 11-24- Granting a special use permit to EA Real Estate for property located at 718-720
     25     East Fourth Street.
           
 
TABLE VII: VARIANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
2887   5-9-94 Granting a request for variance to Robert and Deborah Cadena for 1335
              Rockwell Street.
2888   5-9-94 Granting a request for variance to Ron Beauprez for 918 N. Walnut Street.
2900   6-27-  Granting a request for variance to Keith Ross for 517 Dwight Street.
       94
2901   6-27-  Granting a request for variance to Verlin Stauffer for 319 Valley Road.
       94
2902   6-27-  Granting a request for variance to Signart of Wisconsin on behalf of Dominion
       94     Investments for 337 Tenney Street.
2911   8-8-94 Granting a request for variance to Assembly of God Church for 136 E. McClure
              Street.
2920   9-12-  Granting a request for variance to John R. and Shirley H. Pletkovich for 250
       94     S. Acorn Street.
2921   9-12-  Granting a request for variance to Lynn and Nancy Sutton for 112 Willard
       94     Street.
2922   9-12-  Granting a request for variance to Gregg and Kim Pickering for 414 Otley
       94     Avenue.
2923   9-12-  Granting a request for variance to Good's Furniture and Prairie Partners for
       94     300 W. Fourth Street.
2928   10-19- Granting a request for variance to Linda S. Duytschaver for 438 Rockwell
       94     Street.
2929   10-19- Granting a request for variance to John R. Good for 241 E. Garfield Street.
       94
2930   10-19- Granting a request for variance to Richard Rouse and Mary Jo Rouse for 248
       94     Dwight Street.
2931   10-19- Granting a request for variance to Gary Klein for 319 Willard Street.
       94
2932   10-19- Granting a request for variance to Kenneth B. Huber and Dena L. Huber for 125
       94     Houle Avenue.
       11-28- Amending Ordinance 2923, which granted a request for variance to Good's
2940   94     Furniture and Prairie Partners for 300 W. Fourth Street, by adding language
              to Section Five thereof.
2947   12-12- Granting a request for variance to First Federal Savings and Loan, 301 Payson
       94     Street.
2948   12-12- Granting a request for variance to Clarence W. and Shirley E. Witte, 134 E.
       94     Mill Street.
2954   1-23-  Granting a request for variance to Louis Betten, Jesen Design Corp., at 202,
       95     218, and 228 Beach Street South.
2955   1-23-  Granting a request for variance to Terry and Noreen Conley at 422 W. Second
       95     Street.
2956   1-23-  Granting a request for variance to Forrest Boswell, Boswell Distributing Co.,
       95     at 700 Commercial Street South.
2987   8-15-  Granting a request for variance to Charles and Diane Eastman at 503 W. Mill
       95     Street.
2993   9-11-  Granting a request for variance to Lino Gandarilla at 1002 E. Ninth Street.
       95
2994   9-11-  Granting a request for variance to Hugh and Charlotte King at 607 and 609
       95     East Street South.
3003   10-10- Granting a request for variance to Joseph M. Labedis at 313 Payson Street.
       95
3004   10-10- Granting a request for variance to Patti Lingenfelter at 935 N. Grace Avenue.
       95
3005   10-10- Granting a request for variance to First Christian Church at 105 Dwight
       95     Street.
3009   11-3-  Granting a request for variance to Wayne and Bonnie Bryan at 409 Dwight
       95     Street.
3010   11-3-  Granting a request for variance to Robert and June Hubbard at 401 E. Division
       95     Street.
3011   11-3-  Granting a request for variance to Klemensas Sukys at 901 N. Burr Boulevard.
       95
3036   2-27-  Granting a request for variance to Corey and Melissa Esser at 200 East
       96     Seventh Street.
3043   4-9-96 Granting a request for variance to Robert Coven at 549 Tenney Street.
3044   4-9-96 Granting a request for variance to Marvin and Janet Stevenson at 1216 Lake
              Street.
3067   7-8-96 Granting a request for variance to David and Donna Schaefer at 606 Dwight
              Street.
3073   8-13-  Granting a request for variance to Knobloch Grain Company, Inc. for 410 - 414
       96     N. Chestnut Street.
3081   10-15- Granting a request for variance to Terry Conley and Noreen Conley for 422 W.
       96     Second Street.
3087   11-25- Granting a request for variance to Jensen Construction Company for 228 Beach
       96     Street.
3088   11-25- Granting a request for variance to Clarence Jones for 809 Nelson Avenue.
       96
3098   2-24-  Granting a request for variance to Margo Berry for 338 E. Division Street.
       97
3102   3-24-  Granting a request for variance to T. Clifford Furnald for the house at 102
       97     N. Vine Street.
3107   6-23-  Granting a request for variance to Bernie Polowy at 204 N. Boss Street.
       97
3131   11-24- Granting a request for variance to Frank, Anel and James Dura at 320 W. First
       97     Street.
3132   11-24- Granting a request for variance to William Harshbarger at 512 W. Mill Street.
       97
3147   3-12-  Granting a request for variance to Steve Martin for 101 South Burr Boulevard.
       98
3155   4-27-  Granting a request for variance to Michael Shimmin and Melinda Shimmin for
       98     435 East McClure Street.
3156   4-27-  Granting a request for variance to Shirley Drawyer for 543 Edwards Street.
       98
3166   7-13-  Granting a request for variance to Michael Murray and Linda Murray for 133
       98     Houle Avenue.
3183   9-28-  Granting a request for variance to Mary Lester for 202 Rice Street.
       98
3205   4-26-  Granting a request for variance to Todd Davis and Dianna Davis at 214 W.
       99     Garfield Street.
3206   4-26-  Granting a request for variance to Reiman's Harley-Davidson at 623 N. Main
       99     Street.
3209   5-24-  Granting a request for variance to Gary and Carol Kilstrom at 426 E. Church
       99     Street.
3210   5-24-  Granting a request for variance to John and Beverly Wohlrab at 242 Beach
       99     Street.
3211   5-24-  Granting a request for variance to John Good at 241 E. Garfield Street.
       99
3212   5-24-  Granting a request for variance to Reiman's Harley-Davidson at 623 N. Main
       99     Street.
3215   6-28-  Granting a request for variance to Martin Medley and Annette Medley at 219
       99     Edwards Street.
3216   6-28-  Granting a request for variance to Don Karau and Mary Jane Karau at 601
       99     Elliott Street.
3221   7-26-  Granting a request for variance to Andrew Peed for property at 829 E. Seventh
       99     Street.
3263   7-24-  Granting a request for variance to Ron Tank, Sr. for property at 113 W. Sixth
       00     Street.
3272   9-25-  Granting a request for variance to James and Margaret Debord for property at
       00     237 East Street, South.
3276   10-23- Granting a request for variance to Steve Martin for 101 S. Burr Street.
       00
3288   12-11- Granting a request for variances to Arnie Cordrey for 718 May Street.
       00
3301   3-26-  Granting a request for variances to the First Christian Church of Kewanee for
       01     105 Dwight Street.
3306   4-23-  Granting a request for variances to Albert Davis for 700 Pleasant Street.
       01
3316   7-23-  Granting a request for variance to Sullivan Door Company for 1319 West Sixth
       01     Street.
3319   8-27-  Granting a request for variance to Beverly and Maurice Beauprez for property
       01     at 407 Green Street.
Res.   9-10-  Granting a variance in minimum height clearance for a skywalk spanning an
4209   01     alley located in the 200 Block of N. Main Street.
3335   1-14-  Granting a request for variance for off- street parking to First Christian
       02     Church for 105 Dwight Street.
3361   8-26-  Granting a request for variance to Curt and Christine Reeves for property at
       02     242 Grier Street.
3365   10-28- Granting a request for variance to Lee and Mary Jane Stabler for property at
       02     705 William Street.
3403   6-23-  Granting a request for variances to Larry and Mary Mowbray for property at
       03     601 William Street.
3439   6-28-  Granting a request for variances to Good's Furniture House, Inc. for property
       04     at 300 W. Fourth Street.
3443   7-26-  Granting a request for a variance to Jim Hodge and Hodge’s Phillips 66 Auto
       04     Service Station for property located at 801 N. Main Street.
3483   10-24- Granting a request for variances to D. Packee for property at 526 North Burr
       05     Street.
3516   8-28-  Granting a request for variances to Reiman’s Harley-Davidson at 623 North
       06     Main Street.
3529   2-26-  Granting a request for variance to Ron and Linda Prusator at 503 West Central
       07     Boulevard.
3557   10-22- Granting a request for a variance to Patricia Van Hyfte at 543 East Division
       07     Street.
3585   8-11-  Granting a request for variance to Andrew Fisher at 525 Hollis Street.
       08
3601   4-13-  Granting a request for variance to James and Rebecca Lindbom at 204 West
       09     South Street.
3655   9-27-  Granting a request for variance to Larry Schmidt at 311 Birch Place.
       10
3804   7-27-  Granting a request for variance to Troy Currie and Andrea Currie at 830 Coal
       15     Street.
3828   5-23-  Granting a request for variance to Kaira Ibarra Delgado at 826 Rollins
       16     Street.
3877   3-27-  Granting a request for variance to Patricia and Harvey Baysingar at 816
       17     Florence Street.
3882   5-22-  Granting a request for variance to Brian and Amanda Forrest at 613 East
       17     Street.
3888   6-26-  Granting a request for variance to Anthony Holdgrafer at 703 South Washington
       17     Street.
3899   10-10- Granting a request for variance to Arnie Cordrey at 211 Tenney Street.
       17
3905   11-13- Granting a request for variance to St. Peter’s Church at 119 S. Grove Street.
       17
3914   12-26- Granting a request for variance to Kalvin and Diane Peart at 1009 N. Burr
       17     Street.
3922   3-12-  Granting a request for variance to George and Lois Gibson at 518 W. Mill
       18     Street.
3938   8-13-  Granting a request for variance to James Wiggin at 311 Fifth Avenue.
       18
3954   2-25-  Granting a request for variance to Lisa Rashid at 214 Regina Court.
       19
3964   5-28-  Granting a request for variance to Dean Olson at 629 West Prospect Street.
       19
3969   6-24-  Granting a request for variance to Michael Nichols at 803 Page Street.
       19
3970   6-24-  Granting a request for variance to Jose Chavez at 1200 W. Division Street.
       19
3971   6-24-  Granting a request for variance to Jose Chavez at 1200 W. Division Street.
       19
3973   7-22-  Granting a request for variance to Kim Cernovich at 1002 Western Avenue.
       19
3976   9-23-  Granting a request for variance to Frank & Toni Whitcher, 426 Rockwell
       19     Street.
3977   9-23-  Granting a request for variance to Ken Fleming, 1010 E. 10th Street.
       19
3978   9-23-  Granting a request for variance to Arthur & Dorothy Johnson, 1005 Terry
       19     Avenue.
3979   10-28- Granting a request for variance to Patrick & Brenda Weston, 700 S. Main
       19     Street.
3984   11-12- Granting a request for variance to Kelly Stillwell, 1008 Rockwell Street.
       19
4001   4-13-  Granting a request for variance to Daniel & Brenda Kuffel, 224 E. Garfield
       20     Street.
4008   6-29-  Granting a request for variance to Tito Martinez, 412 West 5th Street.
       20
4016.1 8-10-  Granting a request for variance to Kellie Wilke, 426 South Elm Street.
       20
4025   10-26- Granting a request for variance to Kewanee CUSD #229, 215 E. Central
       20     Boulevard.
4026   10-26- Granting a request for variance to Kewanee CUSD #229, 609 W. Central
       20     Boulevard.
4027   10-26- Granting a request for variance to Kewanee CUSD #229, 920 N. Burr Street.
       20
4028   10-26- Granting a request for variance to Kewanee CUSD #229, 1211 E. Third Street.
       20
4029   10-26- Granting a request for variance to Kewanee CUSD #229, 1401 Lake Street.
       20
4044   2-22-  Granting a request for variance to Great Dane, 2006 Kentville Road.
       21
4048   4-12-  Granting a request for variance to Rogelio Lopez, 340 S. Park Street.
       21
4063   7-12-  Granting a request for variance to Zion Lutheran Church, 250 East Street
       21     South.
4065   7-26-  Granting a request for variance to Jennifer Lang, 311 McKinley Avenue.
       21
4091   2-28-  Granting a request for variance to Jake and Kelly Verscha, 236 East McClure
       22     Street.
4093   3-28-  Granting a request for variance to Donald Lindstrom, 134 West Kellogg Street.
       22
4102   7-25-  Granting a request for variance to Jorge Morales, 505 Beach Avenue.
       22
4109   10-24- Granting a request for variance to Chad and Penny Williams, 550 Whitney
       22     Avenue.
4110   10-24- Granting a request for variance to Chad and Penny Williams, 550 Whitney
       22     Avenue.
4112   11-14- Granting a request for variance to Moises and Jessi Martinez, 234 South
       22     Chestnut Street.
4123   2-27-  Granting a request for variance to DGOG Kewanee, 600, 608, and 614 N. Main
       23     Street.
4124   2-27-  Granting a request for variance to DGOG Kewanee, 600, 608, and 614 N. Main
       23     Street.
4148   9-25-  Granting a request for variance to James Wiggin, 311 Fifth Avenue.
       23
4149   9-25-  Granting a request for variance to James Wiggin, 311 Fifth Avene.
       23
4151   10-23- Granting a request for variance to Shirley Pitman, 480 Midland Drive.
       23
4152   10-23- Granting a request for variance to Jason Phelps, 725 Dewey Avenue.
       23
4167   1-22-  Granting a request for variance to DGOG Kewanee, 600, 608, & 614 N. Main
       24     Street.
4169   2-26-  Granting a request for variance to Marvin & Janet Stevenson, 242 Grier
       24     Street.
4170   2-26-  Granting a request for variance to Colby & Caitlin Hathaway.
       24
4171   2-26-  Granting a request for variance to Colby & Caitlin Hathaway.
       24
4175   4-22-  Granting a request for variance to Frank Mannon, 610 W. Fourth Street.
       24
4176   4-22-  Granting a request for variance to Eduardo Benitez, 114 E. Ninth Street.
       24
4196   8-26-  Granting a request for variance to Matt Jenkins, 625 Dewey Avenue.
       24
4197   8-26-  Granting a request for variance to Richard Werderman, 420 N. Grace Avenue.
       24
4203   9-23-  Granting a request for variance to Dan & Brenda Kuffel, 224 E. Garfield
       24     Street.
4223   1-27-  Granting a request for variance to Troy Currie.
       25
4244   7-28-  Granting a request for variance to Brian Rowlison, 911 Simpson Ave.
       25
4253   10-27- Granting a request for variance to Michael & Kathy Bausman, 624 South
       25     Chestnut Street.
4254   10-27- Granting a request for variance to Brian Rowlison, 911 Simpson Ave.
       25
4257   11-24- Granting a request for variance to Jacob & Kelly Versha, 437 East Street
       25     South.
             
 
TABLE VIII: EASEMENTS
Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. Date   Description
No.  Passed
3811 10-23- Granting an easement to Thomas R. May, James S. May and John M. Blachinsky
     95     to make repairs at 224 W. 2nd. Street.
3812 10-23- Granting an easement to Peoples National Bank to install a pneumatic tube
     95     from their teller windows at 224 W. 2nd. Street.
3828 1-8-96 Entering into an agreement for an easement and repairs associated with the
            Delta Property on Lake Street.
     10-15- Granting an easement to Kewanee Historical Society to install a concrete
3887 96     ramp and landing for the entrance to their building at 211 N. Chestnut
            Street.
3915 4-28-  Granting an easement to Knobloch Grain to install a larger scale, to replace
     97     the existing scale in the right-of-way in front of 411 N. Chestnut Street.
     7-14-  Authorizing the City Manager to purchase an easement for a storm sewer
3933 97     repair and make restitution to a property owner at 721 N. Vine Street for
            the removal of a garage.
3936 8-25-  Granting an easement to Abilities Plus to install a granite marker in the
     97     city right of way at 319 N. Main Street.
     11-9-  Granting an easement to property owners living at 211, 215, and 233 East
4007 98     Garfield to allow the placement of private force sewer laterals within the
            public street right of way.
Res. 5-8-00 Executing an easement with Dorothy Dooley for public parking and utilities.
4122
Res. 6-9-03 Authorizing a permanent easement for utilities.
4316
3901 10-23- Authorizing execution of documents for temporary easement to Mark and
     17     Kathleen Slavens for 211 Regina Court.
     11-25- Authorizing the City Manager to execute an easement with People’s National
5193 19     Bank that would enable the bank to place a generator in the city-owned alley
            to the west of the bank’s main office.
           
 
TABLE IX: ACCEPTANCES OF PLATS
Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. No.  Date Passed Description
3844      4-23-96     Approving the subdivision plat known as Wal Mart
                      Subdivision.
3944      10-14-97    Approving the final plat of Sunset Village Subdivision.
3966      4-13-98     Approving the final plat of Humphrey's Turn of the
                      Century Subdivision, Section 1.
3967      4-13-98     Approving the amended final plat of Sunset Village
                      Subdivision.
4002      12-28-98    Approving the final plat of Sunset Village Extension No.
                      1.
4036      3-8-99      Approving the final plat of Mill Creek Station
                      Subdivision.
4043      4-12-99     Approving the final plat of Walgreen's Resubdivision.
4072      9-13-99     Approving the final plat of Walworth Resubdivision.
Res. 4084 11-22-99    Approving the plat of Maxwell's Subdivision No. 2
Res. 4099 1-24-00     Approving the plat of Candlelight Park Extension No. 1.
Res. 4115 3-27-00     Approving the plat of Kewanee Realty L.L.C. Subdivision.
Res. 4162 11-27-00    Approving the plat of Erik Cali Estates.
Res. 4163 11-27-00    Approving the plat of Lake Village Addition.
Res. 4164 11-27-00    Approving the plat of Eagle Subdivision.
Res. 4308 5-27-03     Approving a final plat of Kentville Road Industrial Par
                      Subdivision, Phase I.
 
TABLE X: DEDICATIONS
 
Res. Date   Description
No.  Passed
3890 11-4-  Dedication of land to the city in the 400 Block of East Mill Street.
     96
3808 8-24-  Dedication of public land at 200 W. Third Street as “Berrien Park”.
     15
5236 7-13-  Accepting a right-of-way dedication plat for Outlot “A” of Candlelight
     20     Extension #1.
           
 
TABLE XI: BONDS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
3134   12-8-  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds for the purpose of paying
       97     the costs of a new municipal building and certain related costs.
3135   12-8-  Abating the tax levied for 1997 to pay the principal of and interest on
       97     $775,000 general obligation bonds, series 1992.
3136   12-8-  Abating the tax levied for 1997 to pay the principal of and interest on
       97     $750,000 general obligation bonds, series 1993.
Res.   6-23-  Authorizing the issuance of Hospital Facility Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series
3925   97     1997 (Kewanee Hospital).
3144   2-25-  Authorizing the issuance of $3,000,000 general obligation bonds (sales tax
       98     revenues alternate revenue source), Series 1998.
3187   12-14- Abating the tax levied for 1998 to pay the principle of , and the interest on,
       98     $775,000 general obligation bonds, series 1992.
3188   12-14- Abating the tax levied for 1998 to pay the principle of, and the interest on,
       98     $750,000 general obligation bonds, series 1993.
3189   12-14- Abating the tax levied for 1998 to pay the principle of, and the interest on,
       98     $3,000,000 general obligation bonds, series 1998.
3233   12-13- Abating the tax levied for 1999 to pay the principal of, and the interest on,
       99     $775,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source), series 1992.
3234   12-13- Abating the tax levied for 1999 to pay the principal of, and the interest on,
       99     $750,000 general obligation bonds, series 1993.
3235   12-13- Abating the tax levied for 1999 to pay the principal of, and the interest on,
       99     $3,000,000 general obligation bonds, Series 1998.
Res.   4-10-  Authorizing a rebate of 50% for taxes due in 1999 and payable in 2000 and a
4116   00     25% rebate for taxes due in 2000 and payable in 2001 to owners of property
              located in Edgewood Drive.
       11-29- Authorizing the issuance of up to $3,200,000 aggregate principal amount of
3283   00     general obligation bond for the purpose of paying costs of improving the water
              and sewer systems.
              Authorizing the issuance of $3,200,000 general obligation bonds, Series 2001,
3289   2-2-01 and the levy of sewer and water fees sufficient to pay the principal of and
              interest on such bonds.
       1-22-  Authorizing the issuance of $297,660,000 non-referendum general obligation
3290   01     bonds, Series 2001, and for the levy of property taxes sufficient to pay the
              principal of such bonds.
3329   12-10- Abating the tax levied for 2001 to pay principal and interest on $750,000
       01     general obligation bonds, Series 1993.
3330   12-10- Abating the tax levied for 2001 to pay principal and interest on $3,000,000
       01     general obligation bonds, Series 1998.
       12-10- Authorizing the issuance of $299,285 non- referendum general obligation bonds,
3331   01     Series 2002, and for the levy of property taxes sufficient to pay the
              principal of such bonds.
3332   12-10- Abating the tax levied for 2001 to pay principal and interest on $3,200,000
       01     general obligation bonds, Series 2001.
3353   8-12-  Authorizing the issuance of up to $8,500,000 waterworks and sewerage revenue
       02     bonds for the purpose of defraying costs and improving waterworks facilities.
3411   8-11-  Authorizing the issuance of $975,000 tax increment revenue bonds, Series 2003.
       03
Res.   9-9-03 Authorizing the issuance of up to $1,750,000 capital improvement bonds, Series
4327          2003.
       11-24- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the fiscal year 2003 to pay the
3415   03     principal of, and the interest on, $750,000 general obligation bonds, Series
              1993.
3416   11-24- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2003 to pay the principal of,
       03     and the interest on, $3,000,000 general obligation bonds, Series 1998.
3417   11-24- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2003 to pay the principal of,
       03     and the interest on, $3,200,000 general obligation bonds, Series 2001.
3418   11-24- Authorizing the issuance of $296,777.50 non-referendum general obligation
       03     bonds, Series 2004.
3453   11-22- Authorizing the issuance of tax increment revenue bonds (East & 11th 2004
       04     TIF), Series 2004.
       12-13- Abating the tax heretofore levied by Ordinance 3144 for the year 2004 to pay
3456   04     the principal of, and the interest on, $3,000,000 general obligation bonds
              (alternate revenue source), Series 1998.
       12-13- Abating the tax heretofore levied by Ordinance 3289 for the year 2004 to pay
3457   04     the principal of, and the interest on, $3,200,000 general obligation bonds
              (water and sewer revenues alternate revenue source), Series 2001.
       12-13- Authorizing the issuance of $300,027.50 non-referendum general obligation
3458   04     bonds, Series 2005, and providing the details of such bonds and for the levy
              of property taxes sufficient to pay the principal of such bonds.
              Authorizing the issuance of general obligation refunding bonds (sales taxes
3468   5-9-05 alternate revenue source), Series 2005, and for an alternate revenue source
              and the levy of direct annual taxes.
       7-25-  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation refunding bonds (sales taxes
3473   05     alternate revenue source), Series 2005, to secure the payment of certain local
              governmental securities.
       12-12- Authorizing the issuance of general obligation refunding bonds, Series 2006,
3492   05     to replace and repair the city sanitary sewer and water main distribution
              system.
3496   1-23-  Authorizing the issuance of tax increment refunding revenue bonds (Mill Creek
       06     Station 2003 TIF), Series 2006.
       12-11- Abating the tax heretofore levied by Ordinance 3468 for the year 2006 to pay
3524   06     the principal of, and the interest on, $2,550,000 general obligation refunding
              bonds (sales taxes alternate revenue source), Series 2005.
       12-11- Abating the tax heretofore levied by Ordinance 3289 for the year 2006 to pay
3525   06     the principal of, and the interest on, $3,200,000 general obligation bonds
              (water and sewer revenues alternate revenue source), Series 2001.
              Authorizing the issuance of non-referendum general obligation bonds, Series
3526   12-11- 2007, to replace and repair the existing sanitary sewer system and water main
       06     distribution system, to increase the city’s existing water storage capacity,
              and to undertake certain related activities.
       12-10- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2007 to pay the principal, of
3559   07     and the interest on, $2,550,000 general obligation refunding bonds (sales tax
              alternate revenue source), Series 2005.
       12-10- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2007 to pay the principal of,
3560   07     and the interest on $3,200,000 general obligation bonds (water and sewer
              revenues alternate revenue source), Series 2001.
3561   12-11- Authorizing the issuance of $297,002.50 non-referendum general obligation
       07     bonds, Series 2008.
       12-8-  Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2008 to pay the principal of,
3594   08     and the interest on, $2,550,000 general obligation refunding bonds (sales tax
              alternate revenue source), Series 2005.
       12-10- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2008 to pay the principal of,
3595   08     and the interest on, $3,200,000 general obligation bonds (water and sewer
              revenue source), Series 2001.
              Authorizing the issuance of $298,392.50 non-referendum general obligation
3596   12-10- bonds, Series 2009, providing the details of such bonds and for the levy of
       08     property taxes sufficient to pay the principal of such bonds, and authorizing
              and approving related matters.
3618   9-14-  Authorizing the issuance of tax increment refunding revenue bonds (East and
       09     11th 2004 TIF) Series 2009, and related matters.
3623   12-15- Authorizing the issuance of $299,262.50 non-referendum general obligation
       09     bonds, Series 2010.
       12-14- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal of,
3624   09     and the interest on, $3,200,000 general obligation bonds (water and sewer
              revenues alternative source), Series 2001.
       12-14- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal of,
3625   09     and the interest on, $2,550,000 general obligation refunding bonds (sales tax
              alternate revenue source), Series 2005.
3631   3-22-  Authorizing the issuance of up to $700,000 waterworks and sewerage revenue
       10     bonds.
3661   12-13- Authorizing the issuance of $299,487.50 non-referendum general obligation
       10     bonds, Series 2011.
       12-13- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal of,
3662   10     and the interest on, $3,200,000 general obligation bonds (water and sewer
              revenues alternate revenue source), Series 2011.
       12-13- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal of,
3663   10     and the interest on, $2,550,000 general obligation refunding bonds (sales tax
              alternate revenue source), Series 2005.
       6-13-  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation waterworks and sewerage
3675   11     refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2011A, and general
              obligation refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2011B.
3686   11-14- Authorizing the issuance of up to $4,000,000 alternate revenue source bonds to
       11     finance various municipal facilities, improvements and costs.
3689   12-12- Authorizing the issuance of $284,225 non- referendum general obligation bonds,
       11     Series 2012.
       12-12- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal of,
3690   11     and the interest on, $1,315,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2011A.
       12-12- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal of,
3691   11     and the interest on, $1,430,000 general obligation refunding bonds (alternate
              revenue source), Series 2011B.
3695   1-9-12 Authorizing the issuance of up to $4,000,000 in general obligation bonds
              (alternate revenue source), Series 2012.
3699   3-26-  Authorizing the issuance of tax increment refunding revenue bonds (Mill Creek
       12     Station 2003 TIF), Series 2012.
              Authorizing the issuance of up to $900,000 waterworks and sewerage revenue
3700   4-9-12 bonds, to defray the cost of acquiring, constructing and installing
              improvements to the waterworks facilities.
3717   12-10- Authorizing the issuance of $282,850 non-referendum general obligation bonds,
       12     Series 2013.
       12-10- Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2012 to pay principal of, and
3718   12     interest thereon, on $1,315,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds.
       12-10- Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2012 to pay principal of, and
3719   12     interest thereon, on $1,430,000 general obligation refunding bonds (alternate
              revenue source) Series 2011B.
       1-14-  Authorizing the issuance of waterworks and sewerage revenue bonds and
3723   13     alternate revenue source (in lieu of such revenue bonds) to refinance
              waterworks and sewerage facilities and improvements.
3725   3-11-  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation water works and sewerage
       13     refunding bond (alternate revenue source), Series 2013.
3751   12-9-  Authorizing the issuance of $281,350 non-referendum general obligation bonds,
       13     Series 2014.
       12-9-  Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2013 to pay principal of, and
3752   13     interest thereon, on $1,315,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds.
       12-9-  Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2013 to pay principal of, and
3753   13     interest thereon, on $1,430,000 general obligation refunding bonds (alternate
              revenue source), Series 2011B.
       12-9-  Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2013 to pay principal of, and
3754   13     interest thereon, on $3,755,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
              source), Series 2012.
       12-9-  Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2013 to pay principal of, and
3755   13     interest thereon, on $5,935,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2013.
3779   11-24- Authorizing the issuance of $288,400 non-referendum general obligation bonds,
       14     Series 2015.
       11-24- Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2014 to pay principal of, and
3780   14     interest on, $1,315,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage refunding
              bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2011A.
       11-24- Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2014 to pay principal of, and
3781   14     interest on, $1,430,000 general obligation refunding bonds (alternate revenue
              source), Series 2011B.
       11-24- Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2014 to pay principal of, and
3782   14     interest on, $3,755,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source),
              Series 2012.
       11-24- Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2013 to pay principal of, and
3783   14     interest on, $5,935,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage refunding
              bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2013.
3794   4-27-  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
       15     source), Series 2015.
              Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
3797   6-8-15 source), Series 2015, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
              $4,000,000.
3814   11-23- Authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $295,000 General Obligation Bonds,
       15     Series 2015A.
       12-14- Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2015 to pay principal of, and
3816   15     interest on, $3,640,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage refunding
              bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2015.
       12-14- Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2015 to pay principal of, and
3817   15     interest on, $1,430,000 general obligation refunding bonds (alternate revenue
              source), Series 2011B.
       12-14- Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2015 to pay principal of, and
3818   15     interest on, $3,755,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source),
              Series 2012.
       12-14- Abating the tax heretofore levied for year 2015 to pay principal of, and
3819   15     interest on, $5,935,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage refunding
              bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2013.
3903   11-13- Authorizing the issuance of $291,920 general obligation refunding bonds,
       17     Series 2017.
       12-11- Abating the tax heretofore levied for 2016 to pay principal of, and interest
3910   17     on, $3,640,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage refunding bonds
              (alternate revenue source), Series 2015.
       12-11- Abating the tax heretofore levied for 2016 to pay principal of, and interest
3911   17     on, $3,755,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source), Series
              2012.
       12-11- Abating the tax heretofore levied for 2017 to pay principal of, and interest
3912   17     on, $5,935,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage refunding bonds
              (alternate revenue source), Series 2013.
       11-13- Authorizing the issuance of $298,570 general obligation refunding bonds,
3945   18     Series 2018, and for the levy of a direct annual tax sufficient to pay the
              principal and interest on said bonds.
       12-10- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2018 to pay the principal of,
3949   18     and interest on, $3,755,000 general obligation bonds (alternative revenue
              source), Series 2012.
       12-10- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2018 to pay the principal of,
3950   18     and the interest on, $5,935,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternative revenue source), Series 2013.
       12-10- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2018 to pay the principal of,
3951   18     and the interest on, $3,640,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternative revenue source), Series 2015.
3982   11-12- Providing for the issuance of $299,245 general obligation refunding bonds,
       19     Series 2019.
       12-9-  Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2019 to pay the principal of,
3985.1 19     and the interest on $5,935,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2013.
       12-9-  Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2019 to pay the principal of,
3986   19     and the interest on $3,640,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2015.
       12-9-  Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2019 to pay the principal of,
3987   19     and the interest on $3,755,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
              source), Series 2012.
       12-14- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2020 to pay the principal of,
4037   20     and the interest on $3,755,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
              source), Series 2012.
       12-14- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2020 to pay the principal of,
4038   20     and the interest on $5,935,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2013.
       12-14- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2020 to pay the principal of,
4039   20     and the interest on $3,640,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2015.
4079   11-8-  Providing for the issuance of $298,820 taxable general obligation bonds,
       21     Series 2021.
       12-13- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2021 to pay the principal of,
4082   21     and the interest on $3,755,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
              source), Series 2012.
       12-13- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2021 to pay the principal of,
4083   21     and the interest on $5,935,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2013.
       12-13- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2021 to pay the principal of,
4084   21     and the interest on $3,640,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2015.
4086   12-13- Authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $1,620,000 general obligation
       21     refunding bonds (alternative revenue source), Series 2022A.
       11-24- Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2025 to pay the principal of,
4259   25     and the interest on, $3,340,000 general obligation waterworks and sewerage
              refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2015.
       11-24- Abating the tax heretofore levied fo the year 2025 to pay the principal of,
4260   25     and the interest on, $1,555,000 general obligation refunding bonds (alternate
              revenue source), Series 2022A.
             
 
TABLE XII: NAMING AND RENAMING OF STREETS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Description
3977     5-26-98     Changing the name of the 200 Block of Junior Avenue, and
                     South to an extension of David Street.
 
TABLE XIII. TRANSFER OF LANDS
Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. No.  Date Passed Description
                      Accepting the jurisdictional transfer of a portion of
3973      5-11-98     Kentville Road that lies within the city limits from
                      Henry County.
4039      3-22-99     Authorizing the City Manager to execute purchase
                      agreement for property located at 200 N. Chestnut.
                      Authorizing the City Manager to execute all documents
4174      2-13-01     required to purchase a portion of property located at 118
                      W. 8th Street to further the expansion of Fire Station
                      #2.
Ord. 3318 8-27-01     Authorizing the Mayor to execute the sale of Lot 2
                      WalWorth Resubdivision to Great Dane Ltd.
                      Authorizing the City Manager to execute option to sell
4320      7-14-03     Lot 3 and a portion of Lot 1 in Walworth Resubdivision to
                      Black Hawk College.
                      Authorizing City Manager to execute any and all contracts
4322      7-28-03     required for transfer of all lands, holdings and
                      improvements from Mill Creek, LLC.
                      Adopting an intergovernmental agreement between the city
Ord. 3507 5-8-06      and Black Hawk College to transfer 3.5 acres of city-
                      owned land generally located at 420 East Third Street to
                      Black Hawk College.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 1971 Code
References to Ordinances
References to Resolutions
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cite Code Section
ILCS Cite                           Code Section
Ch. 5, Act 120, § 2.06(g)          30.18
Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq.    31.011
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-15             31.011
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 10-10 - 10-40    31.011
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5             31.011
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5             31.011
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a)          31.011
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c)          31.011
Ch. 20, Act 655, § 5.4.1(c)        120.06
Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq.    135.02
                                    40.01,
Ch. 20, Act 3305                    40.03,
                                    40.09
Ch. 20, Act 3855, §§ 1-1 et seq.  41.01
Ch. 20, Act 4005, § 1              72.99
Ch. 30, Act 105, § 6z-20.2         36.80
Ch. 30, Act 235, § 2               37.06
Ch. 35, Act 120, § 2-22            36.80
Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3               36.80
Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.   36.70
Ch. 35, Act 636, § 5-25            36.70
Ch. 35, Act 636, § 5-30            36.70
Ch. 50, Act 220, § 2               152.01
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-25001           31.105
Ch. 65, Act 5                       154.091
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1             155.185
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 5-3-7             31.094
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 5-3-7(2)          31.094
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 5-3-9             31.092
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-1-2.5           37.30
                                    36.15,
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1            36.51,
                                    36.80
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.3          36.80,
                                    36.82
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.4          36.80
                                    36.50,
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2            36.55,
                                    36.99
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6            36.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-23           36.20
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24           36.90,
                                    36.91
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-1          33.001,
                                    33.004
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-4          31.094
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-5            132.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-4            134.04
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-4           33.090
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12          155.185
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-19-1 et seq. 50.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-7           95.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2           155.185
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8           155.185
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2           155.185
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1           71.001,
                                    75.10
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-42-10.1        111.16
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-49-1           33.075
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-52.2-1         33.075
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-60-2           95.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-125-4          156.01
Ch. 205, Act 5, § 5g               135.01,
                                    135.02
Ch. 205, Act 205, § 7008           135.01,
                                    135.02
Ch. 205, Act 305, § 42.7           135.01,
                                    135.02
Ch. 210, Act 115                    152.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-104           36.50
Ch. 225, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.    91.01
Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3(1)           52.80
Ch. 225, Act 335                    122.01
Ch. 225, Act 335, § 11(7)          122.01
Ch. 225, Act 465                    116.07
Ch. 225, Act 465, § 4(d)           116.12
Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.     135.02
Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq      135.02
Ch. 230, Act 15, § 2               117.01
Ch. 230, Act 20, §§ 1 et seq.     135.02
Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.     135.02
Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.     135.02
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.     135.02
Ch. 230, Act 40, § 65              111.18
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-20             95.15
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-9              111.69
Ch. 415, Act 5                      155.190
Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.      156.02
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 4                52.80
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 14.2             156.01
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 14.3             156.01
Ch. 415, Act 55, §§ 1 et seq.     156.02
Ch. 425, Act 35                     94.26
Ch. 430, Act 65, §§ 1–16.3      Ch. 137
Ch. 505, Act 70, § 1               110.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-101.5          90.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-104 [repealed] 70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-105            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-123.9          71.141
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.7          71.141,
                                    71.143
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.11         70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-141            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001        70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.8          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-158.2          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168.8          71.141
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1518          73.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-175 [repealed] 70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.001        70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01         70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01         70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.8          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-219 [repealed] 70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-223 [repealed] 70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-101(d)         70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-401.5          70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-414            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609            72.12;
                                    Ch. 78, Sch. III(B)
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616            72.12;
                                    Ch. 78, Sch. III(B)
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-201 et seq.    90.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203            76.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-208–4-211    90.06
Ch, 625, Act 5, § 4-213            76.05,
                                    76.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-107         71.148
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-204            76.05
                                    71.080,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500            71.081,
                                    71.083
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203           70.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205           70.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206           70.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301           70.01,
                                    72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305           70.30
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306           70.31
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307           70.32
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308           70.33
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309           70.34
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310           70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311           70.36
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312           70.37
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401           76.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402           76.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403           76.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404           76.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-407           76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409           76.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-500 - 11-50271.150
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-502           70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1         76.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503           76.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-506           76.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601           71.001,
                                    73.23
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601.5         73.23
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-604           71.001
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605           71.002
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1         71.002
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a)        71.004
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701           71.040
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702           71.041
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703           71.042
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704           71.043
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705           71.044
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706           71.044
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707           70.01,
                                    71.047
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708           71.046
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709           71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710           71.096
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711           71.106
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801           71.020
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802           71.021
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803           71.022
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804           71.023
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805           71.024
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806           71.025
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901           71.060
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902           71.061
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903           71.062
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904           71.063
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905           71.064
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906           71.065
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907           71.040,
                                    71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907(a)(1), (b)71.066
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907.5         71.040,
                                    71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-908           71.040,
                                    71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1001          74.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002          74.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003          74.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1        74.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004          74.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1        74.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005          74.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006          74.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007          74.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008          74.09
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009          74.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1010          74.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011          74.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201          71.080
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1202          71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204          70.41
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205          71.082
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301          72.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.1        72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2        72.12;
                                    Ch. 78, Sch. III
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3        72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302          72.40
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303          72.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304          72.01,
                                    72.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305          72.41
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401          72.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402          71.095
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403          73.20
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1        73.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2        73.23
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404          73.21
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405          73.22
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406          71.097
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407          71.098
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410          71.099
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411          71.100
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412          71.100
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1        71.101
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413          71.103
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414          71.045
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416          71.104
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418          71.105
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420          71.067
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425          71.083
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1426.1        71.144,
                                    71.145
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1426.1(a)(2)  71.141
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1426.1(a)(4)  71.141
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502          73.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503          73.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504          73.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505          73.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1        73.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506          73.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507          73.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1        73.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1518          73.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-100 et seq. 75.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101           75.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208           71.023,
                                    71.024
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215           70.11,
                                    72.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-601           74.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-709           71.142
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-801           71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-803           71.045,
                                    71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805           71.045,
                                    71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 13-101 et seq. 118.26
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq. 75.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101(a), (b)   75.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105           75.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106           75.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109           75.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-114           75.14
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 16-104           70.99
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-2              130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-3              130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-4              130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-12             130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-4              130.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-5              130.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-6              130.04
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-7              130.05
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 5.10-1 et seq. 95.15
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4              130.06
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 9-1 et seq.    95.15
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-0.1           134.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-1.10 et seq.95.15
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-14 et seq.  95.15
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-20 et seq.  95.15
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20            134.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21            134.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-30            134.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 12-1 et seq.   95.15
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 21 et seq.     95.15
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3             131.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 24 et seq.  �95.15
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1             137.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.6           137.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2             137.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1           137.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1(a)(6)  �137.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-5             137.04
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-6             137.05
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 26-1 et seq. �95.15
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1             132.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1             135.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2             135.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-3             135.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-5             135.04
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-8             133.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9             133.03
Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq.    91.26,
                                    95.15
Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et seq.  91.26
Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 401 et seq.  95.15
Ch. 720, Act 570, § 505            99.04
Ch. 720, Act 646, §§ 1 et seq     95.15
Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.  91.41
Ch. 745, Act 10, §§ 1-101 et seq. 154.012
Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2              155.192
Ch. 820, Act 130, § 1 et seq.      32.057
 
REFERENCES TO 1971 CODE
1971 Code Section 1993 Code Section
1971 Code Section 1993 Code Section
1-1-2             10.02
1-1-4             10.07
1-2-1             10.17
1-2-2             10.20
1-2-3             10.21
1-4-1             10.99
1-4-2             10.99
1-4-3             10.99
1-4-4             10.99
1-4-5             31.008
1-4-6             10.99
1-5-1             30.30
1-5-2             10.22
1-6-1             30.01
1-6-2             30.02
1-6-3             31.001,
                  31.003
1-6-4             32.001
1-6-5             30.15
1-6-6             30.15
1-6-7             30.16
1-6-8             30.17
1-7-1             31.004
1-7-2             31.002
1-7-3             31.003
1-7-5             31.007
1-7-6             31.010
1-7-7             38.02
1-8-2             31.020
1-8-3             31.021
1-9-1             31.075
1-9-2             31.076
1-9-3             31.077
1-10-1            31.035
1-10-2            31.036
1-10-3            31.045
1-10-4            31.038
1-10-5            31.039
1-10-7            31.039
1-10-8            31.041
1-10-9            31.042
1-10-12           31.043
1-10-13           31.044
1-10-14           31.037
1-11-1            31.060
1-11-2            31.061
1-11-3            31.062
1-11-4            31.063
1-11-5            31.063
1-11-6            37.03
1-15-1            31.160
1-15-2            31.161
1-15-3            31.162
1-15-4            31.163
1-15-5            31.164
1-15-6            31.163
1-15-7            31.167
1-15-8            31.168
1-18-1            31.120
1-18-2            31.121
1-21-1            31.130
1-21-2            31.131
1-21-3            31.132
1-21-4            31.133
1-22-1            31.145
1-22-2            31.146
1-22-3            31.147
1-25-1            11.01
1-25-2            11.02
1-26-1            37.01
1-32-1            119.20
1-32-2            119.21
1-32-3            119.01
1-32-4            119.20
1-32-5            119.22
1-32-6            119.23
1-32-7            119.02
1-32-8            119.03
1-32-9            119.04
1-32-10           119.06
1-32-11           119.07
1-32-12           119.05
1-32-13           119.24
1-34-1            37.02
1-35-1            38.01
1-35-4            38.03
1-36-1            37.04
1-36-2            37.04
1-36-3            37.04
1-37-4            31.004
1-37-5            31.005
1-37-6            37.05
2-2-4             33.004
2-3-1             33.045
2-3-2             33.046
2-3-3             33.047
2-4-1             33.001
2-4-2             33.002
2-4-3             33.003
2-4-5             33.005
2-5-1             33.090
2-5-2             33.091
2-5-3             33.092
2-5-4             33.093
2-5-5             33.094
2-5-6             33.095
2-5-7             33.096
2-5-8             33.097
2-6-1             40.01
2-6-2             40.02
2-6-3             40.03
2-6-4             40.04
2-6-5             40.05
2-6-6             40.06
2-6-7             40.07
2-6-8             40.08
2-6-9             40.09
2-6-10            40.10
2-6-11            40.11
2-7-1             33.110
2-7-2             33.111
2-7-3             33.112
2-7-4             33.113
2-7-5             33.114
2-8-1             33.075
2-8-2             33.076
2-8-3             33.077
2-8-4             33.078
2-8-5             33.079
2-12-1            33.060
2-12-2            33.061
2-12-3            33.062
2-12-4            33.063
2-12-5            33.064
2-12-6            33.065
2-12-7            33.066
3-1-1             32.015
3-2-1             32.025
3-2-2             32.026
3-3-1             32.040
3-3-2             32.041
3-7-1             35.01
3-7-2             35.02
3-7-3             35.03
3-7-4             35.04
3-7-5             35.05
3-7-6             35.06
3-7-7             35.07
3-7-8             35.08
3-7-9             35.35
3-7-10            35.36
3-7-13            35.38
3-10-1            32.070
3-10-2            32.071
3-10-3            32.072
3-10-4            32.073
3-10-5            32.073
3-10-6            32.074
3-10-7            32.074
4-1-1             110.03
4-1-2             110.04
4-1-3             110.07
4-1-4             110.05
4-1-5             110.06
4-1-6             110.08
4-1-8             110.11
4-1-9             110.03
4-1-10            110.09
4-1-11            110.02
4-1-12            110.01
4-1-13            110.10
4-1-14            110.12
4-1-15            110.12
4-2-1             112.35
4-2-2             112.36
4-2-3             112.37,
                  112.38
4-2-5             112.39
4-2-6             112.40
4-2-7             112.41
4-2-8             112.42
4-3-1             36.45
4-3-2             36.46
4-4-1             112.01
4-4-3             112.03
4-4-4             112.06
4-4-5             112.02
4-5-1             112.85
4-5-2             112.86
4-5-3             112.87
4-5-4             112.89
4-5-5             112.88
4-6-1             112.70
4-6-2             112.71
4-6-3             112.72
4-6-4             112.73
4-6-5             112.75
4-6-6             112.74
4-9-1             115.01,
                  115.15
4-9-2             115.45
4-9-3             115.16
4-9-4             115.17
4-9-5             115.32
4-9-6             115.30
4-9-8             115.31
4-9-9             115.33
4-9-10            115.18
4-9-11            115.46
4-9-12            115.19
4-10-1            51.130
4-10-2            51.131
4-10-3            51.132
4-10-4            51.133
4-10-5            51.135
4-10-6            51.133
4-10-7            51.136
4-10-8            51.134
4-11-1            114.01
4-11-2            114.02
4-11-3            114.03
4-11-4            114.04
4-11-5            114.05
4-11-6            114.06
4-11-7            114.07
4-11-8            114.08
4-12-1            114.20
4-12-2            114.21
4-12-3            114.22
4-12-4            114.23
4-12-5            114.25
4-12-6            114.24
4-13-1            113.02
4-13-2            113.03
4-13-3            113.04
4-13-4            113.05
4-13-5            113.01
4-13-6            113.06
4-14-1            112.55
4-14-2            112.56
4-14-3            112.57
4-14-4            112.58
4-14-5            112.59
4-15-1            112.21
4-15-2            112.20
4-15-3            112.23
4-15-4            112.22
4-16-1            118.20
4-16-2            118.21
4-16-3            118.22
4-16-4            118.23
4-16-5            118.24
4-16-6            118.26
4-16-7            118.27
4-16-8            118.28
4-16-9            118.29
4-16-10           118.30
4-16-11           118.25
4-17-1            111.01
4-17-2            111.02
4-17-3            111.16
4-17-4            111.18
4-17-5            111.17
4-17-6            111.21
4-17-7            111.19
4-17-8(A)         111.24
4-17-8(B)         111.25
4-17-8(D)         111.41
4-17-8(E)         111.42
4-17-8(F)         111.22
4-17-8(G)         111.43
4-17-8(H)         111.46
4-17-8(I)         111.46
4-17-8(K)         111.47
4-17-8(M)         111.26
4-17-8(N)         111.50
4-17-8(O)         111.51
4-17-8(Q)         111.52
4-17-8(R)         111.15
4-17-9(C)         111.40
4-17-9(L)         111.48
4-17-9(S)         111.23
4-17-10           111.40
4-17-11           111.54
4-17-13           111.67
4-17-14           111.53
4-17-15           111.49
4-17-19           111.44,
                  111.45
4-17-21           111.68
4-17-22           111.66
4-17-23           111.65
4-17-24           111.20
4-17-25           111.28
4-17-26           111.29
4-17-27           111.69
4-18-1            95.20
4-18-2            95.20
4-18-3            95.20
4-19-1            116.25
4-19-2            116.26
4-19-3            116.27
4-20-1            150.075
4-20-2            150.076
4-20-4            150.078
4-20-5            150.079
4-20-7            150.081
4-21-1            150.095
4-21-2            150.096,
                  150.099
4-21-4            150.098
4-21-6            150.100
4-21-7            150.101
4-21-8            150.102
4-22-1            36.30
4-22-2            36.31
4-22-3            36.32
4-22-4            36.33,
                  36.34
4-23-1            36.01
4-23-2            36.02
4-24-1            36.15
4-24-2            36.16
4-24-3            36.17
4-28-1            116.01
4-30-1            36.55
4-30-2            36.56
4-30-3            36.57
5-2-1             151.01
5-2-4             151.50
5-2-5             151.50
5-2-6             151.51
5-2-7             151.52
5-2-8             151.53
5-2-14            151.35
5-2-16            151.37
5-2-17            151.38
5-2-18            151.15
5-2-19            151.16
5-2-20            151.17
5-2-21            151.18
5-2-22            151.19
5-2-23            151.20
5-2-27            151.54
5-2-28            151.02
5-3-1             150.030
5-7-1             97.009
5-9-1             97.115
5-9-2             97.116
5-9-3             97.117
5-9-4             97.118
5-9-5             97.119
6-1-1             94.15
6-1-4             35.21
6-1-5             35.22
6-2-1             94.25
6-2-2             94.26
6-2-3             94.27
6-2-4             94.28
6-2-5             94.29
7-1-7             97.001
7-1-8             97.003
7-1-12            95.16
7-1-15            132.04
7-1-16            97.028
7-1-17            95.07
7-1-20            95.17
7-1-22            118.02
7-1-30            111.46
7-1-33            97.136
7-1-34            97.005
7-1-35            97.006
7-1-36            132.03
7-1-37            134.04
7-1-39            97.007
7-1-40(A)         97.004
7-1-40            133.01
7-1-41            97.004
7-1-42            95.06
7-1-44            118.01
7-1-49            111.46
7-1-50(D)         97.999
7-2-8             95.09
7-6-1             90.01
7-6-2             90.02
7-6-3             90.03
7-6-4             90.04
7-6-5             90.05
7-6-6             90.06
7-7-1             93.01
7-7-2             93.02
7-7-3             93.03
7-7-4             93.04
7-7-5             93.15
7-7-6             93.16
7-7-7             93.99
8-1-4             95.08
8-1-5             95.10
8-1-8             95.11
8-1-9             95.12
8-1-10            95.13
8-1-11            95.01
8-1-12            95.03
8-1-13            95.04
8-1-14            97.002
8-1-15            97.026
8-1-16            97.008
8-1-17            95.05
8-1-18            95.02
8-1-19            94.99, 95.99,
                  97.999
8-1-20(A)         90.07
8-2-1             95.14
8-2-2             95.15
8-2-3             95.14
8-2-4             95.18
8-2-5             95.19
8-6-1             51.001
8-6-2(A)          51.002
8-6-2(B)          51.003,
                  51.041
8-6-2(C)          51.004
8-6-2(D)          51.005
8-6-3(A)          51.020
8-6-3(B)          51.021
8-6-3(C)          51.022
8-6-3(D)          51.023
8-6-3(E)          51.024
8-6-3(F)          51.025
8-6-3(G)          51.026
8-6-4(A)          51.040
8-6-4(B)          51.041
8-6-4(C)          51.041
8-6-4(D)          51.041
8-6-4(E)          51.041
8-6-4(F)          51.041
8-6-4(G)          51.041
8-6-4(H)          51.041
8-6-4(I)          51.041
8-6-4(J)          51.042
8-6-4(K)          51.043
8-6-4(L)          51.044
8-6-4(M)          51.045-
                  51.047
8-6-4(N)          51.048
8-6-5(A)          51.060
8-6-5(B)          51.060
8-6-5(C)          51.061
8-6-5(D)          51.062
8-6-5(E)          51.063
8-6-5(F)          51.064
8-6-5(G)          51.065
8-6-5(H)          51.066
8-6-5(I)          51.067
8-6-5(J)          51.067
8-6-5(K)          51.067
8-6-5(L)          51.068
8-6-6             51.006
8-6-7             51.007
8-6-8(A)          51.998
8-6-8(C)          51.998
8-6-9(B)          51.096
8-6-9(C)          51.097
8-6-9(D)          51.098
8-6-10(F)         51.112
8-6-10(G)         51.113
8-6-10(H)         51.008
8-6-10(I)         51.114
8-7-1             95.30
8-7-2             95.31
8-7-31            95.32
9-1-1             97.040
9-1-2             97.041
9-1-3             97.042
9-1-4             97.043
9-1-5             97.044
9-1-6             97.045
9-1-7             97.060
9-1-8             97.061
9-1-9             97.062
9-1-10            97.063
9-1-11            97.046
9-1-12            97.025
9-1-13            97.025
9-1-14            97.048
9-1-15            97.010
9-1-16            97.027
9-1-17            97.047
9-1-18            97.029
9-1-19            97.011
9-1-20            97.150
9-1-21            97.150
9-1-22            51.080
9-1-22(C)         51.081
9-1-23            51.081
9-2-1             11.03
9-3-1             97.080
9-3-2             97.081
9-3-3             97.082
9-3-4             97.083
9-3-5             97.084
9-3-6             97.085
9-3-7             97.086
9-3-8             97.087
9-3-9             97.088
9-3-10            97.089
9-3-11            97.090
9-3-12            97.091
9-4-1             92.01
9-4-2             92.03
9-4-3             92.04
9-4-4             92.02
9-4-5             92.05
9-4-6             92.06
9-4-7             92.07
9-4-8             92.09
9-4-9             92.08
9-4-10            92.10
9-4-11            92.11
9-4-12            92.25
9-4-13            92.26
9-4-14            92.27
9-6-9(A)          51.095
9-7-1             96.01
9-7-2             96.15
9-7-3             96.16
9-7-4             96.17
9-9-1             97.130
9-9-2             97.131
9-9-3             197.134
9-9-4             97.132
9-9-6             97.133
9-11-1            150.130
9-11-2            150.131
9-11-3            150.132
9-11-4            150.133
9-11-4(E)         150.999
10-2-2            35.20
10-4-29           Ch. 77, Sch. V
10-6-14           Ch. 78, Sch. I
10-6-15           Ch. 78, Sch. II
10-8-3(B)         Ch. 77, Sch. III,
                  Sch. VIII
10-8-3(C)         Ch. 77, Sch. III
10-8-5            Ch. 77, Sch. II
10-8-7            Ch. 77, Sch. I
10-8-8            Ch. 77, Sch. IV
11-1-1            155.001
11-1-2            155.002
11-2-1            155.003
11-3-1            155.020
11-3-2            155.021
11-3-3            155.022
11-3-4            155.023
11-3-5            155.024
11-4-1            155.035
11-4-2            155.036
11-4-3            155.037
11-4-4            155.038
11-4-5            155.039
11-4-6            155.040
11-4-7            155.041
11-4-8            155.042
11-4-10           155.044
11-4-11           155.045
11-4-12           155.046
11-4-13           155.047
11-4-14           155.048
11-5-1            155.060
11-5-2            155.060
11-5-3            155.060
11-5-4            155.060
11-5-5            155.060
11-5-6            155.060
11-6-1            155.061
11-6-2            155.061
11-6-3            155.061
11-6-4            155.061
11-6-5            155.061
11-6-6            155.061
11-7-4            155.062
11-7-5            155.062
11-7-6            155.062
11-8-2            155.063
11-8-3            155.063
11-8-4            155.063
11-8-5            155.063
11-8-6            155.063
11-8-7            155.063
11-9-1            155.064
11-9-2            155.064
11-9-3            155.064
11-9-4            155.064
11-9-5            155.064
11-10-1           155.065
11-11-1           155.066
11-11-3           155.066
11-11-4           155.066
11-11-12          155.066
11-12-1           155.067
11-12-2           155.067
11-12-3           155.067
11-12-4           155.067
11-13-1           155.068
11-13A-1          155.069
11-13A-2          155.069
11-13-3           155.068
11-13A-3          155.069
11-13-4           155.068
11-13A-4          155.069
11-13A-5          155.069
11-14-1           155.070
11-14-2           155.070
11-14-3           155.070
11-14-4           155.070
11-14-5           155.070
11-15-1           155.071
11-15-2           155.071
11-15-3           155.071
11-15-4           155.071
11-15-5           155.071
11-16-1           155.085
11-16-2           155.086
11-16-3           155.087
11-16-4           155.088
11-16-5           155.089
11-16-6           155.090
11-16-7           155.091
11-16-8           155.092
11-17-1           155.105
11-17-2           155.106
11-17-3           155.107
11-18-1           155.120
11-18-2           151.121
11-18-3           155.122
11-18-4           155.123
11-18-5           155.124
11-18-6           155.125
11-18-7           155.126
11-20-1           155.220
11-20-2           155.221
11-20-3           155.222
11-20-4           155.223
11-20-5           155.224
11-20-6           155.225
11-21-1           155.205
11-21-2           155.206
11-21-3           155.207
11-21-4           155.208
11-21-5           155.209
11-22-1           155.155
11-22-2           155.156
11-22-3           155.157
11-23-1           155.170
11-23-2           155.171
11-23-3           155.172
11-24-1           155.004
11-25-1           155.185
11-25-2           155.186
11-25-3           155.187
11-25-4           155.188
11-25-5           155.189
11-25-6           155.190
11-25-7           155.191
11-25-8           155.192
11-25-9           155.193
11-25-10          155.194
11-25-11          155.999
11-25-12          155.195
12-1-1            154.001
12-1-2            154.002
12-1-3            154.003
12-1-4            154.005
12-1-5(A)         154.007
12-1-5(B)         154.008
12-1-5(C)         154.009
12-1-5(D)         154.010
12-1-5(E)         154.011
12-1-5(F)         154.006
12-2-1(D)         154.004
12-2-2            154.004
12-3-1            154.025
12-3-2            154.026
12-3-3            154.027
12-4-1            154.055
12-4-2            154.056
12-4-3            154.057
12-4-4            154.058
12-4-5            154.059
12-4-6            154.060
12-4-7            154.061
12-5-1            154.075
12-5-2            154.076
12-5-3            154.076
12-6-1            154.040
12-6-2            154.041
12-6-3            154.042
12-7-1            154.093
12-7-2            154.092
12-7-3            154.091
12-7-4            154.090
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
1266      10-10-49    33.002,
                      33.005
1271      2-6-50      92.11
1274      6-5-50      11.02
1280      7-25-50     97.061
1290      1-29-51     96.15
1311      9-22-52     112.72
1324      7-27-53     35.02–
                      35.04
1353      10-17-55    30.15
1359      6-25-56     33.003
1360      7-9-56      35.06
1366      2-11-57     31.045
1382      1-27-58     33.090–
                      33.097
1398      7-27-59     97.082,
                      97.084
                      33.066,
                      155.001–
                      155.042,
1413      9-13-60     155.044–
                      155.126,
                      155.155–
                      155.225,
                      155.999
1417      3-27-61     116.25–
                      116.27
1427      12-11-61    Repealed
1431      9-10-62     97.082
1447      10-28-63    154.001–
                      154.093
1471      6-9-69      94.02
                      150.075,
                      150.076,
1477      6-14-65     150.078,
                      150.079,
                      150.081
1487      11-8-65     33.045
1491      11-22-66    35.07
1495      1-24-66     Repealed
1506      6-13-66     155.121
1513      11-14-66    90.01–
                      90.05
1530      11-27-67    92.08,
                      92.09
                      150.015,
                      151.01–
1531      1-22-68     151.35,
                      151.37,
                      151.50–
                      151.54
1535      2-12-68     33.110–
                      33.114
                      93.01–
                      93.04,
1540      5-13-68     93.15,
                      93.16,
                      93.99
1562      3-10-69     155.205
1566      5-12-69     93.04
1567      5-12-69     150.015,
                      150.016
1568      5-12-69     Repealed
1579      2-9-70      Repealed
1581      7-15-69     154.076
1596      2-23-70     155.020,
                      155.065
1646      11-9-70     155.064
                      150.015,
1695      9-13-71     150.030,
                      151.02
1696      8-23-71     150.065, 150.066
1705      11-8-71     31.037
1708      11-22-71    37.02
1715      1-10-72     155.040
1724      5-8-72      93.03
1747      8-28-72     155.060
1789      8-27-73     116.01
1798      10-22-73    111.46
1836      9-23-74     35.08
1840      10-14-74    32.070,
                      32.071
1851      12-23-74    32.074
1852      12-23-74    38.01
1882      6-23-75     96.17
1887      8-11-75     151.20,
                      151.61
1899      11-14-75    38.02
1907      2-33-76     40.01–
                      40.11
1923      7-12-76     155.023
1924      7-12-76     154.076
1935      9-27-76     154.026
1944      12-27-76    96.01,
                      96.16
1954      2-28-77     150.016
                      111.02,
1958      4-11-77     111.18,
                      111.21
1977      7-25-77     150.095
1985      9-12-77     95.01
1993      12-12-77    155.060,
                      155.064
1997      11-14-77    92.27
2005      1-9-78      95.09
2006      1-9-78      38.02
2010      3-27-78     151.20
2019      5-8-78      Ch. 77, Sch. II;
                      Ch. 78, Sch. I
2023      6-12-78     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2025      6-26-69     94.15
2043      4-9-79      Ch. 78, Sch. II
2045      4-24-79     32.015
2051      5-29-79     155.066,
                      155.071
2053      5-29-79     96.16
                      114.20,
2056      6-11-79     114.22,
                      114.23,
                      114.25
2057      6-11-79     155.003,
                      155.070
2063      7-23-79     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2078      9-24-79     31.010
2088      10-29-79    Ch. 77, Sch. I
2089      11-12-79    Ch. 77, Sch. III,
                      Sch. VIII
2091      11-12-79    155.060,
                      155.066
                      Ch. 77, Sch. IV,
2093      11-26-79    Sch. V;
                      Ch. 78, Sch. IV
2094      12-10-79    111.46
2095      12-10-79    150.016
2097      12-10-79    155.122
2103      12-26-79    Ch. 77, Sch. I
2104      1-14-80     155.064
2108      1-28-80     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2109      5-8-68      Ch. 77, Sch. I
2109      1-14-80     155.064
2116      3-10-80     155.088
2133      5-27-80     97.010
2142      6-23-80     10.99
2158      10-13-80    151.51
2160      10-13-80    151.20
2171      1-26-81     155.068,
                      155.070
2181      4-13-81     Ch. 77, Sch. II
2194      5-26-81     32.040
2196      6-8-81      155.066
2207      6-22-81     97.088
2216      7-27-81     155.124
2224      9-14-81     155.106
2231      9-29-81     Ch. 78, Sch. III
2244      11-23-81    Ch. 77, Sch. I
2252      12-14-81    155.064
2255      12-28-81    31.043
2257      2-8-82      96.16
2260      2-22-82     92.01
2262      2-22-82     35.36,
                      35.38
2273      4-26-82     155.070
2276      5-10-82     94.25–
                      94.29
2277      5-10-82     111.25
2279      4-26-82     111.51,
                      111.54
2280      4-26-82     37.04
                      111.17,
                      111.18,
2287      6-28-82     111.21,
                      111.29,
                      111.40
2295      7-6-82      Ch. 77, Sch. I
2298      7-12-82     Repealed
                      32.070,
2321      10-11-82    32.072,
                      32.074
2325      10-25-82    Ch. 77, Sch. III
2347      1-10-83     154.091
2350      2-28-83     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2357      3-28-83     155.003
2363      4-25-83     32.015
2377      6-27-83     Ch. 77, Sch. II
2389      8-22-83     155.060
2391      11-28-83    Ch. 77, Sch. II
2392      11-28-83    Repealed
2405      1-9-84      51.080,
                      51.081
2406      1-9-84      51.081
2409      4-30-79     31.147
2411      2-13-84     111.51
2412      2-27-84     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2413      2-27-84     Ch. 77, Sch. II
2419      3-26-84     155.060
2420      3-26-84     155.066
2424      4-23-84     95.01
2435      6-25-85     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2452      8-13-84     155.003
2457      8-27-84     155.066
2465      9-24-84     110.12
2474      10-22-84    31.010
2475      11-12-84    155.003
2482      12-10-84    155.063,
                      155.064
2491      1-14-85     Ch. 78, Sch. III
2497      2-11-85     94.99, 95.99,
                      97.999
2503      3-11-85     95.01
2504      3-11-85     114.24
2514      5-27-85     90.07
2515      5-27-85     155.048
2521      7-8-85      154.004
2538      10-29-85    155.185–
                      155.195
2560      2-24-86     96.16
                      92.04–
2561      2-24-86     92.06,
                      92.10
2563      3-10-86     110.12
                      51.001–
                      51.042,
                      51.044-
                      51.068,
2566      4-28-86     51.095-
                      51.098,
                      51.112-
                      51.114,
                      51.998
2571      4-28-86     32.015
2577      7-22-85     10.99
2577-A    6-23-86     Ch. 77, Sch. II
2578      6-23-86     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2581      10-29-85    155.999
2595      11-10-86    111.46
2599      11-24-86    31.004,
                      37.05
2602      1-26-87     51.097,
                      51.098
2605      2-23-87     111.69
2607      3-23-87     31.004
2623      7-27-87     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2626      8-10-87     Ch. 78, Sch. II
2649      11-23-87    31.004
2651      12-14-87    Ch. 120
2655      12-14-87    Ch. 78, Sch. III
2661      2-8-88      155.066–
                      155.070
2661      2-80-88     155.066
2663      2-22-88     90.06
2673      6-13-88     32.073
2678      7-25-88     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2680      8-8-88      Ch. 78, Sch. I
2682      9-12-88     Ch. 78, Sch. I
                      150.130–
2683      9-12-88     150.133,
                      150.999
2684      9-26-88     40.01–
                      40.11
2687      12-12-88    155.048
2689      12-12-88    Ch. 77, Sch. II
2691      2-27-88     151.20
2692      2-13-89     Ch. 78, Sch. III
2698      4-10-89     Ch. 78, Sch. III
2703      5-80-89     111.18
2709      6-26-89     51.098
2710      7-10-89     97.004,
                      97.999
2720      2-26-90     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2724      4-27-90     111.18
2729      5-29-90     92.06
2731      6-11-90     38.03
2733      7-23-90     90.07
2741      9-24-90     Ch. 78, Sch. IV
2743      10-9-90     35.36
2750      1-28-91     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2754      5-13-91     10.99
2759      9-23-91     TSO, Table II
2764      11-25-91    32.073
2769      12-23-91    96.16
2770      12-23-91    30.15
2784      5-11-92     155.060
2785      5-26-92     94.99, 95.99,
                      97.999
2786      6-8-92      97.030
                      92.06,
2793      8-24-92     92.08,
                      92.11
2794      8-24-92     33.075–
                      33.079
2796      9-28-92     92.10
2799      10-26-92    155.068,
                      155.069
2804      11-9-92     51.098
2805      11-9-92     31.145–
                      31.148
2806      11-9-92     31.160–
                      31.168
2807      11-9-92     97.012
                      32.001,
2811      11-23-92    32.055,
                      32.056
2812      12-14-92    31.105–
                      31.108
2814      12-14-92    155.060
2817      1-11-93     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2820      3-8-93      155.066
2821      3-22-93     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2825      4-28-93     TSO, Table I
2826      5-24-93     150.017
                      150.075,
2827      5-24-93     150.076,
                      150.078–
                      150.081
                      152.01–
2828      5-24-93     152.04,
                      152.99
2829      5-24-93     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2831      6-14-93     97.088
2832      6-14-93     73.09,
                      97.004
2834      6-14-93     31.090–
                      31.096
2837      7-12-93     90.07,
                      90.99
2838      7-26-93     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2839      7-26-93     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2840      7-26-93     52.75–
                      52.86
2843      8-23-93     51.098
2844      8-23-93     TSO, Table IV
2845      8-23-93     TSO, Table II
2846      8-23-93     120.03,
                      TSO, Table II
2847      9-13-93     Ch. 76, Sch. I
2849      9-27-93     TSO, Table II
2851      10-4-93     150.017
                      50.01,
                      50.02,
                      50.03,
                      50.04,
                      50.05,
                      50.06,
2852      10-4-93     50.07,
                      50.08,
                      50.09,
                      50.10,
                      50.11,
                      50.12,
                      50.99
2853      10-4-93     150.017
2854      10-12-93    TSO, Table IV
2855      10-12-93    10.14
2856      10-12-93    31.046
2857      10-12-93    TSO, Table I
2858      10-12-93    TSO, Table I
2859      10-25-93    137.01, 137.12, 137.13
2860      10-25-93    TSO, Table V
2861      11-8-93     TSO, Table I
2862      11-22-93    TSO, Table VI
2863      11-22-93    TSO, Table I
2869      11-22-93    TSO, Table II
2870      11-22-93    TSO, Table II
                      99.01,
2871      12-13-93    99.02,
                      99.03,
                      99.04
2872      12-13-93    72.10
2873      12-13-93    72.10
2874      12-27-93    96.16
2875      12-27-93    TSO, Table V
2876      1-10-94     TSO, Table V
2878      2-14-94     TSO, Table II
2879      2-14-94     120.06
2880      2-28-94     97.031
2881      2-28-94     150.050
2882      3-28-94     111.18, 11.29
2883      4-11-94     70.01,
                      72.10
                      110.01,
                      110.12,
                      112.01,
                      112.22,
2886      4-11-94     112.36,
                      112.72,
                      112.88,
                      113.02,
                      114.01,
                      118.24
2887      5-9-94      TSO, Table VII
2888      5-9-94      TSO, Table VII
2890      5-9-94      151.20
2892      5-9-94      111.18
2893      5-9-94      Ch. 78, Sch. II
2894      5-23-94     TSO, Table IV
2895      5-23-94     120.03
2897      6-13-94     TSO, Table V
2899      6-13-94     154.076
2900      6-27-94     TSO, Table VII
2901      6-27-94     TSO, Table VII
2902      6-27-94     TSO, Table VII
2903      6-27-94     70.01,
                      Ch. 78, Sch. II
2904      6-27-94     TSO, Table II
2905      6-27-94     TSO, Table II
2906      6-27-94     50.10
2907      7-11-94     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2908      7-11-94     50.10
2909      7-25-94     51.005
2911      8-8-94      TSO, Table VII
2912      8-8-94      Ch. 77, Sch. I
2913      8-22-94     TSO, Table V
2914      8-22-94     TSO, Table II
2915      8-22-94     TSO, Table VI
2916      8-22-94     TSO, Table IV
2917      8-22-94     92.06,
                      92.10
2918      8-22-94     120.05
2919      8-22-94     Ch. 117
2920      9-12-94     TSO, Table VII
2921      9-12-94     TSO, Table VII
2922      9-12-94     TSO, Table VII
2923      9-12-94     TSO, Table VII
2924      9-26-94     97.060
2925      9-26-94     TSO, Table V
2926      10-19-94    155.041
2927      10-19-94    97.060
2928      10-19-94    TSO, Table VII
2929      10-19-94    TSO, Table VII
2930      10-19-94    TSO, Table VII
2931      10-19-94    TSO, Table VII
2932      10-19-94    TSO, Table VII
2933      10-19-94    Ch. 78, Sch. I
2934      11-7-94     TSO, Table VI
2935      11-7-94     TSO, Table II
2938      11-7-94     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2940      11-28-94    TSO, Table VII
2941      11-28-94    155.060
2942      11-28-94    72.10,
                      Ch. 78, Sch. II
2946      12-12-94    TSO, Table VI
2947      12-12-94    TSO, Table VII
2948      12-12-94    TSO, Table VII
2949      12-12-94    TSO, Table V
2951      1-10-95     72.10
2952      1-10-95     50.10,
                      50.11
                      50.11,
                      51.110 -
                      51.114,
                      52.01 -
                      52.06,
2953      1-10-95     52.10 -
                      52.17,
                      52.20 -
                      52.25,
                      52.30 -
                      52.33,
                      52.40
2954      1-23-95     TSO, Table VII
2955      1-23-95     TSO, Table VII
2956      1-23-95     TSO, Table VII
                      150.030,
2957      1-23-95     150.031,
                      150.999
2958      1-23-95     150.080
2959      1-23-95     Ch. 77, Sch. I
2960      2-13-95     TSO, Table VI
2961      2-27-95     50.05
2963      2-27-95     Ch. 78, Sch. I
2964      3-13-95     Repealed
2965      3-13-95     Repealed
2966      4-24-95     TSO, Table I
2969      5-8-95      Ch. 77, Sch. V
2970      5-8-95      155.066,
                      155.067
                      50.05,
2971      5-8-95      50.09,
                      52.20
2974      6-5-95      52.07
2975      6-12-95     TSO, Table I
2976      6-12-95     TSO, Table I
2978      6-26-95     TSO, Table I
2979      6-26-95     TSO, Table II
2981      7-24-95     51.097,
                      51.098
2984      7-24-95     TSO, Table IV
2986      7-24-95     Ch. 121
2987      8-14-95     TSO, Table VII
2988      8-14-95     Ch. 77, Sched. I,
                      Ch. 78, Sched. I
2989      8-28-95     TSO, Table I
2990      8-28-95     TSO, Table VI
2991      8-28-95     TSO, Table VI
2992      9-11-95     TSO, Table II,
                      TSO, Table VI
2993      9-11-95     TSO, Table VII
2994      9-11-95     TSO, Table VII
2995      9-11-95     TSO, Table VI
2996      9-11-95     TSO, Table IV
2998      9-25-95     Repealed
2999      9-25-95     10.99,
                      36.02
3000      9-25-95     150.050
3001      9-25-95     150.015 -
                      150.017
3002      9-25-95     150.040,
                      150.041
3003      10-10-95    TSO, Table VII
3004      10-10-95    TSO, Table VII
3005      10-10-95    TSO, Table VII
3006      10-10-95    TSO, Table VI
3007      10-10-95    TSO, Table II
3008      10-23-95    Ch. 77, Sched. III
3009      11-3-95     TSO, Table VII
3010      11-3-95     TSO, Table VII
3011      11-3-95     TSO, Table VII
3012      11-3-95     122.01
3013      11-3-95     Ch. 78, Sched. I
3014      11-3-95     TSO, Table IV
3015      11-20-95    TSO, Table II
3016      11-20-95    TSO, Table VI
3017      11-20-95    11.01
3018      11-20-95    111.18
                      92.06,
3019      11-20-95    92.08,
                      92.10
3023      12-4-95     TSO, Table II
3024      12-4-95     Ch. 77, Sched. I;
                      Ch. 78, Sched. I
3025      12-4-95     31.043
                      111.18,
3026      12-4-95     111.27,
                      111.29
3027      12-4-95     72.10
3028      1-8-96      TSO, Table II
3029      1-8-96      Ch. 78, Sched. I
3031      1-22-96     TSO, Table IV
3032      1-2296      Ch. 77, Sched. V
3033      12-4-96     TSO, Table V
3034      2-13-96     Ch. 78, Sched. I
3035      2-13-96     Ch. 77, Sched. I
3036      2-27-96     TSO, Table VII
3037      2-27-96     TSO, Table II
3038      3-11-96     TSO, Table II
3039      3-12-96     TSO, Table VI
3040      3-11-96     Ch. 95
3042      3-25-96     Ch. 77, Sched. IX
3043      4-9-96      TSO, Table VII
3044      4-9-96      TSO, Table VII
3045      4-9-96      TSO, Table VI
                      111.40,
3046      4-8-96      155.066,
                      155.067,
                      155.069
                      155.060,
3047      4-8-96      155.064,
                      155.122
3048      4-8-96      Adopting Ordinance
                      Ch. 77, Sched. I,
3049      4-8-96      II,
                      VIII;
                      Ch. 78, Sched. I
3050      4-22-96     155.040
3053      4-22-96     51.007
3054      4-22-96     33.091,
                      33.092
3051      4-22-96     50.09,
                      50.10
3054      4-22-96     33.091,
                      33.092
3055      5-13-96     TSO, Table I
3057      5-29-96     TSO, Table VI
3058      5-28-96     TSO, Table II
3059      5-29-96     TSO, Table II
3060      5-28-96     TSO, Table I
3061      5-28-96     132.02
3062      5-28-96     TSO, Table II
3063      6-11-96     TSO, Table VI
3064      6-10-96     TSO, Table I
3065      6-10-96     TSO, Table I
3067      7-8-96      TSO, Table VII
3068      7-22-96     TSO, Table II
3069      7-22-96     TSO, Table II
3070      7-22-96     155.066 -
                      155.068
3071      7-22-96     72.99;
                      Ch. 78, Sch. III
3072      8-12-96     TSO, Table V
3073      8-13-96     TSO, Table VII
3074      8-12-96     Ch. 156
3075      8-12-96     Ch. 78, Sch. III
3077      8-26-96     TSO, Table II
3078      8-26-96     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3079      9-9-96      TSO, Table VI
3080      9-9-96      TSO, Table IV
3081      10-15-96    TSO, Table VII
3083      11-4-96     TSO, Table IV
3087      11-25-96    TSO, Table VII
3088      11-25-96    TSO, Table VII
3093      12-9-96     TSO, Table I
3094      12-23-96    52.22,
                      52.33
3095      12-23-96    TSO, Table I
3096      1-27-97     T.S.O. II
3097      2-24-97     52.17
3098      2-24-97     T.S.O. VII
3099      3-10-97     T.S.O. VI
3100      3-10-97     T.S.O. II
3102      3-24-97     T.S.O. VII
3103      4-28-97     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3104      4-28-97     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3106      6-23-97     52.22
3107      6-23-97     TSO, Table VII
3108      6-23-97     32.057
3110      7-28-97     TSO, Table I
3111      7-28-97     TSO, Table VI
3113      7-28-97     TSO, Table II
3114      7-28-97     TSO, Table VI
3115      7-28-97     TSO, Table II
3117      8-11-97     50.04
3118      8-11-97     92.08
3119      8-25-97     92.08
3120      8-25-97     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3121      8-25-97     TSO, Table VI
3122      8-25-97     TSO, Table VI
3123      8-25-97     155.003,
                      155.064
3125      9-22-97     Ch. 77, Sch. I 
3126      10-14-97    Ch. 78, Sch. I
3127      10-27-97    TSO, Table I
3128      10-27-97    Ch. 77, Sch. I
3129      10-27-97    TSO, Table II
3131      11-24-97    TSO, Table VII
3132      11-24-97    TSO, Table VII
3133      11-24-97    TSO, Table VI
3134      12-8-97     TSO, Table XI
3135      12-8-97     TSO, Table XI
3136      12-8-97     TSO, Table XI
3138      12-22-97    TSO, Table II
3139      12-22-97    Ch. 78, Sch. I
3141      1-12-98     TSO, Table II
                      155.003,
3142      1-26-98     155.071,
                      155.110 -
                      155.115
3143      1-26-98     Ch. 77, Sch. II
3144      2-25-98     TSO, Table XI
3145      3-9-98      Repealed
3146      3-23-98     122.01
3147      3-23-98     TSO, Table VII
3148      4-13-98     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3149      4-13-98     TSO, Table IV
3150      4-13-98     TSO, Table IV
3151      4-13-98     TSO, Table II
                      36.50 -
3152      4-27-98     36.56, 36.38,
                      36.99
3153      4-27-98     TSO, Table II
3154      4-27-98     TSO, Table VI
3155      4-27-98     TSO, Table VII
3156      4-27-98     TSO, Table VII
3157      5-11-98     Ch. 77, Sch. I and
                      II
3158      5-11-98     30.15 -
                      30.17
3159      5-26-98     Repealed
3160      5-26-98     95.02
3161      6-8-98      52.10
3162      7-8-98      32.057
3163      6-8-98      TSO, Table VI
                      155.003,
                      155.060,
3165      7-13-98     155.063,
                      155.064,
                      155.066
3166      7-13-98     TSO, Table VII
3167      7-13-98     50.07
3168      7-27-98     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3171      7-27-98     TSO, Table VI
3172      8-10-98     Ch. 77, Sch. VI
3173      8-10-98     Ch. 77, Sch. II
3174      8-24-98     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3177      9-14-98     TSO, Table I
3178      9-14-98     37.20 -
                      37.22
3179      9-14-98     10.99
3180      9-14-98     132.06
3181      9-14-98     TSO, Table VI
3182      9-28-98     TSO, Table II
3183      9-28-98     TSO, Table VII
3184      10-13-98    Ch. 78, Sch. I
3185      10-13-98    132.02
3186      10-13-98    Ch. 77, Sch. I
3187      12-14-98    T.S.O. XI
3188      12-14-98    T.S.O. XI
3189      12-14-98    T.S.O. XI
3190      12-14-98    T.S.O I
3191      12-14-98    31.170 -
                      31.173
3193      12-28-98    T.S.O. II
                      110.03,
3195      1-11-99     110.07,
                      110.11,
                      110.12
3196      1-25-99     T.S.O. IV
3197      2-8-99      T.S.O. IV
3198      2-8-99      T.S.O. IV
3199      2-8-99      T.S.O. VI
3200      2-22-99     52.22
3201      3-8-99      155.157(A)
3202      3-22-99     Ch. 78, Sch. III
3203      4-12-99     T.S.O. VI
3205      4-26-99     T.S.O. VII
3206      4-26-99     T.S.O. VII
3207      4-26-99     T.S.O. II
3208      5-10-99     Ch. 77, Sch. II
3209      5-24-99     T.S.O. VII
3210      5-24-99     T.S.O. VII
3211      5-24-99     T.S.O. VII
3212      5-24-99     T.S.O. VII
3215      6-28-99     T.S.O. VII
3216      6-28-99     T.S.O. VII
3217      6-28-99     70.39
3218      6-28-99     Ch. 78, Sch. III
3219      7-12-99     122.01
3221      7-26-99     T.S.O. VII
3222      7-26-99     T.S.O. II &
                      VI
3223      8-9-99      Ch. 78, Sch. III
3224      8-9-99      52.20
3225      8-9-99      T.S.O. I
3226      8-9-99      97.088
3227      9-13-99     T.S.O. II
3228      9-27-99     T.S.O. VI
3229      11-8-99     120.03,
                      T.S.O. II
3231      11-22-99    51.044
3232      12-13-99    Ch. 77 Sch. I
3233      12-13-99    T.S.O. XI
3234      12-13-99    T.S.O. XI
3235      12-13-99    T.S.O. XI
3238      12-27-99    96.16
                      92.05,
3239      12-27-99    92.06,
                      92.10
3241      1-24-00     50.10
3242      1-24-00     T.S.O. V
3244      3-13-00     T.S.O. V
3245      6-27-00     51.001,
                      51.004
                      52.10 -
3246      3-27-00     52.12,
                      52.14 -
                      52.17
3247      5-8-00      Ch. 78, Sch. I
3248      5-8-00      T.S.O. I
3249      5-8-00      T.S.O. I
3250      5-8-00      T.S.O. VI
3251      5-8-00      Ch. 7, Sch. I
3252      5-22-00     31.046
3253      5-22-00     T.S.O. VI
3256      6-26-00     T.S.O. II
3257      6-26-00     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3258      6-26-00     T.S.O. VI
3259      6-26-00     T.S.O. II
3260      6-26-00     T.S.O. II
3261      6-26-00     T.S.O. IV
3262      7-10-00     50.04
3263      7-24-00     T.S.O. VII
3264      7-24-00     151.20
                      154.001 -
                      154.012,
                      154.025 -
                      154.027,
                      154.040 -
3265      8-14-00     154.051,
                      154.055 -
                      154.061,
                      154.075 -
                      154.084,
                      154.090 -
                      154.095
3266      8-14-00     Ch. 78, Sch. II
3267      8-14-00     T.S.O. VI
3268      8-28-00     Ch. 78, Sch. I and
                      V
3269      8-28-00     T.S.O. I
                      157.001 -
3270      8-28-00     157.005,
                      157.999
3271      9-25-00     T.S.O. V
3272      9-25-00     T.S.O. VII
3273      10-10-00    T.S.O. VI
3274      10-23-00    T.S.O. II
3275      10-23-00    Ch. 77, Sch. I
3276      10-23-00    T.S.O. VII
3277      11-13-00    T.S.O. V
3278      11-13-00    Ch. 77, Sch. VIII;
                      Ch. 78, Sch. V
3280      11-13-00    Ch. 77, Sch. I
3281      11-13-00    Ch. 78, Sch. III
3282      11-13-00    50.06
3283      11-29-00    T.S.O. XI
3284      12-11-00    151.20
3288      12-11-00    T.S.O. VII
3289      2-2-01      T.S.O. XI
3290      1-22-01     T.S.O. XI
3291      2-13-01     120.06
                      155.066,
3292      2-26-01     155.070,
                      155.107
                      51.042 -
3293      2-13-01     51.044,
                      51.097
3296      2-13-01     T.S.O. II
                      155.003,
                      155.024,
                      155.041,
3297      2-13-01     155.047,
                      155.060,
                      155.106,
                      155.107,
                      155.125
3298      2-26-01     155.124
3299      2-26-01     Ch. 77, Sch. II
                      155.003,
3300      3-26-01     155.107,
                      155.124
3301      3-26-01     T.S.O VII
3305      4-23-01     T.S.O. V
3306      4-23-01     T.S.O. VII
3307      6-11-01     11.04
3309      6-11-01     32.057
3310      6-11-01     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3313      6-25-01     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3315      7-23-01     32.073,
                      35.37
3316      7-23-01     T.S.O. VII
3317      7-23-01     Ch. 77, Sch. II
3318      8-27-01     T.S.O. XII
3319      8-27-01     T.S.O. VII
3320      8-27-01     T.S.O. II
3321      10-9-01     150.015,
                      150.017
3322      10-9-01     150.040,
                      150.041
3323      10-9-01     150.050,
                      150.051
3324      10-9-01     T.S.O. VI
3325      10-9-01     T.S.O. VI
3326      10-9-01     T.S.O. VI
                      155.003,
3327      10-9-01     155.066,
                      155.117
                      110.01,
3328      11-13-01    110.12,
                      116.05 -
                      116.10
3329      12-10-01    T.S.O. XI
3330      12-10-01    T.S.O. XI
3331      12-10-01    T.S.O. XI
3332      12-10-01    T.S.O. XI
3335      1-14-02     T.S.O. VII
3336      1-14-02     T.S.O. V
3337      1-28-02     131.04 - 131.06
3338      3-11-02     50.04
3341      5-13-02     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3343      5-28-02     Ch. 77, Sch. III,
                      97.027
3344      5-28-02     T.S.O. II
3347      6-24-02     50.02,
                      50.04
3348      7-8-02      T.S.O. V
3349      7-8-02      T.S.O. VI
3350      7-22-02     T.S.O. V
3351      7-22-02     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3352      8-12-02     52.22
3353      8-12-02     T.S.O. XI
3354      8-12-02     52.20
3355      8-12-02     T.S.O. IV
3356      8-12-02     120.03
3357      8-12-02     120.05
3358      8-12-02     120.02
3359      8-12-02     T.S.O. II
3361      8-26-02     T.S.O. VII
3362      9-9-02      36.70
3363      9-23-02     T.S.O. I
3364      10-15-02    Ch. 77, Sch. IX
3365      10-28-02    T.S.O. VII
3366      10-28-02    T.S.O. VI
3367      11-12-02    T.S.O. III
3368      11-12-02    Ch. 77, Sch. IX
3369      11-12-02    Ch. 77, Sch. IX
3375      12-9-02     96.16
                      52.08,
3376      1-13-03     52.20,
                      52.33,
                      52.34
3379      1-27-03     92.06,
                      92.28
3380      3-10-03     T.S.O. II
3381      3-10-03     155.070
3390      4-14-03     T.S.O. II
3391      4-28-03     T.S.O. VI
3392      4-28-03     T.S.O. II
3394      5-12-03     T.S.O. III
3396      5-12-03     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3397      5-27-03     121.03
3401      5-27-03     Ch. 77, Sch. VI
3403      6-23-03     T.S.O. VII
3404      7-14-03     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3405      7-14-03     T.S.O. IV
3406      7-14-03     T.S.O. II
3407      7-14-03     120.03
3408      7-28-03     T.S.O. VI
3409      7-28-03     50.09
3410      7-28-03     51.097
3411      8-11-03     T.S.O. XI
3412      9-22-03     T.S.O. III
3414      10-14-03    35.09
3415      11-24-03    T.S.O. XI
3416      11-24-03    T.S.O. XI
3417      11-24-03    T.S.O. XI
3418      11-24-03    T.S.O. XI
3419      11-24-03    111.17,
                      111.20
3421      12-22-03    T.S.O. II
3422      1-12-04     51.041
3423      1-12-04     Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
3424      1-26-04     155.069
3425      2-23-04     Ch. 77, Sch. V
3426      3-8-04      51.041
3429      4-26-04     T.S.O. VI
3430      5-10-04     132.05
3431      5-10-04     30.011
3432      5-24-04     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3433      6-14-04     111.29
3434      6-14-04     132.02
3437      6-14-04     Ch. 78, Sch. III
3438      6-28-04     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3439      6-28-04     T.S.O. VII
3440      6-28-04     T.S.O. II,
                      T.S.O. VI
3442      7-12-04     97.004
3443      7-26-04     T.S.O. VII
3447      9-14-04     T.S.O. III
3448      9-13-04     T.S.O. III
3449      9-13-04     T.S.O. II
3450      9-13-04     T.S.O. V
3451      10-25-04    T.S.O. IV
3452      11-8-04     T.S.O. V
3453      11-22-04    T.S.O. XI
3456      12-13-04    T.S.O. XI
3457      12-13-04    T.S.O. XI
3458      12-13-04    T.S.O. XI
3460      12-28-04    T.S.O. VI
3461      1-10-05     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3462      2-14-05     120.06
3463      3-14-05     T.S.O. V
3464      3-28-05     T.S.O. VI
3465      3-28-05     T.S.O. VI
3466      4-11-05     156.06
3467      4-25-05     32.073
3468      5-9-05      T.S.O. XI
3469      5-9-05      T.S.O. VI
3470      6-13-05     32.057
3472      7-11-05     52.20
3473      7-25-05     T.S.O. VI
3474      8-8-05      T.S.O. VI
3475      8-22-05     71.005,
                      71.005
3477      9-12-05     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3478      9-26-05     T.S.O. VI
3479      9-26-05     90.06
3482      10-11-05    71.001
3483      10-24-05    T.S.O. VII
3484      11-14-05    Ch. 77, Sch. IX
3485      11-28-05    Ch. 78, Sch. I
3486      11-28-05    T.S.O. VI
3487      11-28-05    T.S.O. VI
3488      11-28-05    T.S.O. VI
3489      11-28-05    T.S.O. IV
3492      12-12-05    T.S.O. XI
3494      12-27-05    T.S.O. VI
3495      1-9-06      T.S.O. IV
3496      1-23-06     T.S.O. XI
3497      2-13-06     T.S.O. VI
3498      2-13-06     92.06
3499      2-27-06     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3500      2-27-06     T.S.O. VI
3502      3-27-06     T.S.O. I
3503      4-10-06     52.22
3505      4-24-06     50.09
3507      5-8-06      T.S.O. XIII
3508      5-8-06      T.S.O. VI
3509      5-8-06      50.04
3510      6-12-06     97.088
3511      6-12-06     32.057
3513      6-26-06     T.S.O. II,
                      T.S.O. VI
3515      7-10-06     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3516      8-28-06     T.S.O. VII
3517      10-10-06    Ch. 77, Sch. I
3518      10-10-06    50.04
3519      10-23-06    51.041
3520      10-23-06    52.10
3521      11-13-06    155.225
3522      11-17-06    T.S.O. II
3523      11-27-06    Ch. 77, Sch. I
3524      12-11-06    T.S.O. XI
3525      12-11-06    T.S.O. XI
3526      12-11-06    T.S.O. XI
3528      2-12-07     T.S.O. I
3529      2-26-07     T.S.O. VII
3530      3-12-07     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3532      4-9-07      30.16
3534      4-23-07     51.041
3535      4-23-07     52.10
3536      5-29-07     T.S.O. VI
3537      5-29-07     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3538      5-29-07     52.21,
                      52.22
3540      6-11-07     30.16
3545      7-9-07      T.S.O. III
3546      7-9-07      T.S.O. VI
3547      7-9-07      Ch. 78, Sch. V
3548      8-13-07     Ch. 77, Sch. II
3549      8-13-07     T.S.O. II
3550      8-13-07     36.70
3552      8-27-07     37.20 -
                      37.22
3553      9-10-07     Ch. 77, Sch. II
3554      10-9-07     T.S.O. VI
3555      10-9-07     50.10
3556      10-9-07     T.S.O. II
3557      10-22-07    T.S.O. VII
3558      10-22-07    Ch. 77, Sch. I
3559      12-10-07    T.S.O. XI
3560      12-10-07    T.S.O. XI
3561      12-11-07    T.S.O. XI
3563      12-10-07    52.22
3564      12-26-07    Ch. 78, Sch. I
3565      1-28-08     T.S.O. VI
3566      3-10-08     T.S.O. VI
3567      3-10-08     T.S.O. II
3568      3-10-08     T.S.O. VI
3569      3-10-08     T.S.O. VI
3570      5-12-08     117.03
3571      5-12-08     111.46
3573      5-27-08     T.S.O. VI
3574      5-27-08     T.S.O. VI
3575      5-27-08     51.095 -
                      51.098
3576      5-27-08     52.20
3577      6-9-08      Ch. 78, Sch. III
3578      6-9-08      Ch. 78, Sch. 1
3582      7-28-08     52.11
3584      8-11-08     91.01 -
                      91.45
3585      8-11-08     T.S.O. VII
3587      10-14-08    91.32
3589      10-27-08    Ch. 77, Sch. I
3590      10-27-08    T.S.O. II
3591      11-10-08    132.05
3592      11-24-08    92.06
3593      11-24-08    96.16
3594      12-8-08     T.S.O. XI
3595      12-10-08    T.S.O. XI
3596      12-10-08    T.S.O. XI
3599      2-9-09      50.06,
                      50.09
3600      3-23-09     50.04
3601      4-13-09     T.S.O. VII
3602      4-13-09     T.S.O. I
3603      4-27-09     36.80 -
                      36.82
3604      4-27-09     97.013
3605      4-27-09     111.40
                      155.003,
                      155.067,
3607      5-11-09     155.070,
                      155.071,
                      155.118
3608      5-11-09     T.S.O. VI
3609      5-11-09     111.40
3610      6-8-09      T.S.O. VI
3614      7-13-09     Ch. 77, Sch. III
3615      7-13-09     T.S.O. I
3617      8-10-09     Ch. 78, Sch. III
3618      9-14-09     T.S.O. XI
3619      9-28-09     T.S.O. VI
3620      11-23-09    T.S.O. VI
3623      12-15-09    T.S.O. XI
3624      12-14-09    T.S.O. XI
3625      12-14-09    T.S.O. XI
3628      2-8-10      T.S.O. VI
3629      2-8-10      T.S.O. II,
                      T.S.O. VI
3630      3-8-10      T.S.O. VI
3631      3-22-10     T.S.O. XI
3632      4-26-10     T.S.O. VI
3633      4-26-10     32.073
3634      5-10-10     T.S.O. VI
3635      5-24-10     Ch. 77, Sch. III
3636      5-24-10     50.07
3637      5-24-10     150.016,
                      150.075
3639      6-14-10     T.S.O. VI
3640      6-14-10     T.S.O. VI
                      37.01,
3641      6-14-10     37.02,
                      37.06
3643      6-14-10     52.15
3644      6-28-10     111.18
3645      6-28-10     T.S.O. VI
3646      6-28-10     T.S.O. VI
3648      7-12-10     T.S.O. III
3649      7-12-10     T.S.O. I
3650      7-12-10     35.36
3652      9-13-10     T.S.O. VI
3653      9-13-10     T.S.O. II
3655      9-27-10     T.S.O. VII
3656      9-27-10     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3657      9-27-10     T.S.O. VI
3658      9-27-10     T.S.O. VI
3659      9-27-10     T.S.O. VI
3660      11-8-10     91.32
3661      12-13-10    T.S.O. XI
3662      12-13-10    T.S.O. XI
3663      12-13-10    T.S.O. XI
                      155.185 -
3666      1-11-11     155.197,
                      155.999
3667      1-10-11     50.05
3668      2-14-11     111.18
3669      2-14-11     T.S.O. II
3670      3-28-11     T.S.O. VI
3672      4-25-11     T.S.O. V
3674      5-9-11      T.S.O. VI
3675      6-13-11     T.S.O. XI
3676      6-13-11     32.057
3677      6-13-11     T.S.O. II
3678      6-13-11     T.S.O. III
3679      6-13-11     T.S.O. V
3680      6-27-11     T.S.O. VI
3681      6-27-11     T.S.O. V
3682      7-11-11     T.S.O. II
3683      8-8-11      T.S.O. VI
3684      8-22-11     T.S.O. III
3685      9-12-11     Ch. 77, Sch. II
3686      11-14-11    T.S.O. XI
3687      11-14-11    99.10,
                      99.99
3688      11-28-11    T.S.O. II
3689      12-12-11    T.S.O. XI
3690      12-12-11    T.S.O. XI
3691      12-12-11    T.S.O. XI
3693      12-12-11    92.06
3695      1-9-12      T.S.O. XI
3696      2-13-12     T.S.O. II
3697      2-27-12     52.14
3698      2-27-12     T.S.O. II
3699      3-26-12     T.S.O. XI
3700      4-9-12      T.S.O. XI
3702      5-14-12     50.09
3703      5-29-12     T.S.O. III
3704      5-29-12     T.S.O. II
3705      6-11-12     32.057
                      111.18,
3706      6-11-12     111.50,
                      135.01 -
                      135.04
3707      6-11-12     111.46
3708      6-11-12     50.05
3709      6-25-12     41.01 -
                      41.04
3710      7-9-12      T.S.O. II,
                      T.S.O. VI
3711      7-9-12      T.S.O. VI
3712      8-13-12     T.S.O. VI
3713      8-27-12     T.S.O. I
3714      11-13-12    T.S.O. VI
3715      11-13-12    T.S.O. II
3716      11-13-12    T.S.O. IV
3717      12-10-12    T.S.O. XI
3718      12-10-12    T.S.O. XI
3719      12-10-12    T.S.O. XI
3721      1-14-13     T.S.O. VI
3722      1-14-13     T.S.O. VI
3723      1-14-12     T.S.O. XI
3725      3-11-13     T.S.O. XI
3726      2-25-13     111.18
3727      2-25-13     50.05
3728      3-11-13     T.S.O. II
3729      3-25-13     120.10
3732      4-22-13     132.05
3733      4-22-13     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3735      5-13-13     T.S.O. V
3738      5-28-13     92.10
3741      7-8-13      T.S.O. II
3742      7-8-13      T.S.O. V
3743      7-22-13     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3748      10-15-13    T.S.O. II
3750      11-25-13    T.S.O. VI
3751      12-9-13     T.S.O. XI
3752      12-9-13     T.S.O. XI
3753      12-9-13     T.S.O. XI
3754      12-9-13     T.S.O. XI
3755      12-9-13     T.S.O. XI
3757      3-10-14     37.30 -
                      37.34
3758      3-10-14     T.S.O. VI
                      136.01,
3759      3-24-14     136.02,
                      136.99
3761      4-28-14     52.20
3762      4-28-14     51.097
3764      5-12-14     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3766      6-23-14     T.S.O. III
3767      6-23-14     72.99
3768      7-14-14     T.S.O. VI
3769      7-14-14     91.47
3770      8-11-14     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3771      8-11-14     50.10
3772      8-11-14     T.S.O. III
3773      8-25-14     91.20,
                      91.27
3774      8-25-14     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3775      9-22-14     T.S.O. I
3779      11-24-14    T.S.O. XI
3780      11-24-14    T.S.O. XI
3781      11-24-14    T.S.O. XI
3782      11-24-14    T.S.O. XI
3783      11-24-14    T.S.O. XI
3785      12-22-14    T.S.O. VI
3786      1-12-15     T.S.O. III
3787      1-12-15     T.S.O. III
3788      1-12-15     T.S.O. III
3789      2-9-15      113.01 -
                      113.06
3790      2-23-15     T.S.O. III
3791      3-9-15      T.S.O. VI
3792      4-13-15     Ch. 77, Sch. VII
3793      4-13-15     T.S.O. I
3794      4-27-15     T.S.O. XI
3795      5-11-15     T.S.O. I
3797      6-8-15      T.S.O. XI
                      111.16,
3801      7-13-15     111.18,
                      111.30,
                      132.05
3802      7-13-15     111.16
3804      7-27-15     T.S.O. VII
3806      7-27-15     35.37
3807      8-10-15     T.S.O. VI
3808      8-24-15     T.S.O. X
3809      9-14-15     T.S.O. VI
3811      9-30-15     T.S.O. VI
3811A     11-9-15     Ch. 78, Sch. III
3812      11-9-15     50.05
3813      11-9-15     T.S.O. I
3814      11-23-15    T.S.O. XI
3815      11-23-15    36.51
3816      12-14-16    T.S.O. XI
3817      12-14-15    T.S.O. XI
3818      12-14-15    T.S.O. XI
3819      12-14-15    T.S.O. XI
3821      12-14-15    T.S.O. I
3822      1-11-16     150.016
3823      1-25-16     95.07
3824      3-14-16     117.03
3825      3-14-16     Repealed
3826      3-28-16     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3827      4-11-16     96.16
3828      5-23-16     T.S.O VII
3829      5-23-16     97.001
3831      6-13-16     Ch. 77, Sch. I,
                      II
3833      6-13-16     32.057
3836      6-27-16     T.S.O. VI
3837      6-27-16     T.S.O. VI
3838      6-27-16     T.S.O. VI
3839      6-27-16     T.S.O. V
3840      6-27-16     T.S.O. V
3841      6-27-16     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3842      6-27-16     Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
3844      7-25-16     T.S.O. I
3846      9-12-16     37.30 -
                      37.34
3848      9-12-16     95.02
3849      10-11-16    155.086
3852      10-24-16    150.016
3853      11-14-16    T.S.O. VI
3854      11-4-16     T.S.O. II
3856      11-14-16    Ch. 77, Sch. V
3857-2016 11-14-16    T.S.O. III
3865      12-12-16    T.S.O. VI
3866      12-12-16    T.S.O. VI
3868      1-23-17     Ch. 78, Sch. III
3869      1-23-17     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3870      1-23-17     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3871      1-23-17     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3873      2-27-17     T.S.O. II
                      150.016,
                      155.060,
                      155.066,
3875      3-27-17     155.070,
                      155.071,
                      158.01 -
                      158.08,
                      158.99
                      150.016,
                      155.003,
                      155.107,
3876      2-27-17     159.01,
                      159.02,
                      159.05 -
                      159.10,
                      159.99
3877      3-27-17     T.S.O. VII
3878      3-27-17     T.S.O. VI
3879      3-27-17     T.S.O. VI
3880      4-10-17     Repealed
3881      4-24-17     150.017
3882      5-22-17     T.S.O. VII
                      155.003,
3883      5-22-17     155.068,
                      155.069,
                      155.071
3884      5-22-17     111.19
                      50.09,
3886      7-24-17     50.10,
                      92.06,
                      92.08
3888      6-26-17     T.S.O. VII
3889      6-26-17     T.S.O. II
3890      6-26-17     T.S.O. VI
3891      6-26-17     T.S.O. II
3892      7-24-17     T.S.O. VI
3893      7-24-17     T.S.O. VI
3894      7-24-17     35.37
3896      8-14-17     T.S.O. I
3897      8-14-17     155.117
3899      10-10-17    T.S.O. VII
3900      10-10-17    T.S.O. VI
3901      10-23-17    T.S.O. VIII
3903      11-13-17    T.S.O. XI
3904-2017 11-13-17    T.S.O. III
3905      11-13-17    T.S.O. VII
3907      11-27-17    T.S.O. V
3908      11-27-17    T.S.O. V
3910      12-11-17    T.S.O. XI
3911      12-11-17    T.S.O. XI
3912      12-11-17    T.S.O. XI
3914      12-26-17    T.S.O. VII
3915      12-26-17    T.S.O. II
3917      2-12-18     52.09
3918      2-12-18     150.016
3919      2-26-18     T.S.O. III
3920      2-26-18     T.S.O. III
3921      2-26-18     150.030
3922      3-12-18     T.S.O. VII
3923      3-26-18     92.06
3926      5-14-18     T.S.O. III
3927      5-29-18     T.S.O. VI
3928      5-29-18     T.S.O. VI
3929      5-29-18     150.016
                      160.01 -
                      160.03,
3930      5-29-18     160.15 -
                      160.17,
                      160.99
3932      6-11-18     32.057
3933      6-25-18     155.003,
                      155.068
3934      7-9-18      T.S.O. VI
3935      7-9-18      155.003,
                      155.060
3936      7-9-18      155.066
3937      7-23-18     T.S.O. III
3938      8-13-18     T.S.O. VII
3939      8-13-18     T.S.O. VI
3941      9-10-18     Ch. 77, Sch. I
3942      10-9-18     T.S.O. VI
3945      11-13-18    T.S.O. XI
3946      11-13-18    T.S.O. III
3947      11-13-18    T.S.O. III
3948      11-13-18    Ch. 77, Sch. I
3949      12-10-18    T.S.O. XI
3950      12-10-18    T.S.O. XI
3951      12-10-18    T.S.O. XI
3953      1-14-19     T.S.O. I
3954      2-25-19     T.S.O. VII
3955      2-25-19     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3956      4-8-19      T.S.O. VI
3957      4-8-19      T.S.O. VI
                      50.04,
3958      4-22-19     50.07,
                      50.09
3959      5-13-19     Repealed
3960      5-13-19     T.S.O. VI
3961      5-13-19     T.S.O. VI
3962      5-13-19     T.S.O. VI
3964      5-28-19     T.S.O. VII
3965      5-28-19     95.07,
                      113.06
3967      6-10-19     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3969      6-24-19     T.S.O. VII
3970      6-24-19     T.S.O. VII
3971      6-24-19     T.S.O. VII
3972      7-8-19      T.S.O. VI
3972A     7-22-19     Ch. 78, Sch. I
3973      7-22-19     T.S.O. VII
3974      7-22-19     T.S.O. III
3975      8-12-19     T.S.O. III
3976      9-23-19     T.S.O. VII
3977      9-23-19     T.S.O. VII
3978      9-23-19     T.S.O. VII
3979      10-28-19    T.S.O. VII
3980      10-28-19    155.003,
                      155.060
3981      10-28-19    T.S.O. VI
3982      11-12-19    T.S.O. XI
3983      11-12-19    112.02, Repeals 112.04
3984      11-12-19    T.S.O. VII
3985      11-12-19    112.03,
                      112.06
3985.1    12-9-19     T.S.O. XI
3988      12-19-19    36.20,
                      36.21
3986      12-9-19     T.S.O. XI
3987      12-9-19     T.S.O. XI
3989      12-19-19    155.003
3990      12-19-19    155.068
3991      12-19-19    155.070,
                      155.071
3992      12-19-19    155.070,
                      155.071
3994      1-13-20     111.19
3995      2-10-20     T.S.O. VI
3997      2-10-20     92.06
3998      3-9-20      T.S.O. V
3999      3-9-20      T.S.O. V
4000      4-13-20     T.S.O. III
4001      4-13-20     T.S.O. VII
4005      4-13-20     T.S.O. VI
4006      5-11-20     T.S.O. V
4007      6-15-20     Repealed
4008      6-29-20     T.S.O. VII
4009      7-13-20     T.S.O. V
4010      6-29-20     T.S.O. VI
4012      7-13-20     Ch. 78, Sch. I
                      91.01,
4013      7-27-20     91.50 -
                      91.52, Repeals 91.06
4014      7-27-20     155.068
4015      7-27-20     T.S.O. VI
4016      7-27-20     T.S.O. VI
4016.1    8-10-20     T.S.O. VII
4017      8-24-20     Ch. 78, Sch. I
4019      9-14-20     92.06
4021      9-24-20     T.S.O. VI
4022      9-24-20     T.S.O. VI
4023      9-28-20     95.15
4024      10-26-20    T.S.O. VI
4025      10-26-20    T.S.O. VII
4026      10-26-20    T.S.O. VII
4027      10-26-20    T.S.O. VII
4028      10-26-20    T.S.O. VII
4029      10-26-20    T.S.O. VII
4030      10-26-20    Ch. 77, Sch. I
                      51.001,
4031      10-26-20    51.042,
                      51.044,
                      51.097
4032      10-26-20    52.10,
                      52.20
4034      11-30-20    T.S.O. II
4035      11-30-20    155.068
4036      12-14-20    94.00 -
                      94.05
4037      12-14-20    T.S.O. XI
4038      12-14-20    T.S.O. XI
4039      12-14-20    T.S.O. XI
4043      2-8-21      T.S.O. VI
4044      2-22-21     T.S.O. VII
4045      2-22-21     Ch. 77, Sch. VI
4046      3-8-21   T.S.O. VI
4047      3-8-21   T.S.O. VI
4048      4-12-21     T.S.O. VII
4049      4-12-21     T.S.O. VI
4050      4-26-21     T.S.O. II
4051      5-10-21     132.04
4052      5-10-21     155.066
4053      5-10-21     155.067
4054      5-10-21     155.069
4056      5-10-21     51.097
4058      6-14-21     71.140 -
                      71.152
4062      6-28-21     T.S.O. IV
4063      7-12-21     T.S.O. VII
4064      7-26-21     37.02
4065      7-26-21     T.S.O. VII
4066      8-9-21      155.070,
                      155.071
4067      8-9-21      155.066,
                      155.070
4072      8-23-21     150.017
4073      9-27-21     T.S.O. VI
4076      9-27-21     132.07
4078      11-8-21     T.S.O. VI
4079      11-8-21     T.S.O. XI
4081      11-11-21    T.S.O. I
4082      12-13-21    T.S.O. XI
4083      12-13-21    T.S.O. XI
4084      12-13-21    T.S.O. XI
4086      12-13-21    T.S.O. XI
4088      1-10-22     Ch. 78, Sch. I
4089      1-24-22     31.004, Repeals 33.125
4091      2-28-22     T.S.O. VII
4092      3-28-22     T.S.O. VI
4093      3-28-22     T.S.O. VII
4094      3-28-22     150.016
                      71.141,
4095      4-11-22     71.143,
                      71.145
4096      4-11-22     T.S.O. III
4097      4-25-22     Ch. 78, Sch. I
4098      5-9-22   94.26
4099      5-9-22      155.003,
                      155.060
4101      6-27-22     T.S.O. VI
4102      7-25-22     T.S.O. VII
4103      7-8-22      T.S.O. I
4105      8-8-22   T.S.O. II
4106      8-22-22     T.S.O. III
4109      10-24-22    T.S.O. VII
4110      10-24-22    T.S.O. VII
                      50.09,
4111      10-24-22    51.097,
                      52.20
4112      11-14-22    T.S.O. VII
4113      11-14-22    T.S.O. V
4114      11-28-22    T.S.O. III
4119      12-12-22    T.S.O. I
4121      2-27-23     T.S.O. III
4122      2-27-23     116.12
4123      2-27-23     T.S.O. VII
4124      2-27-23     T.S.O. VII
4125      2-27-23     T.S.O. II
4126      2-27-23     T.S.O. VI
4127      2-27-23     T.S.O. VI
4128      3-13-23     Ch. 78, Sch. II
4130      4-10-23     T.S.O. VI
4131      3-27-23     T.S.O. VI
4132      3-27-23     155.225
4133      3-27-23     T.S.O. III
4134      4-24-23     T.S.O. III
4135      5-8-23      T.S.O. VI
4136      6-12-23     T.S.O. VI
4137      6-12-23     T.S.O. VI
4138      6-26-23     155.107
4139      7-10-23     T.S.O. VI
4140      7-10-23     T.S.O. III
4142      7-24-23     T.S.O. III
4143      7-24-23     T.S.O. V
4144      8-14-23     T.S.O. III
4145      8-14-23     155.068
4146      9-11-23     T.S.O. VI
4148      9-25-23     T.S.O. VII
4149      9-25-23     T.S.O. VII
4150      10-10-23    97.088
4151      10-23-23    T.S.O. VII
4152      10-23-23    T.S.O. VII
4153      10-23-23    150.015
4154      10-23-23    150.017
4155      10-23-23    150.040
4156      10-23-23    150.041
4157      11-13-23    T.S.O. II
4158      11-13-23    T.S.O. VI
4159      12-11-23    94.15
4167      1-22-24     T.S.O. VII
                      111.02,
4168      1-22-24     111.18,
                      111.27
4169      2-26-24     T.S.O. VII
4170      2-26-24     T.S.O. VII
4171      2-26-24     T.S.O. VII
4172      3-11-24     T.S.O. VI
                      111.18,
4173      3-11-24     111.29,
                      111.30
4174      4-8-24      T.S.O. I
4175      4-22-24     T.S.O. VII
4176      4-22-24     T.S.O. VII
4177      5-22-24     T.S.O. III
                      116.05,
4178      4-22-24     116.06,
                      116.11,
                      116.13
4179      5-13-24     30.18
4180      5-13-24     T.S.O. VI
4181      5-13-24     T.S.O. V
4182      5-13-24     T.S.O. III
4183      5-13-24     113.05
4185      5-28-24     T.S.O. VI
4186      5-28-24     T.S.O. VI
4187      5-28-24     T.S.O. VI
4188      5-28-24     T.S.O. III
4189      6-10-24     T.S.O. VI
4190      6-24-24     T.S.O. I
4192      8-12-24     T.S.O. II
4193      8-12-24     T.S.O. II
4194      8-12-24     150.016
4195      8-12-24     T.S.O. III
4196      8-26-24     T.S.O. VII
4197      8-26-24     T.S.O. VII
4198      8-26-24     52.22
4199      9-9-24      T.S.O. III
4200      9-9-24      151.02
4201      9-9-24      155.066
4203      9-23-24     T.S.O. VII
4204      10-15-24    T.S.O. VI
4205      10-15-24    Ch. 78, Sch. I
                      70.01,
                      70.10,
4206      10-15-24    70.38,
                      70.41,
                      70.99, Repeals 71.003
4207      10-28-24    90.01,
                      90.07
                      95.01,
4208      10-28-24    95.02,
                      95.06
4209      10-28-24    T.S.O. V
                      Ch. 77, Sch. I,
4211      11-12-24    II,
                      VIII
                      70.42,
                      74.01,
                      74.07,
4212      11-12-24    74.11,
                      76.01,
                      76.02,
                      76.07, Repeals 76.09
4213      11-25-24    97.027
                      94.02,
4214      11-25-24    94.27,
                      94.29
4218      12-9-24     T.S.O. III
4219      12-9-24     T.S.O. III
                      35.01 -
                      35.09,
4220      12-9-24     35.20 -
                      35.22,
                      35.35 -
                      35.37
                      150.001,
                      150.016,
                      150.050,
                      150.075,
                      150.076,
                      150.079,
4221      12-9-24     150.080,
                      150.081,
                      150.095,
                      150.096,
                      150.101,
                      150.102,
                      150.131,
                      150.133, Repeals 150.077, 150.097, 150.115 - 150.117
4223      1-27-25     T.S.O. VII
4224      1-27-25     T.S.O. VI
4225      11-12-24    Ch. 78, Sch. I
                      91.01,
                      91.02,
                      91.04,
                      91.05,
                      91.09 -
                      91.12,
                      91.14 -
                      91.17,
                      91.19 -
                      91.24,
                      91.26 -
                      91.28,
                      91.31 -
                      91.36,
4227      1-27-25     91.40,
                      91.41,
                      91.44,
                      91.46,
                      91.47,
                      91.50,
                      99.01 -
                      99.04,
                      132.02,
                      133.02,
                      134.01,
                      134.02,
                      134.04,
                      137.01,
                      137.03,
                      137.05, Repeals 91.25
                      151.01,
                      151.15 -
                      151.17,
                      151.19,
4228      1-27-25     151.20,
                      151.35 -
                      151.39,
                      151.50 -
                      151.54,
                      151.99
4231      3-10-25     T.S.O. VI
4232      3-24-25     158.07,
                      158.08
4233      3-24-25     159.03 -
                      159.10
4234      3-24-25     160.15,
                      160.16
4235      4-28-25     94.26
4236      5-13-25     113.05
                      153.01 -
                      153.04,
                      153.15 -
4229      2-10-25     153.33,
                      153.50,
                      153.51,
                      153.99,
                      155.003,
                      155.005,
                      155.020,
                      155.023,
                      155.048,
                      155.060 -
                      155.062,
                      155.064,
                      155.066,
                      155.086,
4230      2-10-25     155.107,
                      155.111,
                      155.113,
                      155.114,
                      155.117,
                      155.118,
                      155.157,
                      155.187,
                      155.189,
                      155.220 -
                      155.223,
                      155.999, Repeals 155.043
4240      6-9-25      36.90 -
                      36.92
                      121.01 -
4241      6-9-25      121.04,
                      121.11 -
                      121.13
4242      6-9-25      52.20
4246      8-11-25     73.10,
                      97.004
4250      9-8-25      36.80 -
                      36.82
4252      10-14-25    T.S.O. III
4253      10-27-25    T.S.O. VII
4254      10-27-25    T.S.O. VII
4255      10-27-25    T.S.O. VI
4256      11-10-25    T.S.O. I
4257      11-24-25    T.S.O. VII
4258      11-24-25    T.S.O. VI
4259      11-24-25    T.S.O. XI
4260      11-24-25    T.S.O. XI
                      40.01 -
4262      12-8-25     40.04,
                      40.06 -
                      40.10
                      98.01 -
4263      12-8-25     98.08,
                      98.99
                      130.02,
4264      12-8-25     130.03,
                      130.05,
                      130.06
                      135.01,
4265      12-8-25     135.02,
                      135.03,
                      135.04
                      152.01,
4266      12-8-25     152.02,
                      152.03,
                      152.99
                     
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
3707     10-12-93    TSO, Table III
3709     10-25-93    TSO, Table III
3716     12-13-93    TSO, Table III
3717     1-10-94     TSO, Table III
3721     2-28-94     TSO, Table III
3730     4-25-94     TSO, Table III
3733     5-23-94     TSO, Table IV
3739     6-13-94     TSO, Table III
3741     6-27-94     93.25 -
                     93.28
3743     7-11-94     TSO, Table III
3745     7-25-94     TSO, Table III
3756     10-24-94    TSO, Table III
3758     11-7-94     TSO, Table III
3759     11-7-94     TSO, Table III
3768     2-13-95     TSO, Table III
3769     2-13-95     TSO, Table III
3771     2-13-95     TSO, Table III
3773     2-27-95     TSO, Table III
3775     3-13-95     TSO, Table III
3779     4-24-95     TSO, Table III
3781     5-8-95      93.25 -
                     93.28
3785     5-8-95      TSO, Table III
3787     5-22-95     TSO, Table III
3789     6-5-95      TSO, Table III
3791     6-12-95     TSO, Table III
3795     6-12-95     TSO, Table III
3805     9-11-95     TSO, Table III
3808     10-10-95    TSO, Table III
3811     10-23-95    TSO, Table VIII
3812     10-23-95    TSO, Table VIII
3819     11-27-95    TSO, Table III
3824     12-18-95    TSO, Table III
3827     1-8-96      TSO, Table III
3828     1-8-96      TSO, Table VIII
3830     1-22-96     TSO, Table III
3840     3-25-96     TSO, Table III
3844     4-23-96     TSO, Table IX
3848     4-22-96     TSO, Table III
3849     4-22-96     TSO, Table III
3850     4-22-96     TSO, Table III
3851     4-22-96     TSO, Table III
3852     4-22-96     TSO, Table III
3853     4-22-96     TSO, Table III
3854     4-22-96     TSO, Table III
3863     5-13-96     TSO, Table III
3864     5-13-96     TSO, Table III
3867     5-28-96     TSO, Table III
3868     5-28-96     TSO, Table III
3869     6-10-96     TSO, Table III
3873     6-24-96     TSO, Table III
3877     8-12-96     TSO, Table III
3879     8-26-96     TSO, Table III
3880     9-9-96      TSO, Table III
3882     9-9-96      TSO, Table III
3884     9-23-96     TSO, Table III
3887     10-15-96    TSO, Table VIII
3888     10-15-96    TSO, Table III
3889     10-15-96    TSO, Table III
3890     11-4-96     TSO, Table X
3892     11-4-96     TSO, Table III
3895     11-25-96    TSO, Table III
3902     1-13-97     TSO, Table III
3915     4-28-97     TSO, Table VIII
3925     6-23-97     TSO, Table XI
3926     6-23-97     TSO, Table III
3928     7-14-97     TSO, Table III
3932     7-14-97     TSO, Table III
3933     7-14-97     TSO, Table VIII
3934     7-28-97     TSO, Table I
3935     8-11-97     TSO, Table III
3936     8-25-97     TSO, Table VIII
3937     9-8-97      TSO, Table III
3943     9-22-97     TSO, Table III
3944     10-14-97    TSO, Table IX
3945     10-27-97    TSO, Table III
3947     11-10-97    TSO, Table III
3948     12-8-97     TSO, Table III
3949     12-8-97     TSO, Table III
3952     1-12-98     TSO, Table III
3959     3-9-98      TSO, Table III
3960     3-9-98      TSO, Table III
3963     3-23-98     TSO, Table III
3966     4-13-98     TSO, Table IX
3967     4-13-98     TSO, Table IX
3970     4-27-98     T.S.O. III
3971     5-11-98     TSO, Table III
3972     5-11-98     TSO, Table III
3973     5-11-98     TSO, Table XIII
3977     5-26-98     TSO, Table XII
3978     - -         T.S.O. III
3979     6-8-98      TSO, Table III
3982     7-27-98     TSO, Table III
3983     7-27-98     T.S.O. III
3985     8-10-98     TSO, Table III
3990     9-28-98     TSO, Table III
3991     9-28-98     TSO, Table III
3992     9-28-98     TSO, Table III
3994     10-13-98    TSO, Table III
3996     10-13-98    TSO, Table III
3999     10-13-98    TSO, Table III
4000     10-26-98    TSO, Table III
4001     10-26-98    TSO, Table III
4003     11-9-98     TSO, Table III
4004     11-9-98     TSO, Table III
4005     11-9-98     TSO, Table III
4006     11-9-98     TSO, Table III
4007     11-9-98     T.S.O. XIII
4008     11-23-98    T.S.O. VI
4012     12-14-98    T.S.O III
4013     12-14-98    T.S.O. III
4016     12-14-98    T.S.O. III
4020     12-28-98    T.S.O. IX
4028     2-22-99     T.S.O. III
4029     2-22-99     T.S.O. III
4030     2-22-99     T.S.O. III
4033     3-8-99      T.S.O. III
4036     3-8-99      T.S.O. IX
4038     3-22-99     T.S.O. III
4039     3-22-99     T.S.O. XIII
4043     4-12-99     T.S.O. IX
4051     5-10-99     T.S.O. III
4053     5-24-99     T.S.O. III
4054     6-14-99     T.S.O. III
4058     7-12-99     T.S.O. III
4059     7-12-99     T.S.O. III
4060     7-26-99     T.S.O. III
4061     7-26-99     T.S.O. III
4064     7-26-99     T.S.O. III
4066     8-9-99      T.S.O. III
4067     8-9-99      T.S.O. III
4068     8-9-99      T.S.O. III
4072     9-13-99     T.S.O. IX
4079     10-25-99    T.S.O. III
4080     10-25-99    T.S.O. III
4081     11-8-99     T.S.O. III
4082     11-8-99     T.S.O. III
4084     11-22-99    T.S.O. IX
4085     11-22-99    T.S.O. III
4090     12-13-99    T.S.O. III
4093     1-10-00     T.S.O. III
4099     1-24-00     T.S.O. IX
4100     2-14-00     37.06
4104     2-14-00     T.S.O. III
4106     2-28-00     T.S.O. III
4110     2-28-00     T.S.O. III
4112     3-27-00     T.S.O. III
4113     3-27-00     T.S.O. III
4114     3-27-00     T.S.O. III
4115     3-27-00     T.S.O. IX
4116     4-10-00     T.S.O. XI
4117     4-10-00     T.S.O. III
4118     4-24-00     T.S.O. III
4119     4-24-00     T.S.O. III
4121     5-8-00      T.S.O. III
4122     5-8-00      T.S.O. VIII
4123     5-8-00      T.S.O. III
4124     5-22-00     T.S.O. III
4125     5-22-00     T.S.O. III
4126     5-22-00     T.S.O. III
4127     6-12-00     T.S.O. III
4128     6-26-00     T.S.O. III
4134     7-24-00     T.S.O. III
4135     7-24-00     T.S.O. IX
4139     8-28-00     T.S.O. III
4143     9-11-00     T.S.O. III
4151     10-10-00    T.S.O. III
4158     11-13-00    T.S.O. III
4162     11-27-00    T.S.O. IX
4163     11-27-00    T.S.O. IX
4164     11-27-00    T.S.O. IX
4166     12-11-00    T.S.O. III
4169     1-8-01      T.S.O. III
4170     1-8-01      T.S.O. III
4173     2-13-01     T.S.O. III
4174     2-13-01     T.S.O. XIII
4179     3-12-01     T.S.O. III
4180     2-13-01     T.S.O. III
4182     3-26-01     T.S.O. III
4184     4-9-01      T.S.O. III
4186     4-23-01     T.S.O. III
4189     5-14-01     T.S.O. III
4194     6-11-01     T.S.O. III
4195     6-11-01     T.S.O. III
4196     6-25-01     T.S.O. III
4199     7-23-01     T.S.O. III
4200     7-23-01     T.S.O. III
4201     7-23-01     T.S.O. III
4202     7-23-01     T.S.O. III
4205     8-13-01     T.S.O. III
4206     8-13-01     T.S.O. III
4207     8-27-01     T.S.O. III
4208     9-10-01     T.S.O. III
4209     9-10-01     T.S.O. VII
4210     9-10-01     T.S.O. III
4213     9-24-01     T.S.O. III
4214     10-9-01     T.S.O. III
4215     10-9-01     T.S.O. III
4218     11-13-01    T.S.O. III
4219     11-13-01    T.S.O. III
4221     12-10-01    T.S.O. III
4222     12-10-01    T.S.O. III
4224     12-10-01    T.S.O. III
4225     12-10-01    T.S.O. III
4226     12-10-01    T.S.O. III
4229     12-10-01    T.S.O. III
4232     1-14-02     T.S.O. III
4233     1-14-02     T.S.O. III
4236     2-11-02     T.S.O. III
4238     3-11-02     T.S.O. III
4242     5-13-02     T.S.O. III
4243     5-13-02     T.S.O. III
4248     5-28-02     T.S.O. III
4250     6-24-02     T.S.O. III
4252     7-8-02      T.S.O. III
4255     7-22-02     T.S.O. III
4260     8-26-02     T.S.O. III
4261     8-26-02     T.S.O. III
4262     9-9-02      33.110
4263     9-9-02      T.S.O. III
4264     9-9-02      T.S.O. III
4266     9-23-02     T.S.O. III
4267     9-23-02     T.S.O. III
4268     10-15-02    T.S.O. III
4269     10-15-02    T.S.O. III
4270     10-15-02    T.S.O. III
4271     10-15-02    T.S.O. III
4275     11-25-02    30.15
4276     12-9-02     T.S.O. III
4279     1-13-03     T.S.O. III
4280     1-13-03     T.S.O. III
4281     1-13-03     T.S.O. III
4283     1-27-03     T.S.O. III
4284     2-10-03     T.S.O. III
4287     2-24-03     T.S.O. III
4289     3-10-03     T.S.O. III
4290     3-10-03     T.S.O. III
4291     3-10-03     T.S.O. III
4292     3-24-03     T.S.O. III
4294     3-24-03     T.S.O. III
4295     3-24-03     T.S.O. III
4296     3-24-03     T.S.O. III
4297     3-24-03     T.S.O. III
4304     4-28-03     T.S.O. III
4308     5-27-03     T.S.O. IX
4309     5-26-03     121.10 -
                     121.13
4310     5-27-03     T.S.O. III
4312     5-27-03     T.S.O. III
4315     6-9-03      T.S.O. III
4316     6-9-03      T.S.O. VIII
4317     7-14-03     T.S.O. III
4318     7-14-03     T.S.O. III
4319     7-14-03     T.S.O. V
4320     7-14-03     T.S.O. XIII
4322     7-28-03     T.S.O. XIII
4324     8-25-03     T.S.O. III
4325     8-25-03     T.S.O. III
4327     9-9-03      T.S.O. XI
4328     9-22-03     T.S.O. III
4329     9-22-03     T.S.O. III
4330     9-22-03     T.S.O. III
4332     10-14-03    T.S.O. III
4333     10-14-03    T.S.O. III
4335     11-10-03    T.S.O. III
4336     11-24-03    T.S.O. III
4337     12-8-03     30.15
4338     12-8-03     T.S.O. III
4339     12-8-03     T.S.O. III
4340     12-8-03     T.S.O. III
4341     12-8-03     T.S.O. III
4342     12-22-03    T.S.O. III
3944     10-9-18     T.S.O. III
5185     9-9-19   T.S.O. III
5189     10-28-19    T.S.O. III
5192     11-25-19    T.S.O. III
5193     11-25-19    T.S.O. VIII
5195     12-19-19    T.S.O. III
5198     1-13-20     T.S.O. III
5200     1-27-20     T.S.O. III
5207     5-11-20     T.S.O. III
5211     4-27-20     T.S.O. III
5212     4-27-20     T.S.O. III
5216     5-11-20     T.S.O. III
5225     5-26-20     T.S.O. III
5229     6-15-20     T.S.O. III
5230     6-15-20     T.S.O. III
5235     7-13-20     T.S.O. III
5236     7-13-20     T.S.O. X
5238     7-27-20     T.S.O. III
5239     7-27-20     T.S.O. III
5241     8-10-20     T.S.O. III
5242.1   9-14-20     T.S.O. III
5244     8-10-20     T.S.O. III
5245     9-28-20     T.S.O. III
5247     10-26-20    T.S.O. III
5251     11-16-20    T.S.O. III
5252     11-16-20    T.S.O. III
5256     11-30-20    T.S.O. III
5257     11-30-20    T.S.O. III
5260     11-30-20    T.S.O. III
5263     12-28-20    T.S.O. III
5264     12-28-20    T.S.O. III
5266     1-11-21     T.S.O. III
5267     1-11-21     T.S.O. III
5275     3-22-21     T.S.O. III
5276     4-12-21     T.S.O. III
5278     5-10-21     T.S.O. III
5279     5-10-21     T.S.O. III
5280     5-10-21     T.S.O. III
5281     5-24-21     T.S.O. III
5285     6-14-21     T.S.O. V
5285B    7-26-21     T.S.O. III
5286     6-14-21     T.S.O. III
5286B  7-26-21     T.S.O. III
5290     8-23-21     T.S.O. III
5293     8-23-21     T.S.O. III
5297     9-24-21     T.S.O. III
5301     10-25-21    T.S.O. III
5302     10-25-21    T.S.O. III
5303     10-25-21    T.S.O. III
5305     11-8-21     T.S.O. III
5310     11-22-21    T.S.O. III
5311     11-22-21    T.S.O. III
5320     12-13-21    T.S.O. III
5322     1-10-22     T.S.O. III
5328     2-28-22     T.S.O. III
5329     3-14-22     T.S.O. III
5330     3-14-22     T.S.O. III
5331     3-14-22     T.S.O. III
5335     3-28-22     T.S.O. III
5337     4-11-22     T.S.O. III
5345     5-9-22   T.S.O. III
5347     5-23-22     T.S.O. III
5349     5-23-22     T.S.O. III
5350     5-23-22     T.S.O. III
5351     6-13-22     T.S.O. V
5355     8-8-22      T.S.O. III
5356     8-8-22      T.S.O. III
5358     8-8-22      T.S.O. III
5360     8-22-22     T.S.O. III
5374     11-14-22    T.S.O. III
5375     11-14-22    T.S.O. III
5380v    12-27-22    T.S.O. III
5382     12-27-22    T.S.O. III
                    
 
