VILLAGE CODE
of
KILDEER, ILLINOIS
1981
Code current through:
Ord. 25-O-014, passed October 21, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the Village of Kildeer, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 25-O-014, passed October 21, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d54cd01a02ea8953ad3a88fd261627e42b829a53/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2254_2695x1978.jpg]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VILLAGE OF KILDEER
 
ORDINANCE NO. 26-O-003
 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND VILLAGE CODE 5-21-3 REGARDING
THE USE OF SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 
 
 
 
ADOPTED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
OF THE
 
VILLAGE OF KILDEER, ILLINOIS
 
ON
 
January 20, 2026
 
 
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the Village Board of the
Village of Kildeer, Lake County, Illinois,
This ____ day of January, 2026
 
 
 
 
 
NANDIA BLACK, President   MICHAEL ARETOS, Trustee
   RICK BLASGEN, Trustee
   RALPH LIBERATORE, Trustee
   LESTER SOKOLOWSKI, Trustee
BRYAN WINTER, Attorney   BARBARA STAVROPOULOS, Trustee
   BASEL TARABEIN, Trustee
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d54cd01a02ea8953ad3a88fd261627e42b829a53/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2258_1636x1139.jpg]
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 26-O-003
 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND VILLAGE CODE 5-21-3 REGARDING
THE USE OF SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 
WHEREAS, in 2020 the Board of Trustees of the Village of Kildeer (the "Board)
enacted Ordinance 20-O-003 to regulate the use of solar energy systems in
residential districts; and
   WHEREAS, in 2023 the Board of Trustees amended Ordinance 20-O-003 to
accommodate the use of roof mounted solar energy systems but specified that
panels installed on that portion of a roof that faces a street were prohibited;
and
 
WHEREAS, in 2026 the State of Illinois enacted 65 ILCS 5/11-15.5-10 which
provides as follows:
Notwithstanding any provision of this Code of other provision of law, the
adoption of any ordinance or resolution or the exercise of any power, by
municipality that prohibits or has the effect of prohibiting the installation
of a solar energy system or low-voltage solar-powered devices is expressly
prohibited.
   WHEREAS, after careful study, and being duly advised in the matter, the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Kildeer have determined that
it is useful, appropriate, and in the best interests of the Village to amend
Title 5, Chapter 21, Section 3 of the Village of Kildeer Municipal Code,
pertaining to solar energy systems;
 
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Kildeer, Lake County and State of Illinois, as follows:
 
   Section 1. The foregoing recitals are incorporated herein as findings of the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Kildeer.
 
Section 2. Village Code 21 shall be added as follows: (additions are shown by
underline ["insertions"] and deletions by strikeouts ["deletions"]):
 
5-21-3: BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:  
 
Building-mounted solar energy systems shall be developed according to the
following parameters:
A. Residential:
1. Location: Building-mounted systems are permitted in the following locations:
a. Principal structures. Solar Energy Systems, Building-Integrated, shall be
allowed on the roof of the principal structure of the property only and must be
mounted flush with the slope of the roof to ensure the lowest profile
permissible per manufacturer specifications. Solar shingles integral to the
roof of the structure on which they are installed, may be installed on any roof
face provided that the entire face of the roof level is covered by the SES.
Solar collection devices shall not be constructed on any part of the vertical
portion of a mansard roof. Roof-Mounted Solar Energy Systems are permitted
provided:
i.   trim caps are installed on every edge;
ii.   the Roof Mounted Solar Energy System does not extend more than six (6)
inches above the roof surface;
iii.   the Roof Mounted Solar Energy System is not installed on that portion of
a roof that faces a street; and
iv.iii.   Conduit shall be installed close to gutter lines and painted to match
the surface where it is installed or otherwise masked.
 
Section 3. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
 
   Section 4. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form in the manner provided
by law.
 
Passed by the Corporate Authorities this 20th day of January 2026 on a roll
call vote as follows:
 
Trustees:   Aye:   Nay:   Absent:   Abstain:
 
Michael Aretos   _____   _____   _____      _____
Rick Blasgen   _____   _____   _____      _____
Ralph Liberatore   _____   _____   _____      _____
Lester Sokolowski   _____   _____   _____      _____
Barbara Stavropoulos   _____   _____   _____      _____
Basel Tarabein   _____   _____   _____      _____
 
Authorized by the Village Board and Approved by the Village President this 20th
day of January 2026.
 
 
 
 
                  
Nandia P. Black, Village President
 
ATTEST:
 
 
                  
Michael S. Talbett, Village Clerk
 
                                 26-O-003
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A VILLAGE CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF KILDEER, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Kildeer, Lake County, Illinois, as follows:
SECTION I: That the Village of Kildeer hereby adopts as its Village Code that
publication known as Village Code of Kildeer, Illinois, heretofore prepared by
Sterling Codifiers, Inc., under the direction of the Board of Trustees of the
Village which contains all of the Ordinances of a general nature in effect at
the time of the codification, and said Code of Ordinances shall be accepted by
all courts of law from this date forward as enacted by the President and Board
of Trustees subject to the following corrections which shall be made:
      1.   The correct amount for the bonds, as set forth in 1-6-1 shall be
$30,000.00 for the Village President, $25,000.00 for the Village Clerk, and
$25,000.00 for the Village Collector. In addition, the reference to Ordinance
68-0-136, 6-6-68 shall be deleted.
      2.   The word "Clerk" in Section 1-9-3 B shall be changed to the word
"Collector."
      3.   Section 1-15-1 shall be relocated in the Code to precede Section 1-
16-1.
      4.   The spelling of "Kreuger Road" in Section 1-15-1 shall be changed to
"Krueger Road."
      5.   The phrase "$5.00 fee for copies of plats and maps" shall be added
to Section 1-16-1A.
      6.   The term "Completion Bond - $500.00" shall be inserted in correct
alphabetical order in Section 4-2-2.
      7.   The second paragraphs of Section 4-2-3 C shall read as follows:
   The $500.00 Completion Bond shall be refunded to the applicant upon request
and after approval of a majority of the Architectural Commission; provided,
that all construction has been completed as per approved plans and all
landscaping has been completed in accordance with the following standards..."
      8.   The following additional sentence shall be inserted at the end of
the first paragraph of Section 6-1-4 B 4 as follows:
   "See also Title 4, Chapter 6 of this Village Code"
SECTION 2: This Code of Ordinances shall be known as and constitute the Village
Code of the Village of Kildeer, Lake County, Illinois.
SECTION 3: Reference to any section of this Code includes the penalty section
relating thereto unless otherwise expressly provided. In case of the amendment
of any section of this Code containing provisions for which a penalty is
provided in another section, the penalty so provided shall relate to the
amended section, whether re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance or not, unless
such penalty is specifically repealed or amended therein.
SECTION 4: Unless otherwise provided in this Code, this Code shall apply to all
acts performed within the corporate limits of the Village of Kildeer.
Provisions of this Code shall also apply to acts performed outside the
corporate limits and up to the limits provided by law where the law confers
power in the Village to regulate such particular acts outside the corporate
limits.
SECTION 5: The terms used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined,
have the meanings prescribed by the Statutes in the State of Illinois for the
same terms and the following terms used in this Code mean:
   Village: Village of Kildeer, Illinois
   County: County of Lake
   Ordinances: The Ordinances of the Village of Kildeer and all Amendments
thereto.
   Person: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section prescribing a
penalty or fine, as applied to partnerships or associations, the word includes
the partners or members thereof and as applies to corporations, includes
officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for any violation of
this section. The singular includes the plural. The masculine gender includes
the feminine and neuter genders.
SECTION 6: The Village Clerk is hereby directed to insert in the proper section
each newly adopted Ordinance of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the instant Ordinance which amends, alters, adds or deletes the
provisions of the Code of Ordinances. Each such new provision shall become
effective upon the passage of the Ordinance and the insertion of the proper
replacement pages in the copies of the Code, three copies of which shall be
maintained in the Office of the Village Clerk and be duly certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times said offices are
regularly open.
SECTION 7: All Ordinances of a special nature such as tax levy ordinances, bond
ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a
provision of the Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 8: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change
or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the laws of the Village to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as
provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code of Ordinances of the Village of Kildeer.
SECTION 9: All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in
this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and
meaning of the Village Board may be fully carried out.
Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject
matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing
the greater restrictions or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
SECTION 10: When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, cause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to
revive such former Ordinance, cause or provision unless it shall be therein so
expressly provided.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred
before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending
at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising
under the ordinance repealed.
SECTION 11: The sections, paragraphs, sentences, causes and phrases of this
Code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of
this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the
valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceable shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.
SECTION 12: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 13: This Ordinance and the Code adopted herein shall be in full force
and effect from and after its passage and approval as provided by law.
Passed and approved by the Corporate Authorities this 1st day of October, 1981,
by a roll call vote as follows:
AYES 6 - Adkins, Angelotti, Longeway, Rudisill, Schor, Schroeder
NAYS 0
ABSENT 0
Approved by the Village President this 1st day of October, 1981.
Jack Squardo, Village President
ATTEST:
Laurel Schreiber, Village Clerk
APPROVED:
John M. Mullen
Village Attorney
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of Kildeer. This
Village Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the KILDEER VILLAGE
CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the Board of Trustees and
shall be kept up to date as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of the Village Attorney, acting for
said Village Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this Village Code by title in any legal document.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Village Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
this Village Code.
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
shall be inserted by the Village Clerk according to the official instructions
when so authorized by the Village Board. The Village Clerk shall see that the
replacement pages are properly inserted and the official copies maintained in
the office of the Clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of
this Village Code shall deliver it to the Clerk as requested for updating. The
Clerk shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when
such are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the
Village Clerk. Said Code books, while in the actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain property of the Village and shall
be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by order of the
Village Board. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village heretofore passed prior to the adoption
of this Village Code and all parts of general ordinances heretofore passed and
adopted by the Village prior to the adoption of this Village Code, which are in
conflict with the terms set forth in this Village Code, be and the same are
hereby repealed.
The repeal of the ordinances and parts of ordinances effectuated by this
enactment of this Section shall not be construed as abating any actions now
pending under or by virtue of such ordinance or as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accruing or to accrue or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation or as waiving any right of the
Village under any section or provision existing at the time of the passage of
this provision.
The repeal of the general ordinances, as heretofore set forth in this Section,
shall not apply to those ordinances which are referred to herein as being still
in full force and effect or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal and shall further not apply to all tax levy ordinances, appropriation
ordinances, budget ordinances, ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations, franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations, contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of " warrants, salary ordinances,
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets or other public places,
improvement ordinances, bond ordinances, ordinances relating to elections,
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
Village, building ordinances, zoning ordinances and all special ordinances.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be replaced by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as
this Village Code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case this
Village Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in
respect to such provisions only.
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of
Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matter, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this Village Code by words importing the singular
number only or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and
females, as well as males, and bodies corporate shall be applied to any section
of this Village Code, unless the provisions contained therein contain an
express provision excluding such construction or in which the subject matter or
content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has been
changed in the content of this Village Code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not
meant to amend the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the Board of Trustees of the Village.
CODE: The Municipal Code of Kildeer, Illinois, and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The county of Lake, State of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of the
Village of Kildeer".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the administration of its
Municipal affairs. (1981 Code)
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the Village shall commence on May 1 and end on
April 30 of the following year. (Ord. 59-0-35, 7-20-59)
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAYOR: See Village President.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed*( S.H.A. 720
ILCS 5/2-11.).
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the Village
of Kildeer".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part-
owner, joint-owner or tenant in common.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred,
increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest
therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be understood
to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things directly to
consumers.
STATE: State of Illinois.
STREET: This term shall include lanes, courts, boulevards and roads.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person
who individually or jointly occupies or is in possession of the whole or any
part of such building or land, individually or jointly.
VILLAGE: The Village of Kildeer, County of Lake, State of Illinois.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The President of the Village of Kildeer who may be referred
to as "Mayor" or "President" of the Village.
WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, such
terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things to persons who purchase the same for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: These terms may include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it
shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to
write, by his proper mark.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Village Code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify
or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, inciuding the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this Village
Code, in which no other penalty is set forth, shall be punished by a fine not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), and a separate offense shall be deemed to have occurred on each day,
or portion of a day, during which a violation occurs 1 . (Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-
1995)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this Village Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate
section. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day any duty or
obligation remains unperformed or any prohibited act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this Village Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Village Code, the prosecuting officer may
elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of
a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar
any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this Village Code and there shall be no
fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this
Chapter shall apply. (1981 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Village Code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Village President, Number Of Terms
1-5-2: Village Board Meetings
1-5-3: Rules Of Order
1-5-1: VILLAGE PRESIDENT, NUMBER OF TERMS:
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the village that persons
elected to the office of village president shall retain that office for not
more than five (5) consecutive full four (4) year terms. This declaration of
policy does not prohibit a person from holding more than five (5)
nonconsecutive terms nor from holding more than five (5) consecutive terms if
he has not served five (5) full consecutive terms.
(Ord. 74-O-194, 5-2-1974; amd. Ord. 20-O-014, 8-18-2020; Ord. 24-O-019, 7-16-
2024)
1-5-2: VILLAGE BOARD MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the board of trustees shall be
held on the third Tuesday of each month at the hour of seven thirty o'clock (7:
30) P.M., prevailing time, at the village office, except that if the third
Tuesday of any month shall fall on a legal holiday, the regular meeting for
that month shall be held on the following Wednesday at the same time and place.
(Ord. 11-O-024, 12-20-2011)
   B.   Adjourned Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the board of trustees
that shall be adjourned to reconvene at a later time and place shall be so
reconvened at a time and place fixed by motion adopted at the regular meeting.
   C.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the board of trustees may be
called by the village president or any three (3) trustees by the giving of
written notice thereof of such special meeting to the president, village clerk,
and each member of the board of trustees; such notice shall state the time and
place of the special meeting, the purpose(s) for which it is called, and the
person(s) calling such special meeting.
Notice of the special meeting shall be given as follows:
      1.   By delivering a copy of the notice to the persons entitled thereto
personally, or by leaving a copy of said notice at the residence of said
persons with a member of the family of persons of the age of ten (10) years or
upwards and informing such person of the contents thereof prior to four o'clock
(4:00) P.M., prevailing time, on the day preceding the day upon which the
special meeting is to be held; or
      2.   By depositing a copy of said notice in the United States mail,
postage prepaid in full, addressed to the persons entitled to notice thereof at
his place of residence at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the time of the
special meeting, exclusive of any intervening Sunday or legal holiday.
The notice of the special meeting may be prepared and served by any person
calling said meeting or by the village clerk, upon instruction of the person
calling said meeting.
Notwithstanding any provision of this section, if all trustees and the village
president are present at any special meeting, no notice of said meeting shall
be deemed necessary and all notice requirements shall be deemed waived by all
persons entitled thereto. (Ord. 68-O-137, 6-6-1968)
   D.   Participation In Meetings Via Telephone Conference Call Or Other
Electronic Means: The corporate authorities of the village find that it is in
the public interest to adopt a set of rules and procedures that allow the
members of the village board to participate in and vote at open and closed
public meetings through the use of telephone conference calls or other
electronic means (e.g., video or audio conference). Such voting shall be
governed by the following rules and procedures:
      1.   The village board must comply with all of the applicable
requirements of the open meetings act 1 , as amended.
      2.   The village board is prohibited from establishing a quorum to
conduct business at an open or closed meeting through the attendance of Board
members by the use of telephone conference calls or other electronic means. A
quorum of members of a Village Board must be physically present at the location
of an open or closed meeting.
      3.   Village Board members who wish to attend a meeting electronically
must give notice forty eight (48) hours before the commencement of the meeting
to the Recording Secretary or the Village Clerk (or Deputy Clerk), unless
advance notice is impractical.
      4.   Meeting minutes must reflect whether a member is present physically
or electronically, regardless of whether any members are attending through the
use of a telephone conference call or other electronic means.
      5.   Provided that the audio, telephone or video conference connection
allows the voice of an absent member to be clearly heard by the attendees of
the meeting (including the public) and the absent member can clearly hear the
voices of the attendees who participate in the meeting, a member of a Village
Board may attend, participate and vote at an open or closed meeting through the
use of a telephone conference call or other electronic means if the member is
prevented from physically attending because of:
         a.   Personal illness or disability; or
         b.   Employment purposes or the business of the public body; or
         c.   A family or other emergency.
      6.   Where a member of the Village Board is attending the meeting by use
of a telephone conference call or other electronic means, the presiding officer
shall, immediately after convening of the meeting, announce to the public which
member is attending the meeting by use of a telephone conference call or other
electronic means, identify the method of attendance and the reason why the
absent member is participating by such means.
      7.   If the Village President attends the meeting through the use of a
telephone conference call or other electronic means, he or she shall vacate the
chair and may not act in his or her capacity as the presiding officer.
      8.   The voice of the absent member participating by telephone conference
call or other electronic means, after being identified by the other Village
Board members as belonging to the absent member, shall be simultaneously
broadcast to the public present at the meeting so that his or her voice can be
heard, and the member shall also be able to hear any discussions of the other
members and the public comment regarding any issue discussed at the meeting
before a vote is taken.
      9.   The reasons for which an absent member of a Village Board may
participate in a meeting by use of a telephone conference call or other
electronic means are limited to those reasons set forth in subsection D5 of
this section, and do not include vacations or other personal business. Any
absent member participating in a meeting by use of a telephone conference call
or other electronic means shall publicly state the reason(s) for his or her
absence and the reason(s) shall be made part of the record of the meeting.
      10.   Only two (2) members of the Village Board shall be allowed to
participate in any meeting by use of telephone conference call or other
electronic means at a time.
      11.   No member of the Village Board shall be allowed to participate in
any meeting by telephone conference call or other electronic means more than
three (3) times in a fiscal year. (Ord. 08-O-1008, 3-19-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
1-5-3: RULES OF ORDER:
   A.   Order Of Business: The order of business to be observed at all meetings
of the Board of Trustees and other meetings where Village business is conducted
shall be as follows:
      Roll call of members
      Review of minutes of the previous meeting and approval thereof
      Public comment
      Reports of officers and committees
      Unfinished business
      New business
      Adjournment
   The above order of business may be suspended upon a majority vote of the
members of the Board of Trustees.
   B.   Quorum: A majority of the members of the Board of Trustees shall
constitute a quorum.
   C.   Power Of Majority: The action of the Board of Trustees shall be
controlled by a majority vote of the members of the Board of Trustees.
   D.   Addressing Meetings:
      1.   Other than during public comment, no person other than the Village
President or a member of the Board of Trustees or other Municipal officer or
employee shall address that body at any regular or special meeting of the Board
of Trustees except upon consent of the President or a majority of the members
present.
      2.   Public comment is an opportunity during an open meeting to receive
feedback from the public. During the public comment portion of the meeting, if
any, all public comments are limited to three (3) minutes per individual and
the total time allotted for public comment shall not exceed thirty (30)
minutes. Individuals are directed to be brief and concise in making comments.
The presiding officer, after one warning, may rule any individual making a
public comment out of order if the individual:
         a.   Becomes repetitive;
         b.   Exceeds the three-minute limitation;
         c.   Engages in electioneering for candidate(s); or
         d.   Otherwise interferes with the orderly and dignified conduct of
the meeting.
      3.   If ruled out of order the individual may be barred from further
remarks at the meeting and can be barred from further attendance at that
meeting. An out of order ruling by the presiding officer can be overridden by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members present.
      4.   Nothing herein is intended to limit or restrain negative, positive
or neutral comments.
   E.   Procedure: The Village President shall decide all questions of order
and shall be governed in his or her decisions by parliamentary law as
prescribed by "Robert's Rules of Order" as revised from time to time. (Ord. 18-
O-023, 10-16-2018)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Bonds
1-6-1: BONDS:
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, the following
Village officers shall execute bond, with security to be approved by the Board
of Trustees, payable to the Village in the following sums and conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the duties of their office and the payment of all
money received by such officer, according to law and the ordinances of the
Village 1 :
 
Village President     $30,000.00
Village Administrator 30,000.00
Village Clerk         25,000.00
Village Collector     25,000.00
Village Treasurer (see Section
1-7-2 of this Code)
 
The bond so required may provide that the obligation of the sureties shall not
extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure, or closing of any bank
organized and operating either under the laws of the State or the United States
wherein such officer has placed funds in his custody, if the bank has been
approved by the corporate authorities as a depository for these funds.
Said bonds shall be filed with the Village Clerk, except the bond of the Clerk,
which shall be filed with the Village President. (Ord. 89-0-505, 6-5-89)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25.
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7-1: Appointment, Term
1-7-2: Bond
1-7-3: Duties Of Village Treasurer
1-7-4: Monthly Statements, Warrants, Vouchers, Register
1-7-5: Deposit Of Funds, Designation Of Bank
1-7-6: Treasurer's Report, Annual Account
1-7-7: Special Assessment Funds Kept Separate
1-7-8: Personal Use Of Funds
1-7-9: Retention Of Outside Consultant
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT, TERM:
There is hereby created the office of village treasurer, who shall be appointed
by the village president and board of trustees, voting jointly. The treasurer's
term of office shall be until the next regular election for village officers
following said appointment and until his successor has been appointed and has
qualified. (Ord. 59-O-30, 6-15-1959)
1-7-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the village treasurer shall
execute a bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties with
security to be approved by the village president and board of trustees. The
amount of the bond shall be established by resolution of the president and
board of trustees and shall be not less than ten percent (10%) of the highest
amount of taxes and special assessments received by him or his predecessors
during any fiscal year 1  in the preceding five (5) fiscal years, nor less than
one and one-half (11/2) times the largest amount which the corporate
authorities estimate will be in his custody at any one time. (Ord. 59-O-30, 6-
15-1959)
 
Notes
1 1. "Fiscal year" defined in section
  1-3-2 of this title.
1-7-3: DUTIES OF VILLAGE TREASURER:
The village treasurer shall:
   A.   Keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and the debits
and credits belonging thereto.
   B.   File copies of all receipts with the village clerk with his monthly
reports. (Ord. 59-O-30, 6-15-1959; amd. 1981 Code)
1-7-4: MONTHLY STATEMENTS, WARRANTS, VOUCHERS, REGISTER:
At the end of every month, and more often if required by the corporate
authorities, the village treasurer shall render an account under oath to the
corporate authorities, or to such officer as may be designated by ordinance,
showing the state of the treasury at the date of the account, and the balance
of money in the treasury. He shall accompany the account with a statement of
all money received into the treasury, and on what account, together with all
warrants redeemed and paid by him. On the day he renders an account, these
warrants, with all vouchers held by him, shall be delivered to the village
clerk and filed, together with the account, in the clerk's office. He shall
return all warrants paid by him marked "paid". He shall keep a register of all
warrants, which shall describe each warrant, showing its date, amount and
number, the fund from which paid, the name of the person to whom paid, and when
paid. (Ord. 59-O-30, 6-15-1959)
1-7-5: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS, DESIGNATION OF BANK:
   A.   Depository: The village treasurer shall be required to keep all funds
and money in his custody belonging to the village in such places of deposit as
may be designated by ordinance, and when requested by the village treasurer,
the corporate authorities shall designate a bank or banks in which may be kept
the funds and money of the village 1 , in the custody of the treasurer. When a
bank has been designated as a depository, it shall continue as such until ten
(10) days have elapsed after a new depository is designated and has qualified
by furnishing the statements of resources and liabilities as required by this
section. When a new depository is designated, the corporate authorities shall
notify the sureties of the village treasurer of that fact, in writing, at least
five (5) days before the transfer of funds.
   B.   Discharge Of Money; Deposits: The treasurer shall be discharged from
responsibility for all funds or money which he deposits in a designated bank
while the funds and money are so deposited. If village funds or money are
deposited in a designated bank, however, the amount of such deposits shall not
exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the bank's capital stock and surplus, and
the treasurer shall be responsible for funds or money deposited in the bank in
excess of this limitation. No bank shall be qualified to receive village funds
or money until it has furnished the corporate authorities with copies of the
last two (2) sworn statements of resources and liabilities which the bank is
required to furnish to the auditor of public accounts or to the comptroller of
currency. Each bank designated as a depository for such funds or money shall,
while acting as such depository, furnish the corporate authorities with a copy
of all statements of resources and liabilities which it is required to furnish
to the auditor of public accounts or to the comptroller of currency. (Ord. 59-
O-30, 6-15-1959)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 13 of this title.
1-7-6: TREASURER'S REPORT, ANNUAL ACCOUNT:
The village treasurer shall report to the corporate authorities, as often as
they require, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of
the village, as shown by his books, up to the time of the report. Within thirty
(30) days following the end of the fiscal year, the village treasurer shall
make out and file with the village clerk a full and detailed account of the
village receipts and expenditures, and of all his transactions as treasurer
during the preceding fiscal year, and he shall show in that account the state
of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year. (Ord. 59-O-30, 6-15-1959; amd.
1981 Code)
1-7-7: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS KEPT SEPARATE:
All money received on any special assessment shall be held by the village
treasurer as a special fund, to be applied to the payment of the improvement
for which the assessment was made, and the money shall be used for no other
purpose, except to reimburse the village for money expended on such
improvements. (Ord. 59-O-30, 6-15-1959)
1-7-8: PERSONAL USE OF FUNDS:
The village treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the village in his
custody separate and distinct from his own money, and he shall not use, either
directly or indirectly, the village's money or warrants in his custody for his
own use and benefit, or that of any other person. Any violation of this
provision shall subject him to immediate removal from office by the corporate
authorities, who may declare the treasurer's office vacant. In that case his
successor shall be appointed, and he shall hold his office for the remainder of
the unexpired term of the treasurer so removed. (Ord. 59-O-30, 6-15-1959)
1-7-9: RETENTION OF OUTSIDE CONSULTANT:
The corporate authorities may retain an outside financial consultant, to assist
the village treasurer in the performance of his/her duties as set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 08-O-1005, 2-4-2008)
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
1-8-1: Term
1-8-2: Bond
1-8-3: Duties Of Village Clerk
1-8-4: Deputy Clerk Authorized; Appointment
1-8-5: Deputy Clerk Powers; When Exercised
1-8-1: TERM:
The Village Clerk shall serve a term of office of four (4) years and shall be
appointed by the Village President with the concurrence of the Village Board
pursuant to the Illinois Compiled Statutes. The Village Clerk's term shall run
concurrently with that of the Village President and shall commence after the
April 1, 1997, election. (Ord. 96-O-731, 10-7-1996)
1-8-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of the office of Village Clerk, the Village
Clerk shall execute a bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of his
duties with security to be approved by the Village President and Board of
Trustees in an amount not less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) 1
. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 81-O-331, 9-30-1981)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  1-6-1 of this Title.
1-8-3: DUTIES OF VILLAGE CLERK:
The Village Clerk shall:
   A.   Keep the Corporate Seal and all papers belonging to the Village, the
custody and control of which are not given to any other officers of the
Village. The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the corporate authorities and
keep a full record of its proceedings in the correct journal.
   B.   Publish the annual Treasurer's account within ten (10) days of its
being filed in one or more newspapers published in the Village or, if no
newspaper is published therein, then in one or more newspapers with general
circulation within the Village.
   C.   Further perform all duties and functions as required by Illinois
Compiled Statutes as in effect or as amended from time to time by the
Legislature.
   D.   Also perform all of those functions and duties prescribed by the
Village Board. (1981 Code)
1-8-4: DEPUTY CLERK AUTHORIZED; APPOINTMENT:
   A.   The Village Clerk may appoint one Deputy Clerk, which Deputy Clerk
shall have the power and duty to execute all documents required by law or
ordinance to be executed by the Village Clerk and to affix the seal of the
Village thereto, whenever required.
   B.   The appointment of the Deputy Clerk shall be made by the Village Clerk
and the Deputy Clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Clerk. (Ord.
93-O-638, 5-13-1993)
1-8-5: DEPUTY CLERK POWERS; WHEN EXERCISED:
   A.   In signing any document as described in subsection
1-8-4A of this Chapter, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the Clerk
followed with the word "By" and the Deputy Clerk's own name, and the words
"Deputy Clerk". (Ord. 93-O-638, 5-13-1993)
   B.   Such duties shall be exercised in the absence of the Clerk from the
Clerk's office, or when the President and Board of Trustees have determined by
resolution that the Village Clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated
to perform such functions. (Ord. 93-O-638(A), 6-7-1993)
CHAPTER 9
VILLAGE COLLECTOR
SECTION:
1-9-1: Appointment, Term
1-9-2: Bond
1-9-3: Duties Of Village Collector
1-9-4: Compensation
1-9-1: APPOINTMENT, TERM:
The office of the Village Collector, which may be filled by the Village Clerk
then in office, shall be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees
voting jointly. The term of office for the office of the Village Collector
shall be one year. (1981 Code)
1-9-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of this office, the Village Collector shall
execute a bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties with
security to be approved by the Village President and Board of Trustees. The
amount of the bond shall be not less than twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) 1 . (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 81-0-331, 9-30-81)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  1-6-1 of this Code.
1-9-3: DUTIES OF VILLAGE COLLECTOR:
The Village Collector shall:
   A.   Receive all money belonging to the Village and shall keep books and
accounts in the manner prescribed by ordinance. These books and accounts shall
always be subject to the inspection of any member of the corporate authorities.
(1981 Code)
   B.   Give every person paying money to the Village a receipt therefor,
specifying the date of payment, and upon what account the monies are received.
If the Collector has in his possession money, properly appropriated or budgeted
for the payment of any warrant lawfully drawn upon him, he shall pay the money
specified in this warrant to the person designated by the warrant. (1981 Code;
amd. Ord. 81-0-331, 10-1-81)
   C.   Perform any and all other duties and functions as required by the
Village Board or the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (1981 Code)
1-9-4: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the Village Collector shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) per month. (Ord. 95-0-688, 2-6-95)
CHAPTER 10
BUILDING COMMISSIONER
SECTION:
1-10-1: Appointment, Term
1-10-2: Duties of Building Commissioner
1-10-1: APPOINTMENT, TERM:
There is hereby created the office of the Building Commissioner, who shall be
appointed by the Village President and Board of Trustees voting jointly. The
term of office for the Building Commissioner shall be one year.
1-10-2: DUTIES OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER:
The Building Commissioner's duties include the following:
   A.   The Building Commissioner shall administer the Building Code*( See
Title 4 of this Code.) and other applicable ordinances and State laws.
   B.   He shall keep careful systematic records of the business and work of
his office, including permit applications, survey plats and building plot
plans, all construction plans and specifications, copies of permits and
certificates issued, affidavits and certificates received, a record of
inspections, copies of notices and orders issued, reports of tests made.
   C.   Plans and specifications of houses and accessories shall be maintained
for not less than twenty (20) years and may thereafter be destroyed; provided,
that those parts of plans for other buildings which may be useful for future
periodic inspections shall be maintained and not destroyed.
   D.   He shall make inspections and for that purpose may enter buildings,
structures and premises.
   E.   He shall stop, by written work order, work being done contrary to the
building permit or contrary to any ordinances of the Village.
   F.   He shall revoke, by writing, a permit or approval issued contrary to
the building regulations of the City or based upon a false statement or
misrepresentation in the application for permit.
   G.   He shall perform any and all other duties prescribed by the Village
Board or as otherwise indicated in the ordinances of the Village. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 11
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-11-1: Appointment, Term
1-11-2: Duties of Zoning Administrator
1-11-1: APPOINTMENT, TERM:
The Building Commissioner*(See Chapter 10 of this Title.) shall serve as Zoning
Administrator and shall be in charge of the administration and enforcement of
the zoning regulations of the Village.*(See Title 5 of this Code.)
1-11-2: DUTIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The Zoning Administrator shall:
   A.   Receive applications required, issue permits and furnish
certifications, all in his judgment and discretion.
   B.   Examine premises for which permits have been issued and make necessary
inspections to determine compliance.
   C.   When requested by the Village President or when the interest of the
Village so requires, make investigations and render written reports.
   D.   Issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
   E.   Adopt rules and procedures consistent with the zoning regulations of
the Village.
   F.   Keep careful and comprehensive records of applicants, permits,
certificates, inspections, reports, notices, orders and all localized actions
of the Board of Trustees and file the same permanently by street address.
   G.   Keep all such records open to public inspection at reasonable hours but
not for removal from his office.
   H.   Report to the Village President at least once each month as to permits
and certificates issued and orders promulgated.
   I.   Request and receive the assistance and cooperation of the Police
Department, Village Attorney and Village officials.
   J.   Inform the Legal Department of all violations and all other matters
requiring prosecution of legal action.
   K.   Be entitled to reply upon any opinion of the Legal Department as to the
interpretation of the zoning regulations or the legal application of the zoning
regulations to any factual situation.
   L.   Discharge such other duties as may be placed upon him by the Village
zoning regulations or as prescribed by the Village Board. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 12
VILLAGE BUDGET
SECTION:
1-12-1: State Laws Adopted
1-12-2: Budget Officer
1-12-3: Budget Procedures
1-12-1: STATE LAWS ADOPTED:
The Village hereby adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through and
including 5/8-2-9.10, providing for an annual Municipal budget in lieu of the
passage of an annual appropriation ordinance.
1-12-2: BUDGET OFFICER:
The Village President, with the approval of the Trustees, shall appoint a
Budget Officer who shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities
enumerated in the above sections of the Illinois Compiled Statutes as they now
or may hereafter be amended and including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Permit, encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all Municipal departments, commissions and boards.
   B.   Compile an annual budget in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-2-9.3.
   C.   Examine all books and records of all Municipal departments, commissions
and boards which relate to moneys received by the Municipality, Municipal
departments, commissions and boards and paid out by the Municipality, Municipal
departments and boards, debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to
the Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions and boards.
   D.   Obtain such other additional information from the Municipality,
Municipal departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the Budget
Officer for purposes of compiling a Municipal budget, such information to be
furnished by the Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions and boards in
the form required by the Budget Officer. Any department, commission or board
which refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the
Budget Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent
budget for the Municipality until such Municipal department, commission or
board shall comply in full with the request of the Budget Officer.
   E.   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall insure that no
expenditures are made by the Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions
or boards except as authorized by the budget.
The Budget Officer shall give a bond in such sum as may be required by Statute*
( S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/13-4-3.).
1-12-3: BUDGET PROCEDURES:
   A.   The Budget Officer shall, before the beginning of the fiscal year to
which it applies, prepare a budget containing estimates of the revenues
available together with recommended expenditures for the Municipality and all
of its boards, commissions and departments. Said budget shall be adopted prior
to May 1 of each fiscal year.
   B.   Copies of the tentative annual budget shall be made available for
public inspection in printed or typewritten form at the office of the Village
Clerk not less than ten (10) days prior to the passage of the annual budget.
Not less than one week after the budget is available for inspection and prior
to final action on the budget, the corporate authorities shall hold at least
one public hearing on the tentative annual budget after which hearing or
hearings the tentative budget may be passed without further notice. Notice of
this public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having general
circulation in Kildeer at least one week prior to the time of the hearing.
   C.   The Village Board may delegate authority to heads of Municipal
departments, boards or commissions to delete, add to, change or create
subclasses within object classes budgeted previously to the department, board
or commission subject to such limitation or requirement for prior approval by
the Budget Officer as the Village Board may establish by a two-thirds (2/3)
vote. The annual budget may be revised by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the
Village Board to delete, add or change budgeted items. No revision of the
budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event funds are not available
to effectuate the purpose of the revision. (Ord. 79-0-283)
CHAPTER 13
VILLAGE DEPOSITORIES
SECTION:
1-13-1: Depositories Designated
1-13-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED 1 :
   A.   Illinois Public Treasurer's Investment Pool, Springfield, Illinois;
Chase Bank, Lake Zurich, Illinois; Inland Bank, Lake Zurich, Illinois;
Barrington Bank And Trust, Barrington, Illinois; Cornerstone National Bank &
Trust Company, Palatine, Illinois; US Bank, Palatine, Illinois; MB Financial;
UBS Financial Services, Inc.; and Federal Home Mortgage Bank Of Chicago, are
hereby designated as depositories for funds of the village of Kildeer
("village") and the officers or employees of the village are hereby authorized
to endorse, in the name of the village for the purpose of deposit and
collection in and with said institutions, checks, drafts, notes and other like
obligations, issued or drawn to and owned by the village, and the endorsements
for deposit and collection may be made by written or stamped endorsement of the
village without designation of the party making the endorsement. (Ord. 16-O-
028, 12-20-2016)
   B.   Said institutions are hereby authorized to pay out the funds of the
village on deposit with it from time to time upon checks drawn upon said
depositories and signed in the name of the village by its treasurer or signed
by the village president, whether said checks are payable to cash, bearer or
the order of the village or to any third party or to the order of any village
officer in either their individual or official capacity.
   C.   The corporate authorities of the village, in the manner prescribed by
law, are hereby authorized from time to time to borrow money from said
depositories in such amounts for such length of time and at such rates of
interest and upon such other terms and conditions as said officer or officers
may deem expedient and to evidence the indebtedness thereby created by
executing and delivering in the name and on behalf of the village promissory
notes, judgment promissory notes and other like obligations of the village
signed in the name of the village by the officer or officers designated above
and to pledge the security for the payment of said notes and other obligations
any property or security now or hereafter belonging to the village, which notes
or other obligations shall be in such form and shall contain such terms,
provisions and conditions as may be deemed proper by such officer or officers
and said officer or officers are further authorized to discount said
depositories, notes and other obligations issued to or owned by the village.
   D.   The depositories shall not be in any manner whatsoever responsible for
or required to see to the application of any of the funds of the village
deposited with it, checked out or borrowed from it or secured by the discount
notes and other obligations to them as hereinbefore provided, and all such
transactions shall be conclusively presumed to be legally binding upon the
village. (1981 Code)
   E.   All drafts or checks issued by the village, with the exception of petty
cash and drafts or checks less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), shall
have on its face not less than two (2) signatures of either the village
president, the village treasurer, or the chief village officer. (Ord. 14-O-003,
2-18-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 1-7-5 of this title.
CHAPTER 14
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-14-1: Purpose
1-14-2: Definitions
1-14-3: Prohibited Political Activities
1-14-4: Gift Ban
1-14-5: Exceptions
1-14-6: Disposition Of Gifts
1-14-7: Conflict Of Interest
1-14-8: Powers And Duties Of Ethics Commission
1-14-9: Ethics Commission
1-14-10: Ethics Advisor
1-14-11: Ethics Commission Procedures
1-14-12: Enforcement And Penalties
1-14-13: Review
1-14-1: PURPOSE:
It is the goal of the village to guarantee fair, efficient, and honest
government and to ensure the integrity and objectivity of its officers and
employees. The purpose of this chapter is to implement regulations and
procedures that are to be followed in conducting the business of the village.
(Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
1-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
COMPENSATED TIME: Means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment and sick days, but for purposes
of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a
leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not
fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on
premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer
or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code 3 .
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of Kildeer, whether on a full time
or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how
the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Kildeer.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit toward pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of, or in connection with, any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office, or on behalf of a political
organization, for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 13-O-
014, 10-15-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 3. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-14-3: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village in
connection with any prohibited political activity.
   B.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment, or
3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, sick days, vacation or
personal time off).
   C.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   E.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-
2013)
1-14-4: GIFT BAN:
Except as permitted by this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of
or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively
referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any
gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is otherwise
prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer
or make a gift that violates this section. (Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
1-14-5: EXCEPTIONS:
Section
1-14-4 of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
   A.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
   B.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member pays the fair market value.
   C.   Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or
2) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
   D.   Educational materials and missions.
   E.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
   F.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual
as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt,
great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather,
grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother,
stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and
including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's
spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
   G.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 1) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 2)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and 3) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
   H.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or 2) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
   I.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee) if the
benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others
in similar circumstances.
   J.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this
act, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee
from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift
given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
   K.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
   L.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar
year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other. (Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
1-14-6: DISPOSITION OF GIFTS:
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living
with the officer or employee, does not violate this chapter if the recipient
promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to
its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate
charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the
internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or
succeeded. (Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
1-14-7: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No officer or employee shall engage in any business or transaction or shall
have a financial interest, direct or indirect, as is described in this section.
   A.   Financial Interest: No officer or employee shall participate in, vote
upon, or otherwise act on any matter in which that person is directly or
indirectly financially interested. For purposes of this subsection, a person
shall be deemed to be financially interested in any contract, grant,
appropriation, or legislative enactment that is made with, to, or for the
benefit of that person, to any firm, partnership, association, corporation, or
cooperative association as to which the person is a board member, director, or
officer. No conflict shall be deemed to exist under this subsection as to any
legislative enactments that affect the officer only to the extent that members
of the general public are affected.
   B.   Conflict Of Interest: No officer or employee shall participate in, vote
upon, or otherwise act on any matter in which that person has a conflict of
interest as defined under the provisions of the public officer prohibited
activities act 1 .
   C.   Disclosure Of Confidential Information: No public official or employee
with respect to any transaction which is or which is reasonably expected to
become the subject of an official act or action, shall without proper legal
authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property,
government or affairs of the village or use such information to advance the
interest of such public official or employee or a family member.
   D.   Appearance Before Village Boards: No public official or employee and no
member of any agency, board, committee or commission on any matter within the
jurisdiction of such agency, board, committee or commission shall appear on
behalf of any private person or business entity, other than himself or a family
member before any village agency, board, committee or commission, provided,
however, that a member of an agency, board, committee or commission may appear
on behalf of or provide testimony in support of an applicant, not a family
member, but such representations or appearances shall be limited to no more
than two (2) times in a single calendar year.
   E.   Incompatible Employment: No public officer or employee shall engage in
or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such
employment or services creates a conflict with or impairs the proper discharge
of official duties.
   F.   Private Use Of Public Property: No public official or employee shall
request or permit the use of village owned vehicles, equipment, materials or
property for personal convenience or profit except as otherwise allowed by
rules and regulations of the village.
   G.   Special Treatment Of Others: No public official or employee in exchange
for a gift, favor, service or thing of value shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any person or business entity beyond
that which is available to every other citizen.
   H.   Disclosure Of Interest: Any officer or employee who has, or whose
family members have, an interest in a transaction which is the subject of an
official act or action shall disclose on the record of the board or commission
which performs such official act or to the chief village officer, in the case
of employees, the nature and extent of such interest and shall not participate
in any official act or action regarding that transaction. (Ord. 13-O-014, 10-
15-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
1-14-8: POWERS AND DUTIES OF ETHICS COMMISSION:
The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its
duties and the exercise of its powers.
   B.   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to investigate,
conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for disciplinary
actions, impose fines in accordance with sections
1-14-3 and
1-14-7 of this chapter and refer violations of sections
1-14-3,
1-14-4 and
1-14-7 of this chapter to the appropriate attorney for prosecution. The
commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint
alleging a violation of this chapter and not upon its own prerogative.
   C.   To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations
and to require additional information and documents from persons who may have
violated the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of
books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees of the village to cooperate with the commission during
the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests
by the commission shall constitute grounds for discipline.
   E.   The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters clearly
within the purview of this chapter. (Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
1-14-9: ETHICS COMMISSION:
There is hereby created an ethics commission for the village. The ethics
commission shall consist of the president of the village and the village
trustees. (Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
1-14-10: ETHICS ADVISOR:
   A.   The chief village officer or his or her designee is hereby designated
as the ethics advisor for the village.
   B.   The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the elected official,
citizen appointees, and employees of the village concerning the interpretation
of and compliance with the provisions of this chapter and state ethics laws.
(Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
1-14-11: ETHICS COMMISSION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Complaints alleging a violation of this chapter shall be filed with the
ethics commission. The complaint shall include the following information: 1)
the complaint shall set forth the date or time period when the alleged
violation occurred; 2) the complaint shall describe in detail the act or acts
complained of and provide a list of witnesses to the act or acts; 3) the
complaint shall contain the complainant's home address, business telephone
number and personal telephone number; and 4) the complaint shall be signed by
the complainant and notarized; 5) a complaint alleging the violation of this
act must be filed within one year after the alleged violation.
   B.   Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the
commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of
the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within three (3) business days after receipt by the commission. The notices to
the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time,
and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
   C.   Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the
commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the
complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this chapter, to
determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by
the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the
extent authorized by the open meetings act. The commission shall issue notice
to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the
sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed
within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section
1-14-4 of this chapter and there is a determination of probable cause, then the
commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled
within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the
commission may elect to notify in writing the attorney designated by the
corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and request that the complaint
be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege
a violation, or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the
commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be
made public.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section
1-14-3 of this chapter, then the commission shall notify in writing the
attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such action and
shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in
the custody of the commission concerning the alleged violation.
   D.   On the scheduled date and upon at least forty eight (48) hours' public
notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a hearing open to the
public on the complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present
testimony and evidence.
   E.   Within thirty (30) days after the date of the hearing or any recessed
hearing is concluded, the commission shall either: 1) dismiss the complaint or
2) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the
executive officer or other officer having authority to discipline the officer
or employee, or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The particular
findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed
shall be a matter of public information.
   F.   If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the date
of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission shall
render its decision as required under subsection E of this section within seven
(7) days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven (7) days preceding
that election, the commission shall render such decision before the date of
that election, if possible. (Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
1-14-12: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   The commission may impose disciplinary action and/or a fine against any
person it determines to be in violation of this chapter and may issue a
decision which prescribes one or more of the following courses of action:
      1.   A reprimand.
      2.   An order to cease and desist the offensive action.
      3.   An order to return or refund of money or other items, or an amount
of restitution for services.
      4.   Imposition of a fine in an amount not to exceed five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00).
   B.   A violation of section
1-14-3 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney
for the village by filing in the circuit court any information, or sworn
complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to
the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of
the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
A violation of sections
1-14-4 and
1-14-7 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an
attorney for the village, or, by the ethics commission through the designated
administrative procedure created herein.
   C.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of sections
1-14-4 and
1-14-7 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
   D.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-14-3 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   E.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this chapter to the ethics commission may be fined by the
commission in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   F.   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of section
1-14-3,
1-14-4 or
1-14-7 of this chapter is subject to discipline. (Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
1-14-13: REVIEW:
The decision of the ethics commission to dismiss a complaint is not subject to
administrative review under the Illinois code of civil procedure. The
imposition by the ethics commission of any disciplinary action, penalty or fine
is a final decision and subject to administrative review pursuant to the
Illinois code of civil procedure. (Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
CHAPTER 15
POSTING NOTICES
SECTION:
1-15-1: Official Posting Locations
1-15-1: OFFICIAL POSTING LOCATIONS:
The following designated structures or locations shall be the places where
notices with reference to official village business requiring publication and/
or posting, shall be posted:
   Village hall bulletin board.
   Village website: www.villageofkildeer.com.
   The office of the village clerk.
The above places shall be considered the places where notices can be posted and
any other location in the village authorized by statute in such case made and
provided may be used. (Ord. 08-O-1009, 3-3-2008)
CHAPTER 16
VILLAGE FEES
SECTION:
1-16-1: Village Documents
1-16-2: Planning Consultant Fees
1-16-3: Annexation Procedures
1-16-4: Application Fees
1-16-1: VILLAGE DOCUMENTS:
   A.   There is hereby established the following charges for copies of village
documents:
      Twenty dollars ($20.00) for a copy of the zoning code, subdivision code,
or comprehensive plan.
      Ten dollars ($10.00) for a copy of the zoning map.
      Five dollars ($5.00) for a copy of an accident report.
      One dollar ($1.00) for certification of a document.
      Twenty five cents ($0.25) per page for all other copies. (Ord. 94-O-654,
2-7-1994)
   The village collector is hereby directed to collect the foregoing sums and
to deposit the same in the general corporate fund of the village. (1981 Code;
amd. Ord. 81-O-331, 10-1-1981)
1-16-2: PLANNING CONSULTANT FEES:
In the event the village board and/or the village plan commission/board of
appeals 1  determines that to accurately review and assess a proposal and/or
matter presented to said body or bodies by an applicant or petitioner, it is
necessary to retain the services of a planning consultant to review the same,
then said applicant, petitioner or the like shall be directly responsible for
the costs of services incurred thereby.
In accordance with the above, before procuring the services of a planning
consultant, the body or board desiring the same shall ascertain an estimate
from the planning consultant as to the amount of fees likely to be incurred in
the matter and the petitioner, applicant or the like shall be duly notified of
the same and, subsequently, shall, prior to receiving any approval, disapproval
or review, deposit said sum with the village collector.
All monies deposited with the village collector in accordance with this section
shall be paid to the planning consultant consulted, with any excess remitted to
the depositor. However, should there be an amount outstanding over and above
that amount deposited pursuant to the request of the body involved, said
applicant, petitioner or the like shall immediately deposit the balance, upon
receiving notice, with the village collector. (Ord. 77-O-254, 12-1-1977; amd.
1981 Code; Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
1-16-3: ANNEXATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Annexation Fees: Prior to the approval of a petition for annexation by
the village board, the petitioner shall pay a fee to the village:
      1.   In the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per residential
acre if the petitioner is also seeking approval of a subdivision or planned
unit development.
      2.   The petitioner shall pay one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per acre
if the petitioner is not also seeking approval of a subdivision simultaneously
or in connection with the petition for annexation.
The annexation fees above described shall be due and payable prior to the time
of final plat approval if the petitioner for annexation is seeking approval of
a subdivision. In the event the petitioner is not seeking approval of a
subdivision in addition to annexation, the above described fee shall be due and
payable at the time the property is annexed. (Ord. 01-O-842, 11-5-2001)
   B.   Maps: No petition or ordinance with respect to the annexation to or
transfer or disconnection of any territory from the village shall be acted upon
by the board of trustees of the village unless and until accompanied by a map
of the territory affected by the petition or ordinance and showing said
territory's location with respect to the adjoining boundaries of the village.
Said map shall be sufficient to comply with the provisions of the Illinois
municipal code requiring that a certified copy of the ordinance annexing,
transferring, or disconnecting any territory to or from a municipality,
together with an accurate map of the territory annexed or disconnected, shall
be recorded with the recorder of deeds.
   C.   Approval By Village Engineer: No ordinance annexing or disconnecting
any territory to the village shall be recorded until the legal description
contained in such ordinance and in the petition requesting the annexation or
disconnection, if required by law, shall have been submitted to the village
engineer and approved by him as true and correct, and in compliance with all
applicable legal description requirements of the Illinois municipal code with
respect to annexations or disconnections, and that an accurate map of such
territory annexed or disconnected has been approved or prepared by said village
engineer. (Ord. 62-O-68, 6-4-1962)
1-16-4: APPLICATION FEES:
Simultaneous with the filing of any application for zoning or subdivision the
applicant shall deposit the following application fee:
 
Variance                $150.00
Zoning or rezoning      250.00
Subdivision:             
For the first 5 lots    250.00
For each additional lot 10.00
Special use permit      250.00
 
(Ord. 05-O-943, 7-5-2005)
CHAPTER 17
PROFESSIONAL FEES
SECTION:
1-17-1: Definitions
1-17-2: Review
1-17-3: Reimbursement
1-17-4: Administration of Escrow
1-17-5: Estimate
1-17-6: Disbursements
1-17-7: Replenishments
1-17-8: Final Disbursement
1-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
PERSON: All individuals, partnerships, corporations, associations or any other
legal entities.
PROFESSIONAL FEES: Fees incurred by the Village for professional consultation
by attorneys, engineers, land planners and any other professionals retained by
the Village to review, in whole or in part, Village matters.
1-17-2: REVIEW:
Whenever any person is required by an ordinance of the Village, or State or
Federal law, to submit any plans, specifications or other documents to the
Village to be reviewed, and in connection therewith it shall be necessary for
the Village to retain professional services of an engineer, attorney, planning
consultant and/or other professional, the person submitting the same shall be
fully responsible for all fees charged by said professionals in reviewing the
matter.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the requirement to pay for professional fees
incurred by the Village shall apply to, but not be limited to, applications for
rezoning, applications for variations, applications for planned unit
developments, applications for subdivision, applications for special use,
applications for annexations and applications for building permits. Neither
preliminary approval nor final approval shall be given for any subdivision,
zoning change amendment, variation, planned unit development, special use,
annexation or building permit unless and until the Village Clerk certifies that
all professional fees incurred by the Village have been paid in full.
1-17-3: REIMBURSEMENT:
It is further the purpose of this Chapter of the Village Code to require the
deposit of the necessary funds by applicants prior to professional fees being
incurred by the Village in those instances in which the Village requires that
the applicant reimburse the Village for any professional fees incurred by the
Village in connection with the applicant's request or matter.
1-17-4: ADMINISTRATION OF ESCROW:
The Village Clerk shall be responsible for the administration of escrow of
funds in all those instances in which the Village Code requires an applicant or
other individual to reimburse the Village for any professional fees it may
incur in processing that applicant's request or matter. This Chapter shall
apply to all instances in which the Village Code requires that an applicant or
other individual reimburse the Village for its professional expenses incurred
or to be incurred, and it shall apply to those Village Code provisions
presently in effect or hereafter adopted which require an applicant or other
individual to reimburse the Village for its professional fees incurred or to be
incurred.
1-17-5: ESTIMATE:
The Village Clerk shall, upon receipt of a matter which may or will require
professional services to be rendered to the Village, obtain an estimate of the
amount of the cost of expected services based on the nature of the matter, its
complexity, the relative need for professional advice, and the expected
duration of processing of the matter. The Village Clerk shall so notify the
individual applicant in writing with his estimate of the necessary funds to
defray all professional costs the Village might incur in the course of
reviewing the matter submitted by the applicant or other individual. The
Village Clerk shall also include in this communication a request that the
individual applicant deposit with the Village within fourteen (14) days said
sum to be held in escrow. The application or matter shall not thereafter be
reviewed or acted upon by the Village unless and until said sum is received by
the Village Clerk. Upon receipt of said sum, the Village Clerk shall deposit
the same in a separate escrow account.
Simultaneously with the sending of notice to the applicant or other individual,
the Village Clerk shall also notify the professionals whom the Village expects
to utilize to review the matter and request that those professionals bill no
less frequently than monthly on said matter, and otherwise keep the Village
apprized of time and cost expended in reviewing this matter.
1-17-6: DISBURSEMENTS:
The escrow funds as deposited shall be utilized to pay for professional review
and any and all disbursements therefrom shall be approved by the village clerk
or the village board, and a copy of each disbursement shall be transmitted by
the village clerk to the individual applicant who has deposited the funds.
(Ord. 84-O-376, 1-4-1984)
1-17-7: REPLENISHMENTS:
The village clerk shall periodically review the escrow funds on deposit to
ensure that adequate funds are available to satisfy all professional statements
relating to said matter. In the event that the village clerk determines that
sufficient funds are not available, the village clerk shall so notify the
applicant or other individual and request a further amount to defray the
anticipated additional costs in accordance with the standards set forth in
section
1-17-5 of this chapter. The professionals previously engaged shall be advised
not to do any further work until said sum has been received, and the individual
applicant shall be given fourteen (14) days to deposit said additional funds.
In the event that said funds are not deposited, the village shall take no
further action on the matter and shall so advise the applicant or other
individual. (Ord. 84-O-376, 1-4-1984)
1-17-8: FINAL DISBURSEMENT:
At the conclusion of the matter and after all outstanding professional fees
incurred by the village in review of the matter have been satisfied in full,
the village clerk shall remit the balance, if any, to the applicant or other
individual. (Ord. 84-O-376, 1-4-1984)
CHAPTER 18
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
SECTION:
1-18-1: Definitions
1-18-2: Responsible Officer
1-18-3: Time To Respond
1-18-4: Time And Place For Request For Records
1-18-5: Approval Of Description Of Village Of Kildeer
1-18-6: Exemptions
1-18-7: Appeals
1-18-8: Costs
1-18-9: Applicability To Records Received Or Obtained Prior To July 1, 1984
1-18-10: Categorization Of Records
1-18-11: Exemption Of Certain Records
1-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
COPYING: The reproduction of any public record by means of any photographic,
electronic, mechanical or other process, device or means.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OFFICER: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it
in the freedom of information act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et seq.
(FOIA), and shall be appointed by the village administrator.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, organization or
association acting individually or as a group, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC BODY: Any legislative, executive, administrative or advisory body of the
state of Illinois, counties, townships, cities or villages, incorporated towns,
school districts, and all other municipal corporations, boards, bureaus,
committees or commissions of this state, and any subsidiary bodies of any of
the foregoing, including, but not limited to, committees and subcommittees
which are supported in whole or in part by tax revenue, or which expend tax
revenue.
PUBLIC RECORD: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in the freedom of
information act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et seq. (Ord. 11-O-009, 3-
15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
1-18-2: RESPONSIBLE OFFICER:
The FOIA officer or such deputies or assistants as the village administrator
shall deem appropriate shall be responsible for administering all requests for
inspection or photocopying of public records. (Ord. 11-O-009, 3-15-2011, eff.
3-15-2011)
1-18-3: TIME TO RESPOND:
The FOIA officer shall respond to a duly filed noncommercial request for
inspection or photocopying of public records within five (5) working days of
receipt of the request and within twenty one (21) days for commercial requests
as provided in FOIA.
In the event that the FOIA officer is unable to determine whether or not the
application seeks public records or nonpublic records, the FOIA officer is
authorized to confer with the Illinois attorney general, or such other persons
as are necessary to make a final determination as to whether or not the request
of information consists of public records within the meaning of FOIA. (Ord. 11-
O-009, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
1-18-4: TIME AND PLACE FOR REQUEST FOR RECORDS:
Written requests for inspection or photocopies of public records may be made to
the village to the attention of the FOIA officer. (Ord. 11-O-009, 3-15-2011,
eff. 3-15-2011)
1-18-5: APPROVAL OF DESCRIPTION OF VILLAGE OF KILDEER:
Section 4 of the freedom of information act requires all public bodies to
display certain information and make the same available to the public for
inspection and copying. The brief description of the village, the short summary
of its purpose, the block diagram with its functional subdivisions, and the
amount of the operating budget shall be made available to the general public
for inspection and photocopying during normal office hours and posted on the
village website. (Ord. 11-O-009, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
1-18-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The documents, information or materials identified in section 2(c) of the FOIA,
5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/2 (c), which are incorporated by reference
herein, shall not be considered public records for the purposes of this
chapter. (Ord. 11-O-009, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
1-18-7: APPEALS:
Any person whose request for inspection or photocopy of public records is
denied in whole or in part shall have the right to appeal the FOIA officer's
decision to the Illinois attorney general. (Ord. 11-O-009, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-
15-2011)
1-18-8: COSTS:
The following costs for photocopies of public records shall apply:
   A.   There is a one dollar ($1.00) charge for each certification of records;
   B.   There is no charge for the first fifty (50) pages of black and white
text either letter or legal size;
   C.   There is a fifteen cent ($0.15) per page charge for copied records in
excess of fifty (50) pages;
   D.   The actual copying cost of color copies and other sized copies will be
charged;
   E.   If the records are kept in electronic format, you may request a
specific format and, if feasible, they will be so provided, but if not, they
will be provided either in the electronic format in which they are kept (and
you would be required to pay the actual cost of the medium only, i.e., disk,
diskette, tape, etc.) or in paper as you select. (Ord. 11-O-009, 3-15-2011,
eff. 3-15-2011)
1-18-9: APPLICABILITY TO RECORDS RECEIVED OR OBTAINED PRIOR TO JULY 1, 1984:
The village hereby adopts and approves the foregoing standards, except as
precluded or otherwise prevented by the operation of the local records act, for
the production of public records for all records received or obtained by the
village prior to July 1, 1984, provided, however, that in addition to the
foregoing costs as set forth in section
1-18-8 of this chapter, the village shall further charge an administrative cost
of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per hour for the time expended by the village clerk
in collecting and producing any documents or records that were received or
obtained by the village prior to July 1, 1984, and such other and further costs
that are actually incurred by the village in complying with any requests for
said records. (Ord. 11-O-009, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
1-18-10: CATEGORIZATION OF RECORDS:
The village clerk is authorized and directed to maintain and make available for
inspection and photocopying a reasonably current list of all types or
categories of records under the village's control. This responsibility shall
apply exclusively to information received after July 1, 1984, and shall not
apply to any records or information received prior to that date. (Ord. 11-O-
009, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
1-18-11: EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN RECORDS:
The village clerk shall not divulge or reveal to any public record applicant
any records or materials which are exempt from the terms of the freedom of
information act as set forth in section 7 of that act, unless directed to do so
by a court of competent jurisdiction or the village board of trustees. (Ord.
11-O-009, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
CHAPTER 19
INDEMNITY AND LEGAL ASSISTANCE
SECTION:
1-19-1: Purpose
1-19-2: Application
1-19-3: Legal Assistance
1-19-4: Indemnification
1-19-5: Claims
1-19-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to indemnify and hold harmless village
officials, officers, employees and agents acting on behalf of the village from
any claims or causes of action that arise as a result of the performance of
their duties. (Ord. 86-O-413, 3-3-1986)
1-19-2: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and be for the benefit of all
elected or appointed officers and officials, employees, and agents, including,
but not limited to, the village engineer, village planner and village attorney
of the village. (Ord. 86-O-413, 3-3-1986)
1-19-3: LEGAL ASSISTANCE:
The village may at the request of an officer, employee or agent, or former
officer, employee or agent, appoint counsel to appear and defend him and pay
costs or shall reimburse said officer, employee or agent for reasonable
attorney fees and costs expended by him, upon the following conditions:
   A.   If any claim or action or investigation, either civil or criminal in
nature, is instituted against an officer, employee or agent, or former officer,
employee or agent, of the village where such claim or action arises out of:
      1.   An act or omission made in good faith occurring within the scope of
his employment and respective duties as elected or appointed official, employee
or agent of the village.
      2.   An investigation by any Federal, state or municipality, or agency
thereof, involving the officer, employee or agent of the Village in nature of
his duties or actions as such officer, employee or agent of the Village.
      3.   An investigation of any officer, employee or agent of the Village by
any Federal, state or municipality, or agent thereof, by reason of his office,
employment or agency in the Village.
      4.   An investigation of any other officer, employee or agent of the
Village by any Federal, state or municipality, or agency thereof, to which such
officer, employee or agent may be subjected to by reason of another officer's,
employee's or agent's duties or actions as such Village officer, employee or
agent.
   B.   No officer, employee or agent of the Village shall be entitled to
reimbursement for counsel when his action was done with malice or wilful
misconduct. No officer, employee or agent of the Village shall have further use
of appointed counsel or be reimbursed where there is a finding of guilty
against him in criminal or quasi-criminal action or wilful misconduct in a
civil action.
   C.   The appointment of counsel and payment of costs shall not be a matter
of right of any officer, employee or agent, but is a matter in the sole
discretion of the Village. Reimbursement, however, shall be a matter of right
to any officer, employee or agent and shall cover only those duties or actions
committed within the course of employment or by the nature of the office,
employment or agency held.
   D.   The appointment of counsel shall be made by the President, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The President, with the consent of
the Board of Trustees, may terminate such appointment at any time. Appointed
counsel shall be paid up to the time his employment is terminated. No officer,
employee or agent shall be entitled to reimbursement unless he notifies the
Clerk and Village Attorney in writing within fifteen (15) days after receiving
first notice that a claim, action or investigation is being made or instituted
against him. No officer, employee or agent shall be entitled to reimbursement
if he does not accept the offer of appointed counsel. No officer, employee or
agent shall be entitled to reimbursement if he refuses to cooperate in the
investigation of any matter or claim, including the taking of a polygraph
examination or breathalyzer test. No officer, employee or agent shall be
entitled to reimbursement if he does not cooperate in the defense of the suit,
action or claim.
   E.   The Village shall have the right and duty to defend any suit against
any officer, employee or agent, or any former officer, employee or agent, for
breach of duty made against that person by reason of any negligent act, error
or omission, including misfeasance, malfeasance and nonfeasance, or any other
claim, arising out of the scope of duties of said person.
1-19-4: INDEMNIFICATION:
The Village shall indemnify and hold harmless any officer, employee or agent of
the Village, or any former officer, employee or agent of the Village, from any
and all liability, lawsuits or damages any such person may suffer as a result
of claims, demands, costs or judgment against him for actions or inactions
within the scope of his employment or duties, and the Village shall further
indemnify him for any damages awarded or monies paid in compromise or
settlement.
No indemnification shall be made where there is adequate insurance, nor where
there is a finding of guilty in a criminal or quasi-criminal case and fines or
penalties are assessed.
No officer, employee or agent of the Village, or former officer, employee or
agent of the Village, shall be entitled to indemnification unless he notifies
the Village Clerk and Village Attorney in writing within fifteen (15) days
after receiving first notice that a claim, action or investigation is being
made or instituted against him. No officer, employee or agent of the Village,
or former officer, employee or agent of the Village, shall be entitled to
indemnification if he does not accept the offer of appointed counsel. No
officer, employee or agent of the Village, or former officer, employee or agent
of the Village, shall be entitled to indemnification if he refuses to cooperate
in the investigation of any matter or claim, including the taking of a
polygraph examination or breathalyzer test. No officer, employee or agent of
the Village, or former officer, employee or agent of the Village, shall be
entitled to indemnification if he does not cooperate in the defense of the
suit, action or claim.
1-19-5: CLAIMS:
This Chapter shall apply to any claims heretofore or hereafter made coming
within the terms of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 86-0-413, 3-3-86)
CHAPTER 20
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-20-1: Creation Of Position; Appointment; Term
1-20-2: Compensation
1-20-3: Functions, Duties, Authority
1-20-1: CREATION OF POSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby created the position of village administrator. The village
administrator shall be appointed and removed by the president and board of
trustees acting jointly. The administrator shall be chosen on the basis of his/
her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his/
her actual experience in or his/her knowledge of accepted practice in respect
to the duties of his/her office hereinafter set forth.
The village administrator shall remain in the position so long as he/she
performs his/her duties to the satisfaction of the president and the board of
trustees.
The village administrator may be removed by the village board by a majority
vote of the entire board at any time. The administrator may request a written
statement of the reasons for removal, which the village board shall furnish to
the administrator within twenty (20) days after the filing of such request.
During this period, the administrator may be suspended from the position with
or without pay. The action of the village board in removing the administrator
shall be final. (Ord. 08-O-1005, 2-4-2008)
1-20-2: COMPENSATION:
The village administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. 08-O-
1005, 2-4-2008)
1-20-3: FUNCTIONS, DUTIES, AUTHORITY:
The village administrator shall be an administrative position of the village,
under the direction of the corporate authorities. The administrator is
responsible to the president and board of trustees. The administrator may head
one or more departments, and shall be responsible to the corporate authorities
for the proper administration of all affairs of the village, excepting such
affairs or matters as the president and board of trustees may from time to time
determine shall be under their direct control and supervision. All provisions
herein contained shall be subject to the exceptions set forth in the
immediately preceding sentence. To the ends hereinbefore contemplated, but
subject to the exceptions and qualifications hereinbefore set forth, the
village administrator shall have power and shall be required with diligence to:
(Ord. 08-O-1005, 2-4-2008; amd. Ord. 13-O-001, 3-19-2013)
   A.   Administer and enforce all policies, directives, laws, and ordinances
adopted by the corporate authorities; to oversee the administration of all
municipal departments; to review departmental procedures and to see that
recommendations are carried out. (Ord. 08-O-1005, 2-4-2008)
   B.   Act as the village's administrative position responsible for the day to
day administrative operations of the village based on the corporate
authorities' recommendations; to administer village personnel rules, policies,
and procedures; to appoint and remove employees of the village; to recommend
appointments and removal of department heads of the village subject to the
consent of the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 08-O-1005, 2-4-2008; amd.
Ord. 13-O-001, 3-19-2013)
   C.   Be responsible for preparing the agenda for all regular and special
meetings of the board. The agenda and supporting material shall be delivered to
the president and each board member two (2) days preceding each regular
meeting.
   D.   Prepare annual operating and capital improvement budgets for all
municipal departments and submit them together with the administrator's
opinions and recommendations covering their important features to the corporate
authorities for their review and approval; to prepare the annual budget
ordinance and be responsible for the administration and implementation of the
budget; to act as chief purchasing agent for the village, or in the
alternative, as supervisor of all purchasing which may be done by the various
department heads through appropriate control systems as established and
approved by the corporate authorities; to prepare long range capital
expenditure programs for the village for consideration and approval in concept
by the corporate authorities.
   E.   Prepare and submit to the village board as of the end of the fiscal
year, a complete report on the finances and the administrative activities of
the village for the preceding year.
   F.   Recommend to the corporate authorities the adoption of such measures as
may be deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety, or welfare of the
community, or for the improvement of the services rendered by the village when
such measures require action by the corporate authorities.
   G.   Furnish the corporate authorities with such background support
information as may be requested on any subject to enable them to make a
decision.
   H.   Attend all meetings of the corporate authorities and to take part in
the discussion of all matters coming before them, but with no right to vote.
   I.   Attend meetings of village committees and commissions.
   J.   Be responsible for investigating all complaints received in relation to
matters concerning the administration of the village and the services
maintained and provided by the village, and to direct communications activities
to keep the public informed of village plans and operations.
   K.   Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the
village and the location of such property. The administrator shall be
responsible for the care and custody, or supervise the preparation and care of
all records of the village except as otherwise required by law.
   L.   Develop and implement such procedures, with the approval of the
corporate authorities, as may be necessary to ensure that the affairs of the
village are handled on a professional and businesslike basis.
   M.   Perform such other duties as may be required by the village board or
the president, not inconsistent with the village ordinances or the law. (Ord.
08-O-1005, 2-4-2008)
CHAPTER 21
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-21-1: Creation Of Position, Appointment
1-21-2: Functions, Duties, Authority
1-21-1: CREATION OF POSITION, APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the position of director of public works. The director
of public works shall be appointed by the president and board of trustees
voting jointly. (Ord. 89-O-510, 10-3-1989)
1-21-2: FUNCTIONS, DUTIES, AUTHORITY:
The director of public works shall be authorized and required with diligence
to:
   A.   Have charge and supervision over the operation, maintenance, repair,
and replacement of all dedicated public improvements, including, but not
limited to: streets, rights of way, sidewalks, municipal buildings and grounds,
parks, municipal lighting, sanitary sewer systems and stormwater facilities.
(Ord. 15-O-022, 12-15-2015)
   B.   Prepare the public works and sewage treatment plant budgets for
submission to the village administrator, together with a written report
describing the important features thereof and be responsible for their
administration after adoption.
   C.   Enforce all laws and ordinances relating to matters under his
supervision, direction or control.
   D.   Coordinate his activities with the village engineer with respect to the
installation or upgrading of public works facilities or infrastructure. (Ord.
89-O-510, 10-3-1989)
   E.   Perform such other duties as may be required by the village president,
or village board of trustees, not inconsistent with the village ordinances or
the law. (Ord. 89-O-510, 10-3-1989; amd. Ord. 13-O-001, 3-19-2013)
CHAPTER 22
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDINANCE VIOLATION ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
1-22-1: Enforcement
1-22-2: Offenses
1-22-3: Ticket Specifying Offenses
1-22-4: Judicial Review
1-22-1: ENFORCEMENT:
To facilitate the expeditious resolution of ordinance violations and the
collection of requisite fines, the village hereby establishes an administrative
ordinance violation enforcement mechanism. (Ord. 90-O-528, 4-2-1990)
1-22-2: OFFENSES:
In the event that a person is charged with violating any of the following
described sections of this code, the village may elect to proceed initially
with this administrative enforcement program. The offenses which come within
the terms of this program are as follows:
Section Violation 5 Day Payment 15 Day Payment 25 Day Payment
Section     Violation              5 Day Payment 15 Day Payment 25 Day Payment
3-4-15      Peddler and Solicitor  $ 50.00       $ 100.00       $ 150.00
5-20 et al. Sign violations        50.00         100.00         150.00
7-4-1A      Deposit material on    50.00         100.00         150.00
            public way
8-1-1A      Noise (general)        50.00         100.00         150.00
8-1-2       Noise (specific)       50.00         100.00         150.00
8-1-3       Nuisance on public way 50.00         100.00         150.00
8-1-4       Nuisance signs         50.00         100.00         200.00
8-2-5       Dumping                50.00         100.00         150.00
8-10-1      Open burning           50.00         100.00         150.00
8-10-2      Violation of burning   50.00         100.00         150.00
            restrictions
9-6-14      False alarms (3rd and  50.00         100.00         150.00
            4th)
9-6-14      False alarms (5th      50.00         100.00         150.00
            through 10th)
9-6-14      False alarms (11th and 100.00        150.00         250.00
            above)
9-9-5       Fireworks              50.00         100.00         150.00
9-9-6       Littering              50.00         100.00         150.00
9-10-1      Violation of animal    50.00         100.00         150.00
            control ordinance
10-3-2      Illegal parking        50.00         100.00         150.00
10-5-1      Handicapped parking    250.00        –            500.00
            violation
10-6-2      Abandoned vehicles     50.00         100.00         150.00
10-7-1      Inoperative motor      50.00         100.00         150.00
            vehicle
 
(Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008; amd. Ord. 11-O-005, 2-1-2011, eff. 2-1-2011; Ord.
21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
1-22-3: TICKET SPECIFYING OFFENSES:
The defendant shall be provided with a "hang on ticket" that sets forth the
nature of the offense, the section of this code governing the offense, and the
date and time of the offense. The defendant may thereafter avoid prosecution by
paying the requisite fine. The requisite fine shall be as set forth in section
1-22-2 of this chapter. Unless otherwise so provided, the avoidance of
prosecution shall be as follows:
A defendant who is charged with a violation of any of the foregoing sections
may avoid prosecution as follows:
   A.   Within five (5) days from the date of issuance of the notice of
violation by paying to the village the amount listed in section
1-22-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Within fifteen (15) days from the date of issuance of the notice of
violation, by paying to the village the amount listed in section
1-22-2 of this chapter.
   C.   Within twenty five (25) days of the date of issuance of the notice of
violation by paying to the village the amount listed in section
1-22-2 of this chapter.
   D.   In the event the defendant does not pay the fines listed above by the
due dates, the village shall send notice to the defendant by mail of the
escalated fine amount and due date.
   E.   In the event that the ticket remains unpaid for twenty five (25) days,
the village shall send a final notice which shall indicate that if the fine is
not paid within the next ten (10) days that either a complaint will be filed
against the defendant or the ticket will be sent to an outside agency for
collection.
   F.   All remittances or fines may be made by check, money order, or
currency, and must be accompanied by a signed plea of guilty and waiver of
hearing.
   G.   In the event that the defendant fails to pay the fine within forty five
(45) days, the complaint shall either be forwarded to the village attorney for
the filing of a complaint and issuance of summons or it shall be sent to an
outside agency for collection. (Ord. 02-O-852, 6-3-2002)
1-22-4: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
   A.   Upon receipt of a written request from the defendant for a court
hearing, the originating officer shall issue a nontraffic citation to the
defendant and shall set the hearing date for the next available traffic court
date for that officer.
   B.   Upon the issuance of a nontraffic citation to the defendant, the fines
and procedures set forth in this section shall be superseded by the order of
the court and the ticket shall not be sent out for collection. (Ord. 02-O-852,
6-3-2002)
CHAPTER 23
FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES
SECTION:
1-23-1: Discrimination In Employment
1-23-2: Discrimination By Contractors With The Village
1-23-3: Bidding On Village Contracts
1-23-4: Contracts With Village Of Kildeer
1-23-1: DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any department of the Village, or any Village
official, his or her agent or employee, for or on behalf of the Village to
refuse to employ, or to discharge any person, otherwise qualified, on account
of race, sex, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, sexual orientation,
age, matriculation, familial status or handicap or to discriminate for any of
said reasons in regard to tenure, terms or conditions of employment; to deny
promotion or increase in compensation solely for any of said reasons; to
publish offers of employment based on any such discrimination; to adopt or
enforce any rule or employment policy which discriminates between employees on
account of race, sex, creed, religion, national origin, sexual orientation,
matriculation, familial status, ancestry or age, except where such rule or
policy is consistent with the pension, retirement, and related laws of the
State. Further, that all persons with a physical or mental handicap shall be
free from discrimination unrelated to ability in hiring and promotion practices
of the Village. (Ord. 95-0-665, 7-5-95)
1-23-2: DISCRIMINATION BY CONTRACTORS WITH THE VILLAGE:
Every supplier of materials and services and all contractors doing business
with the Village shall be an "equal opportunity employer" as defined in section
2000(e) of chapter 21, title 42, of the United States Code Annotated, and
Federal Executive Orders 11246 and 11375 which are incorporated herein by
reference. (Ord. 95-0-665, 7-5-95)
1-23-3: BIDDING ON VILLAGE CONTRACTS:
The Village shall have the right, as a condition to bidding, to require
prospective contractors, bidders or suppliers to show that they are "equal
opportunity employers" as provided for by Federal law and Federal executive
order, and to ensure their compliance with the requirements and obligations of
the Human Rights Act, contained in 775 Illinois Compiled Statutes Article 2 and
5/2-105(A) of said Act pertaining to public contracts, which Act is
incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 95-0-665, 7-5-95)
1-23-4: CONTRACTS WITH VILLAGE OF KILDEER:
The provisions of Section
1-23-1 of this Chapter shall be incorporated as material parts of all contracts
to which the Village is a party. (Ord. 95-0-665, 7-5-95)
CHAPTER 24
STATE OF ILLINOIS ETHICS ACT
(Rep. by Ord. 13-O-014, 10-15-2013)
CHAPTER 25
TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
1-25-1: Definitions
1-25-2: Application Of Payments
1-25-3: Interest On Overdue Payments
1-25-4: Determination Of Tax Liability
1-25-5: Appeals
1-25-6: Credits And Refunds
1-25-7: Voluntary Disclosure
1-25-8: Liens
1-25-9: Penalty
1-25-1: DEFINITIONS:
CODE: The Kildeer village code, a codification of the ordinances of the village
of Kildeer.
TAX: Any pecuniary burden imposed by this village on individuals or entities to
support village government that is not a permit or other fee (excepting the
infrastructure maintenance fee), is not collected or administered by a
department or agency of the state of Illinois, or is not a tax on real property
under the Illinois property tax code 1 , including, but not limited to, any of
the following taxes that may now, or in the future be collected or administered
by this village:
   Amusement tax
   Cigarette tax
   Coin-operated games and devices tax
   Foreign fire insurance tax
   Hotel/motel tax
   Infrastructure maintenance fee
   Motor vehicle tax
   Real estate transfer tax
   Utility tax
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village administrator of the village or the village
administrator's designee. (Ord. MM-O-817, 11-6-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq.
1-25-2: APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS:
Notwithstanding any provision in this code to the contrary, any payment
designated by a taxpayer as payment of a particular tax liability shall be
applied to that taxpayer's liabilities pertaining to the particular tax as
follows: first to the interest accrued on outstanding tax liabilities; second
to the outstanding tax liability; third to any penalties due on outstanding tax
liabilities; and fourth to current tax liabilities. (Ord. MM-O-817, 11-6-2000,
eff. 1-1-2001)
1-25-3: INTEREST ON OVERDUE PAYMENTS:
Notwithstanding any provision in this code to the contrary, any tax not paid on
the date due shall accrue interest at one percent (1%) of the amount due for
each month or part of a month the tax remains unpaid. (Ord. MM-O-817, 11-6-
2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
1-25-4: DETERMINATION OF TAX LIABILITY:
To collect overdue taxes, a determination notice shall be sent to the taxpayer
by registered or certified mail no more than four (4) years after the end of
the calendar year when the tax was due; however, if less than seventy five
percent (75%) of the tax due was paid, a determination notice may be sent no
more than six (6) years after the end of the calendar year when the tax was
due.
All determinations of tax liability shall include notice of the following:
   A.   Reason for tax liability.
   B.   The amount of tax, interest and penalty due on the date of the
determination and information on how interest and penalties accrue.
   C.   Procedure for appeal.
   D.   Information regarding the right of the village to audit the taxpayer's
books and records for a particular period and its obligation to refund
overpayments. (Ord. MM-O-817, 11-6-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
1-25-5: APPEALS:
Any taxpayer may within forty five (45) days of the date of receipt of a
determination of tax liability or at any time before a current tax becomes due
seek a hearing before the tax administrator to appeal the tax liability.
For reasonable cause shown in writing by the taxpayer and full payment of the
amount of tax protested plus accrued interest due, the tax administrator shall
extend the forty five (45) day period for appeal after a determination has been
issued for up to an additional forty five (45) days. (Ord. MM-O-817, 11-6-2000,
eff. 1-1-2001)
1-25-6: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
Notwithstanding any provision in this code to the contrary, taxpayers may, in
writing, claim a credit or refund for payment of taxes, interest or penalties
paid in error for up to four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in
which the payment was made. Claims must include dates, amount paid, and an
explanation of the error that occurred. The tax administrator shall determine
whether a credit or refund is justified and shall respond to the taxpayer in
writing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the claim. Tax amounts paid in
error shall be returned plus five percent (5%) interest. (Ord. MM-O-817, 11-6-
2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
1-25-7: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
A taxpayer who has not received a written notice of an audit or determination
of a tax liability may seek disclosure of tax liability by applying to the tax
administrator in writing for voluntary disclosure of the taxpayer's liability
pertaining to a particular tax and agreeing to pay within ninety (90) days of
the date of the application, the tax due plus one percent (1%) interest per
month for all periods prior to filing the application but not more than four
(4) years prior thereto. The taxpayer shall be liable for any underpaid taxes
and accrued interest during the four (4) year time period but, except for the
taxes and interest due under this section, the taxpayer shall not be liable for
any taxes imposed prior to the date of the application for voluntary
disclosure. (Ord. MM-O-817, 11-6-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
1-25-8: LIENS:
In the first month of each year the tax administrator shall cause all liens
against taxpayers to be reviewed. The village shall at its sole expense release
improper liens, correct the taxpayer's credit record and correct any public
disclosure of said lien. (Ord. MM-O-817, 11-6-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
1-25-9: PENALTY:
   A.   A penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax due shall be
charged against any taxpayer whose tax payment is not made on or before the
date the tax is due.
   B.   A penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of tax due for the
period in which a report or return is required to be filed shall be charged
against any taxpayer who fails to file, before the date that a determination of
liability is issued, a report or return for that period.
   C.   Any penalty may be abated by the tax administrator if reasonable cause
for nonpayment or failure to file is shown. (Ord. MM-O-817, 11-6-2000, eff. 1-
1-2001)
CHAPTER 26
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
1-26-1: Adoption
1-26-2: Procedures, Not Exclusive
1-26-3: Violation Notice
1-26-4: Service
1-26-5: Administrative Hearing Proceeding; Generally
1-26-6: Administrative Hearing Proceeding; Automated Traffic Enforcement
Violations
1-26-7: Rules Of Evidence Shall Not Govern
1-26-8: Judicial Review
1-26-9: Enforcement Of Judgment
1-26-10: Impact On Existing Administrative Adjudication Systems
1-26-1: ADOPTION:
The village of Kildeer, Illinois, hereby adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-2.2-1 et seq., in its current form and as it may be amended from time to
time for the adjudication of village ordinance violations to the extent
permitted by the Illinois constitution. As used in this chapter, a "system of
administrative adjudication" means the adjudication of any violation found in
this code except for: a) proceedings under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
31.1-1 et seq., and b) except as provided for in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-208.3, any offense under the Illinois vehicle code, or any similar offense
that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles. (Ord. 08-O-
1011, 3-18-2008)
1-26-2: PROCEDURES, NOT EXCLUSIVE:
   A.   Other Methods Of Enforcement Not Precluded: The adoption by the village
of a system of administrative adjudication procedures does not preclude the
village from using other methods to enforce municipal ordinances, including,
but not limited to, relief in the circuit court for the nineteenth judicial
circuit, Lake County, Illinois.
   B.   Code Hearing Division Established: There is hereby established a code
hearing division in the village. The code hearing division shall have the
jurisdiction to adjudicate any violation of this code (previously and
hereinafter referred to as "code violations") as described in section
1-26-1 of this chapter.
   C.   Hearing Officer: Adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by a
hearing officer. The hearing officer must meet the requirements stated below
and shall be appointed by the corporate authorities of the village acting
jointly. The powers and duties of the hearing officer shall include:
      1.   Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the code violations;
      2.   Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony at the hearing, upon request of the parties or their representatives;
      3.   Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all the
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      4.   Issuing a determination, based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, of whether a code violation exists. The determination shall be in
writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision, and order,
including the fine, penalty, or action with which the defendant must comply;
and
      5.   Imposing penalties consistent with the applicable code provisions
and assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation,
except, however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have the authority
to: a) impose a penalty of incarceration, or b) impose a fine in excess of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
      6.   In addition to the powers as prescribed above, the hearing officer
shall have the authority to impose a sentence of community service not to
exceed twenty four (24) hours, and/or psychological or substance abuse
counseling in addition to, or in lieu of all or part of any other penalty
imposed by the hearing officer under this section. (Ord. 09-O-1045, 8-4-2009)
   D.   Training: Prior to conducting the administrative adjudication
proceedings, the hearing officer shall have successfully completed a formal
training program, which includes the following:
      1.   Instructions on rules of procedure of the administrative hearings
which they will conduct;
      2.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they
will adjudicate;
      3.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      4.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
   E.   Licensed Attorney: In addition, every hearing officer must be an
attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three
(3) years and be in good standing with the Illinois supreme court attorney
registration and disciplinary commission.
   F.   Written Pleading: A proceeding before the code hearing division shall
be instituted upon the filing of a written pleading by an authorized official
of the village.
   G.   Compensation: Authorization for compensation for a hearing officer
shall be made by the president and board of trustees through the village's
annual budget process. Compensation shall be determined by the village manager
within approved budget limitations. (Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
1-26-3: VIOLATION NOTICE:
   A.   A notice of any violation ("violation notice") shall be issued by the
persons authorized under this chapter, shall contain information as to the
nature of the violation, shall be certified, and shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the violation cited.
   B.   All full time and part time police officers, as well as other
specifically authorized individuals of any department of the village, shall
have the authority to issue violation notices.
   C.   Any individual authorized to issue violation notices who detects a
violation, is authorized to issue a violation notice thereof and shall serve
the violation notice in the manner set forth in this code.
   D.   The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be
certified by the person issuing the notice through signing his or her name to
the violation notice at the time of issuance.
   E.   The code hearing division shall retain the original or a facsimile of
the violation notice and keep it as a record in the ordinary course of
business.
   F.   The violation notice or a copy thereof shall be admissible in any
subsequent administrative or judicial proceeding to the extent permitted by
law. (Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
1-26-4: SERVICE:
   A.   Service of any violation notice shall be made within ten (10) days as
follows: (Ord. 12-O-001, 2-20-2012)
      1.   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present; or
      2.   Handing the notice to the person responsible for the ordinance
violation; or
      3.   Mailing the notice by certified mail to the person responsible for
the ordinance violation.
   B.   If service of notice is provided by mail for any violation notice or
for any hearing notice, said service shall be deemed sent and shall be complete
on the date the notice is deposited, postage prepaid, in the United States
mail. The counting of any time period as set forth in this code shall begin to
run on the date the notice is deposited, postage prepaid, in the United States
mail. (Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
1-26-5: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEEDING; GENERALLY:
   A.   Parties to administrative adjudication shall be afforded due process of
law, including notice and opportunity for hearing. Parties shall be served with
process in a manner reasonably calculated to give them actual notice,
including, as appropriate, personal service of process upon a party or its
employees or agents; service by mail at a party's address; or notice that is
posted upon the property where the code violation is found when the party is
the owner or manager of the property.
   B.   Parties shall be given notice of an adjudicatory hearing which includes
the type and nature of the code violation to be adjudicated, the date and
location of the adjudicatory hearing, the legal authority and jurisdiction
under which the hearing is to be held, and the penalties for failure to appear
at the hearing.
   C.   Parties shall be provided with an opportunity to give testimony at the
adjudicatory hearing and may be represented by counsel, present witnesses, and
cross examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request the hearing officer to
issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses
and the production of relevant documents.
   D.   When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a village
code violation finds a violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation
on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates:
      1.   The name and address of the defendant,
      2.   The type and nature of the violation,
      3.   The date and time the violation was observed, and
      4.   The initial hearing date for the violation. (Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-
2008)
   E.   The initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than forty
five (45) days after the date of the mailing or notification of the notice of
hearing. (Ord. 12-O-001, 2-20-2012)
   F.   One copy of the violation notice and report form shall be maintained in
the files of the code hearing division and shall be part of the record of the
hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual
representing the village in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of
the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and
one copy of the report form shall be served in person or by certified mail to
the defendant. (Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
1-26-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEEDING; AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT
VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Parties to administrative adjudication shall be afforded due process of
law, including notice and opportunity for hearing. Notices sent by mail as a
part of an automated traffic enforcement program as authorized by 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 shall be deemed to be proper notice of violation,
hearing, and determination of liability under this section.
   B.   Parties shall be provided with an opportunity to give testimony at the
adjudicatory hearing and may be represented by counsel, present witnesses, and
cross examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request the hearing officer to
issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses
and the production of relevant documents.
   C.   As provided for in section
10-2-9-11 of this code, affidavits containing written statements and other
documentary evidence provided by a nonresident violator may be reviewed in lieu
of a personal appearance by the violator. (Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
1-26-7: RULES OF EVIDENCE SHALL NOT GOVERN:
The formal and technical rules of evidence do not apply in the adjudicatory
hearing permitted under this chapter. Evidence, including hearsay, may be
admitted only if it is a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs. (Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
1-26-8: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by a hearing officer that a code violation does or does not
exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review
and shall be subject to review under the Illinois administrative review law and
may be filed with the clerk of the circuit court of Lake County, Illinois.
(Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
1-26-9: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
   A.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois administrative
review law are debts due and owing the village and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of the
nineteenth judicial circuit, Lake County, Illinois, for the purpose of
obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision, and order.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating
multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a person in such a proceeding.
(Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
1-26-10: IMPACT ON EXISTING ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEMS:
This chapter shall not affect the validity of systems of administrative
adjudication that were authorized by state law, including the village of
Kildeer ordinances, and in existence prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord.
08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
CHAPTER 27
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION POLICY
SECTION:
1-27-1: Established
1-27-2: Purpose And Definitions
1-27-3: Identification Of Red Flags
1-27-4: Detecting Red Flags
1-27-5: Preventing And Mitigating Identity Theft
1-27-6: Administration
1-27-1: ESTABLISHED:
The village of Kildeer ("village") developed this identity theft prevention
program ("program") pursuant to the federal trade commission's red flags rule
("rule"), which implements section 114 of the fair and accurate credit
transactions act of 2003. This program was developed with oversight and
approval of the village board and village administrator's office. (Ord. 09-O-
1047, 8-4-2009)
1-27-2: PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Requirements Of The Red Flags Rule: Under the red flags rule, every
financial institution and creditor is required to establish an "identity theft
prevention program" tailored to its size, complexity and the nature of its
operation. Each program must contain reasonable policies and procedures to:
      1.   Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts
and incorporate those red flags into the program;
      2.   Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program;
      3.   Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent
and mitigate identity theft; and
      4.   Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in
risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity
theft. (Ord. 09-O-1047, 8-4-2009)
   B.   Red Flags Rule Definitions: The red flags rule defines "identity theft"
as "fraud committed using the identifying information of another person" and a
"red flag" as a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.
   According to the rule, a municipality is a creditor subject to the rule
requirements. The rule defines a municipality as a "financial institution" and
"creditors" to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers,
utility providers, and telecommunications companies. Where nonprofit and
government entities defer payment for goods or services on a recurring basis,
they, too, are to be considered creditors.
   All the village's accounts that are individual village accounts held by
customers of the village whether residential, commercial or industrial are
covered by the rule. Under the rule, a "covered account" is: (Ord. 15-O-022,
12-15-2015)
      1.   Any account the village offers or maintains primarily for personal,
family or household purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions;
and
      2.   Any other account the village offers or maintains for which there is
a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of
the village from identity theft.
"Identifying information" is defined under the rule as "any name or number that
may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a
specific person", including: name, address, telephone number, social security
number, date of birth, government issued driver's license or identification
number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer or
taxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number, or
routing code. (Ord. 09-O-1047, 8-4-2009)
1-27-3: IDENTIFICATION OF RED FLAGS:
In order to identify relevant red flags, the village considers the types of
accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open its
accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous
experiences with identity theft. The village identifies the following red
flags, in each of the listed categories:
   A.   Notifications and warnings from credit reporting agencies:
      1.   Report of fraud accompanying a credit report;
      2.   Notice or report from a credit agency of a credit freeze on a
customer or applicant;
      3.   Notice or report from a credit agency of an active duty alert for an
applicant; and
      4.   Indication from a credit report of activity that is inconsistent
with a customer's usual pattern or activity.
   B.   Suspicious documents:
      1.   Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered
or inauthentic;
      2.   Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or
physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the document;
      3.   Other document with information that is not consistent with existing
customer information (such as if a person's signature on a check appears
forged); and
      4.   Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged.
   C.   Suspicious personal identifying information:
      1.   Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other
information the customer provides (example: inconsistent birth dates);
      2.   Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other
sources of information (for instance, an address not matching an address on a
credit report);
      3.   Identifying information presented that is the same as information
shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent;
      4.   Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent
activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing address);
      5.   Social security number presented that is the same as one given by
another customer;
      6.   An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of
another person;
      7.   A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information
on an application when reminded to do so (however, by law, social security
numbers must not be required); and
      8.   A person's identifying information is not consistent with the
information that is on file for the customer.
   D.   Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account:
      1.   Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the
account holder's name;
      2.   Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up to date account;
      3.   Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use
(example: very high activity);
      4.   Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as
undeliverable;
      5.   Notice to the village that an account has unauthorized activity;
      6.   Breach in the village's computer system security; and
      7.   Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information.
   E.   Alerts from others:
      1.   Notice to the village from a customer, identity theft victim, law
enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent
account for a person engaged in identity theft. (Ord. 09-O-1047, 8-4-2009)
1-27-4: DETECTING RED FLAGS:
   A.   New Accounts: In order to detect any of the red flags identified above
associated with the opening of a new account, village personnel will take the
following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the
account:
      1.   Require certain identifying information such as name, service
address, relationship to service address (owner or renter), mailing address,
telephone number, or other identification;
      2.   Verify existence of a business entity against the village's business
license database; and
      3.   Independently contact the customer if any information is
questionable in nature.
   B.   Existing Accounts: In order to detect any of the red flags identified
above for an existing account, village personnel will take the following steps
to monitor transactions with an account:
      1.   Verify the identification of customers if they request information
(If request from resident will only accept requests in person or via telephone.
If request from business can accept requests in person, via telephone, via e-
mail, via facsimile.);
      2.   Verify the validity of requests to change billing addresses; and
      3.   Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment
purposes. (Ord. 09-O-1047, 8-4-2009)
1-27-5: PREVENTING AND MITIGATING IDENTITY THEFT:
   A.   Red Flags Detected: In the event village personnel detect any
identified red flags, such personnel shall take one or more of the following
steps, depending on the degree of risk posed by the red flag:
      1.   Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft;
      2.   Contact the customer;
      3.   Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access to
accounts;
      4.   Reopen an account with a new number;
      5.   Notify the village administrator for determination of the
appropriate step(s) to take;
      6.   Notify law enforcement; or
      7.   Determine that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances.
   B.   Protect Customer Identifying Information: In order to further prevent
the likelihood of identity theft occurring with respect to village accounts,
the village will take the following steps with respect to its internal
operating procedures to protect customer identifying information:
      1.   Ensure that its website(s) used for account transactions is secure
or provide clear notice that the website(s) is not secure;
      2.   Ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and
computer files containing customer information;
      3.   Ensure that computer user accounts and computers are password
protected in compliance with the village's information systems security policy;
      4.   Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information;
      5.   Request only the last four (4) digits of social security numbers (if
any);
      6.   Discontinue use of any computers or systems known or reasonably
thought to be compromised until such time as the nature of the compromise or
potential compromise is understood; and
      7.   Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are
necessary for village purposes. (Ord. 09-O-1047, 8-4-2009)
1-27-6: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Updates: This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to
reflect changes in risks to customers and the soundness of the village from
identity theft.
   B.   Oversight: The village administrator will be responsible for the
program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of village staff on
the program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red
flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining
which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular
circumstances and considering periodic changes to the program.
   C.   Staff Training And Reports: Village staff responsible for implementing
the program shall be trained either by or under the direction of the village
administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be
taken when a red flag is detected.
   D.   Service Provider Arrangements: In the event the village engages a
service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more
accounts, the village will take the following steps to ensure the service
provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies and
procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity
theft:
      1.   Require that service providers have such policies and procedures in
place; and
      2.   Require that service providers review the village's program and
report any red flags to the village administrator. (Ord. 09-O-1047, 8-4-2009)
CHAPTER 28
CHIEF VILLAGE OFFICER
SECTION:
1-28-1: Creation Of Position; Appointment; Term
1-28-2: Compensation
1-28-3: Functions, Duties And Authority
1-28-1: CREATION OF POSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby created the position of chief village officer. The chief
village officer shall be appointed and removed by the president and board of
trustees acting jointly. The chief village officer shall be chosen on the basis
of his/her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference
to his/her actual experience in or his/her knowledge of accepted practice in
respect to the duties of his/her office hereinafter set forth.
The chief village officer shall remain in the position so long as he/she
performs his/her duties to the satisfaction of the president and the board of
trustees.
The chief village officer may be removed by the village board by a majority
vote of the entire board at any time. The chief village officer may request a
written statement of the reasons for removal, which the village board shall
furnish to the chief village officer within twenty (20) days after the filing
of such request. During this period, the chief village officer may be suspended
from the position with or without pay. The action of the village board in
removing the chief village officer shall be final. (Ord. 13-O-001, 3-19-2013)
1-28-2: COMPENSATION:
The chief village officer shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. 13-O-
001, 3-19-2013)
1-28-3: FUNCTIONS, DUTIES AND AUTHORITY:
The chief village officer shall be the chief administrative position of the
village of Kildeer and possess all of the functions, duties and authorities of
the following positions:
   Village administrator pursuant to section
1-20-3 of this title;
   Building commissioner pursuant to section
1-10-2 of this title;
   Zoning administrator pursuant to section
1-11-2 of this title; and
   Director of public works pursuant to section
1-21-2 of this title. (Ord. 13-O-001, 3-19-2013)
CHAPTER 29
FINANCE DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-29-1: Creation Of Position; Appointment; Term
1-29-2: Compensation
1-29-3: Functions, Duties And Authority
1-29-1: CREATION OF POSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby created the position of finance director. The finance director
shall be appointed and removed by the chief village officer. The finance
director shall be chosen on the basis of his/her executive and administrative
qualifications, with special reference to his/her actual experience in or his/
her knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his/her office
hereinafter set forth.
The finance director shall remain in the position so long as he/she performs
his/her duties to the satisfaction of the chief village officer.
The finance director may be removed by the chief village officer at any time.
The finance director may request a written statement of the reasons for
removal, which the chief village officer shall furnish to the finance director
within twenty (20) days after the filing of such request. During this period,
the finance director may be suspended from the position with or without pay.
The action of the chief village officer in removing the finance director shall
be final. (Ord. 13-O-002, 3-19-2013)
1-29-2: COMPENSATION:
The finance director shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from
time to time by the chief village officer. (Ord. 13-O-002, 3-19-2013)
1-29-3: FUNCTIONS, DUTIES AND AUTHORITY:
Under administrative direction, manage and coordinate accounting and budgeting
support operations including general accounting functions, payroll and accounts
receivable, accounts payable; monitor the annual operating budget; coordinate
assigned activities with the police department and outside agencies; and
provide highly responsible and complex administrative support to the chief
village officer and police chief.
The finance director shall be authorized and required with diligence to:
   A.   Assume management responsibility for assigned services and activities
of the village's accounting and budget support operations including general
accounting functions, payroll, accounts receivable, and accounts payable.
   B.   Manage and participate in the development and implementation of goals,
objectives, policies, and priorities for assigned programs; recommend and
administer policies and procedures.
   C.   Monitor and evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of service
delivery methods and procedures; recommend appropriate service and staffing
levels.
   D.   Participate in the development and administration of the village's
annual budget; participate in the forecasting of revenues and expenditures;
implement line item adjustments as directed by the chief village officer.
   E.   Oversee and evaluate current accounting systems and procedures; develop
and implement enhancements to current accounting practices.
   F.   Research and resolve a variety of complex accounting issues and
problems identified by the chief village officer.
   G.   Assist the chief village officer and police chief with the annual
operating budget preparation process.
   H.   Assist the chief village officer and police chief in developing and
overseeing expenditures associated with the village's capital improvement
program.
   I.   Participate in various financial reporting duties; oversee and
coordinate the annual financial statement preparation process; review and
prepare monthly, quarterly, and annual reports for management and the village
board.
   J.   Assist in monitoring and maintaining the village's computerized
municipal accounting and financial reporting system.
   K.   Meet with outside financial consultants and auditors to answer
questions and resolve problems.
   L.   Prepare and present various financial reports and analyses requested by
the chief village officer, police chief, and village board.
   M.   Recommend to the chief village officer and police chief modifications
to assigned financial programs, policies, and procedures as appropriate.
   N.   Attend and participate in professional group meetings; stay abreast of
new trends and innovations in the field of finance and accounting.
   O.   Perform related duties as required. (Ord. 13-O-002, 3-19-2013)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLAN COMMISSION/BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Created
2-1-2: Membership, Terms
2-1-3: Meetings, Organization
2-1-4: Jurisdiction And Authority
2-1-1: CREATED:
A combined plan commission/board of appeals is hereby created. (Ord. 05-O-942,
11-7-2005)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP, TERMS:
The plan commission/board of appeals shall consist of a chairman and six (6)
other members to be appointed by the village president and confirmed by a
majority vote of the board of trustees to serve respectively for the following
terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one
for four (4) years, one for five (5) years, one for six (6) years, and one for
seven (7) years, the successor to each member so appointed to serve for a term
of five (5) years. Any member of the plan commission/board of appeals,
including the chairman, may be removed from office by the village president and
a majority of the board of trustees acting together. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term of any member whose place has become vacant. (Ord. 05-O-
942, 11-7-2005)
2-1-3: MEETINGS, ORGANIZATION:
All meetings of the plan commission/board of appeals shall be held at the call
of the chairman or at such other times as the plan commission/board of appeals
shall determine. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in the
zoning regulations 1  of this code shall be given under oath. The chairman, or
in his absence the vice chairman or the secretary, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the plan commission/board
of appeals shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its
examinations and other official actions.
Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case of a requested
variation, specifying the reasons for making or denying such variation. Every
rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order,
requirement, decision or determination of the plan commission/board of appeals
shall immediately be filed in the office of the plan commission/board of
appeals and shall be a public record. The plan commission/board of appeals
shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with Illinois law.
The plan commission/board of appeals shall give its recommendations on matters
as authorized by the zoning regulations of this code in a specific case and
after a public hearing. A concurring vote of four (4) members of the plan
commission/board of appeals shall be necessary on any matter which it is
authorized to decide by this chapter. (Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5 of this code.
2-1-4: JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY:
The plan commission/board of appeals is hereby vested with the following
jurisdiction and authority:
   A.   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a comprehensive
plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the
municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or
functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official
comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the village. This plan may include
reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys, public grounds, and
other improvements hereinafter specified. The plan, as recommended by the plan
commission/board of appeals and as thereafter adopted by the village board of
trustees, may be made applicable, by the terms thereof, to land situated within
the corporate limits and contiguous territory not more than one and one-half
(11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality.
Such plan may be implemented by ordinances: 1) establishing reasonable
standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land
and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as
herein defined; 2) establishing reasonable requirements governing the location,
width, course, and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for
public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and
sewage collection and treatment; and 3) may designate land suitable for
annexation to the municipality and the recommended zoning classification for
such land upon annexation.
   B.   To recommend changes, from time to time, in the official comprehensive
plan.
   C.   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities, from time to
time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the official
comprehensive plan.
   D.   To give aid to the municipal officials charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the
making of these projects, and, generally, to promote the realization of the
official comprehensive plan.
   E.   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities schemes for
regulating or forbidding structures or activities which may hinder access to
solar energy necessary for the proper functioning of solar energy systems, as
defined in section 1.2 of the comprehensive solar energy act of 1977, 30
Illinois Compiled Statutes 725/1.2, or to recommend changes in such schemes.
   F.   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by this
chapter as may be conferred by the corporate authorities.
   G.   To hear and decide an appeal from an administrative order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the building inspector under this chapter and
to report its recommendations to the village board.
   H.   To hear all other matters referred to it upon which it is required to
decide under this chapter and to report its recommendations to the village
board. (Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
(Rep. by Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
CHAPTER 3
POLICE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Creation of Commission
2-3-2: Qualifications
2-3-3: Duties
2-3-4: Rules
2-3-5: Chairman
2-3-6: Secretary of the Commission
2-3-1: CREATION OF COMMISSION:
There is hereby created a Police Commission, consisting of three (3) members,
whose function shall be solely advisory to the Village Board.
The term of each member of the Police Commission shall be for six (6) years or
until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified.
2-3-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The members of the Commission shall possess the qualifications required of
other officers of the Village, and shall take an oath in the same manner as
other appointed officers of the Village. Due to the nature of personnel matters
involved, members of the Police Commission shall also take an oath of
confidentiality. They shall be subject to removal as are other Village
officers.
2-3-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Recommendation of Appointment: Upon presentation of candidates by the
Chief of Police, the Police Commission shall examine candidates and recommend
appointments to the Village President and Board of Trustees.
   B.   Recommendation of Promotion: Upon recommendation of promotion by the
Chief of Police, the Police Commission shall examine candidates, and recommend
appropriate promotions to the Village President and Board of Trustees.
   C.   Disciplinary Action: The Police Commission shall hear appeals from
suspensions in excess of five (5) days, and any other appeals permitted by the
rules and regulations. The Police Commission, after a hearing, may terminate a
Police Department member for cause.
   D.   Other Actions: The Police Commission shall take action on such other
matters as directed or requested by the Village President, Village
Administrator, or Chief of Police.
2-3-4: RULES:
The Police Commission may adopt rules to carry out the purpose and duties of
this Chapter. The Police Commission from time to time may make changes in these
rules. These rules of the Commission shall apply only to the conduct of
examinations for original appointments, for promotions, and to the conduct of
hearings on charges brought against a member of the Police Department. All of
these rules and changes therein shall be on file with the Village
Administrator. The Village Attorney shall be the attorney representing the
Police Commission.
2-3-5: CHAIRMAN:
The Village President shall appoint one of the members to act as chairman. The
chairman shall preside over Commission meetings.
2-3-6: SECRETARY OF THE COMMISSION:
The Police Commission shall designate one of its members to act as secretary.
The secretary shall keep the minutes of the Commission's proceedings, shall be
custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the Commission, and
perform such duties as the Commission shall prescribe. (Ord. 90-0-557, 12-3-90)
CHAPTER 4
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
2-4-1: Establishment
2-4-2: Coordinator
2-4-3: Functions
2-4-4: Service As Mobile Support Team
2-4-5: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
2-4-6: Emergency Action
2-4-7: Compensation
2-4-8: Reimbursement By State
2-4-9: Purchases And Expenditures
2-4-10: Oath
2-4-11: Office
2-4-12: Appropriation; Levy Of Taxes
2-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Kildeer emergency management agency (EMA) to
prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from
disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from
natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with the "Illinois emergency
management agency act". (Ord. 06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
2-4-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the village EMA shall be appointed by the president and
shall serve until removed by same.
The coordinator may designate such person as deemed necessary to act as deputy
coordinator; that person having the full power and responsibility of the
coordinator in the absence of the coordinator.
The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the EMA, subject to the direction and
control of the president, as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
coordinator, the president or any person designated by him, shall be and act as
coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this section. (Ord.
06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
2-4-3: FUNCTIONS:
The village EMA shall perform such EMA functions within the village as shall be
prescribed in and by the state EMA plan and program prepared by the governor,
and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor,
and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may
be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the
"Illinois emergency management agency act". (Ord. 06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
2-4-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the village EMA organization may be designated as members
of a mobile support team created by the director of the state EMA as provided
by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the coordinator
of the village EMA organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the village, while so serving, shall receive from the state
reasonable compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
2-4-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator of EMA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities or
political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective
until it has been approved by the village board and by the state director of
EMA or designee. (Ord. 06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
2-4-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the
village EMA to cooperate fully with the state EMA and with the governor in the
exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
2-4-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the EMA who are paid employees or officers of the village, if called
for training by the state director of EMA, shall receive for the time spent in
such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members
who are not such village employees or officers shall receive for such training
time such compensation as may be established by the president. (Ord. 06-O-979,
10-2-2006)
2-4-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The village treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the EMA prescribed by the state director of EMA, compensation for
services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside
the village in response to a call by the governor or state director of EMA, as
provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to EMA
activities as provided by law. (Ord. 06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
2-4-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The village board, on recommendation of the village coordinator of EMA, may
authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the village in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the village coordinator of EMA
is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or obligations, as authorized
by the "Illinois emergency management agency act"; provided, that if the
village board meets at such time, he shall act subject to the discretion and
restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord. 06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
2-4-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the village EMA organization
shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe the following oath, which
shall be filed with the coordinator:
I                        do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public
and private against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this
obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and
that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to
enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor
have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the Government of the United States, or of this State, by force or
violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Kildeer EMA
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
2-4-11: OFFICE:
The village president is authorized to designate space in a village building,
or elsewhere, as may be provided for the president for the village EMA as its
office. (Ord. 06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
2-4-12: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The village board may make an appropriation for EMA purposes in the manner
provided by law, and may levy in addition for EMA purposes only, a tax not to
exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed
value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by
the "Illinois emergency management agency act"; provided, however, that the
amount collectible under such levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents
($0.25) per capita. (Ord. 06-O-979, 10-2-2006)
CHAPTER 5
BOARD OF HEALTH AND HEALTH DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2-5-1: Board Of Health
2-5-1: BOARD OF HEALTH:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created and established a board of health for
the village. The board of health shall be the Lake County health department.
   B.   Rules And Regulations: The rules and regulations of the Lake County
health department shall govern all such matters within the village of Kildeer.
(Ord. 05-O-938, 6-6-2005)
CHAPTER 6
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-6-1: Board Created; Adoption Of State Code
2-6-2: Officers Of The Board; Minutes
2-6-3: Regular Meetings
2-6-4: Special Meetings
2-6-5: Meeting Place
2-6-6: Abatements
2-6-1: BOARD CREATED; ADOPTION OF STATE CODE:
   A.   There is hereby created and established a Board of Local Improvements
for the Village which shall be composed of the President and six (6) Trustees.
   B.   The provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-1 through 5/9-2-
144 of the Illinois Municipal Code are hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 94-O-
666, 7-5-1994)
2-6-2: OFFICERS OF THE BOARD; MINUTES:
   A.   The officers of the Board of Local Improvements shall consist of the
president who shall be the Village President and vice president who shall be
one of the Trustees. The vice president shall be elected on or about June 30 or
as soon as thereafter is feasible and shall serve in such office until June 30
of the next year.
   B.   Minutes shall be maintained by the secretary with copies to the Village
Clerk. The Village Attorney shall serve as the secretary. Financial records of
any assessments shall be kept by the Village Treasurer. (Ord. 94-O-666, 7-5-
1994)
2-6-3: REGULAR MEETINGS:
The Board of Local Improvements shall hold regularly scheduled meetings. Notice
of those regularly scheduled meetings shall be filed annually. (Ord. 94-O-666,
7-5-1994)
2-6-4: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
Special meetings of the Board of Local Improvements may be called at any time
on call of the president or any three (3) or more members. Such call shall be
in writing and shall specify the business that will come before the meeting.
The secretary shall give two (2) days', excluding day of notice and day of
meeting, previous notice thereof in writing and as may be required by law to
each member of the Board of Local Improvements. (Ord. 94-O-666, 7-5-1994)
2-6-5: MEETING PLACE:
All meetings of the Board of Local Improvements shall be held in the same
building where the President and Board of Trustees hold their meetings unless
otherwise provided for by the Board of Local Improvements. (Ord. 94-O-666, 7-5-
1994)
2-6-6: ABATEMENTS:
Whenever the Board of Local Improvements finds that the public benefit
assessment exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the total amount assessed
against public and private property, the Board may provide for any excess to be
abated pursuant to section 9-2-114 of the Local Improvement Act to be abated
and the judgment reduced entirely to said public benefit assessment. (Ord. 99-
O-789, 4-5-1999)
CHAPTER 7
ARCHITECTURE COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-7-1: Committee Established; Membership
2-7-2: Intent And Purpose
2-7-3: Duties; Review Required
2-7-4: Administration; Standards For Review
2-7-5: Reports And Recommendations
2-7-6: Applicant's Opportunity For Comment Or Rebuttal
2-7-1: COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby established an architecture committee which shall consist of a
maximum of five (5) members, all of whom shall be residents of the village and
who shall serve without pay. Additionally, the building commissioner and
village administrator shall serve as members. All members shall be appointed by
the president subject to advice and consent of the board of trustees, based
upon their particular fitness to be members, and shall have training or
experience in art, architecture, community planning, design, land development,
landscape architecture, or other relevant business, interests, or professions.
One member shall be appointed chairman by the president. The member appointees
to the committee shall serve for a term of four (4) years. Vacancies in the
membership shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments. (Ord.
11-O-014, 6-21-2011)
The president or board of trustees shall have the power to remove any member at
any time without cause.
All meetings shall be held at the call of the building commissioner. Any
recommendation must receive the concurrence of a majority of the members
present at a meeting. The committee shall keep records of its findings
including a record showing the vote of each member. The building commissioner
shall be the custodian of all building files, including architecture committee
reports, recommendations, documents, exhibits and other material pertaining to
the conduct of the affairs of the committee.
The committee shall have the power to adopt, amend or repeal its own procedural
regulations from time to time, provided the same are not inconsistent with law
or this chapter. (Ord. 98-O-785, 12-7-1998)
2-7-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The architecture committee is established to promote and maintain the high
character of the development of the village, to preserve, protect and promote
the general welfare and to protect property values. The committee is to
consider general design, arrangement, continuity of elevations, texture,
material and color of the building and structure in question, and the relation
of such factors to similar features of buildings and structures in the
immediate neighborhood. The committee shall review all building plans and
building permit applications. (Ord. 97-O-737, 1-4-1997)
2-7-3: DUTIES; REVIEW REQUIRED:
The architecture committee shall be solely an advisory body of the village
government, and shall have the following powers and duties: (Ord. 97-O-737, 1-
4-1997)
   A.   To consult with and advise, the village board, plan commission/board of
appeals and building commissioner regarding all matters within their above
stated jurisdiction and expertise. (Ord. 97-O-737, 1-4-1997; amd. Ord. 05-O-
942, 11-7-2005)
   B.   To review and make recommendations regarding all new building within
the village, as the proposed building relates to exterior architectural design,
continuity of design, arrangement, height and appearance, color and texture of
the materials of the exterior construction, and similar matters, including
aesthetic factors, and all as within their above stated jurisdiction and
expertise.
   C.   To make recommendations regarding advisable amendments to existing
codes, ordinances and regulations of the village.
   D.   To make recommendations as to the refund of completion bonds pursuant
to subsection
4-2-3A of this code.
   E.   To hold hearings and make recommendations regarding playground
certificates and fences pursuant to this code.
   F.   Any other matters assigned to the committee by the building
commissioner or the board of trustees. (Ord. 97-O-737, 1-4-1997)
2-7-4: ADMINISTRATION; STANDARDS FOR REVIEW:
Upon receipt of an application for a building permit, and upon receipt of
plans, drawings, specifications, architectural renderings or other similar
documentation regarding a proposed building(s) by which the same can be
reasonably evaluated, whichever first occurs, the building commissioner shall
file with the committee a copy of the application and all documentation
submitted therewith, which should include a site and layout plan and
specifications. Sufficient copies of all such documentation shall be required
to be submitted by the applicant in order to comply with this provision. The
architecture committee shall review any such application within thirty (30)
days from the date of referral. In reviewing said applications as submitted,
the committee shall give consideration to the following:
   A.   The architectural value and significance of the structure or its site.
   B.   The relationship of the exterior architectural features of the proposed
structure to the existing structures and to the surrounding area.
   C.   The compatibility and continuity of exterior design, arrangement,
texture and material to be used with that used in the surrounding area.
   D.   Compatibility in relation to other property in the surrounding area,
and orientation of building to site.
   E.   The building code provisions of title 4, chapter 9 of this code.
   F.   The architectural review criteria 1 . (Ord. 97-O-737, 1-4-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. Available for inspection in the village administrator's office.
2-7-5: REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
After review and due consideration of each application, the committee shall
submit to the building commissioner its findings and recommendations regarding
the application, particularly in relation to the standards set forth in section
2-7-4 of this chapter. Any such written report of the committee shall be signed
by all members of the committee in attendance. In the event the committee fails
to submit its written report to the building commissioner within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of the application, plans, etc., then it shall be
deemed that the committee finds that said application, plans, etc., are
acceptable and that the committee's recommendation is favorable. (Ord. 97-O-
737, 1-4-1997)
2-7-6: APPLICANT'S OPPORTUNITY FOR COMMENT OR REBUTTAL:
Any applicant desiring to comment upon or rebut the findings and
recommendations of the committee may do so by submitting its comments or
rebuttal in writing to the building commissioner for his consideration. Any
such applicant is encouraged to present any oral comments or rebuttal directly
to the committee at its meeting on the application or at subsequent meetings.
(Ord. 97-O-737, 1-4-1997)
CHAPTER 8
POLICE PENSION FUND
SECTION:
2-8-1: Established
2-8-2: Board Of Trustees
2-8-3: Powers And Duties
2-8-4: Operation Of Fund
2-8-1: ESTABLISHED:
Pursuant to the referendum approved at the November 7, 2006 election, there is
hereby created and established a police pension fund in and for the village of
Kildeer, Lake County, Illinois, in accordance with 40 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (the "act") for the benefit of all full time police
officers entitled to participate in said Kildeer police pension fund. (Ord. 06-
O-984, 12-19-2006)
2-8-2: BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The board of trustees of the Kildeer police pension fund is hereby created for
the administration of said fund. The members of said board shall be set as
provided for in the act, and all amendments thereto. (Ord. 06-O-984, 12-19-
2006)
2-8-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The rights, powers, duties and functions of the board of trustees of the
Kildeer pension fund (the "board") and the members thereof, and the rights and
benefits of the various beneficiaries of the Kildeer police pension fund shall
be and are hereby declared to be as provided by law and, particularly, in
accordance with the act, and all amendments thereto. (Ord. 06-O-984, 12-19-
2006)
2-8-4: OPERATION OF FUND:
   A.   The board shall be appointed and elected as provided by the act.
   B.   All monies and securities belonging to the Kildeer police pension fund
shall be held by the village treasurer subject to the order of the board.
   C.   An annual list of beneficiaries and report of funds shall be made by
the board as required by law.
   D.   Members of the board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 06-O-984,
12-19-2006)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: License Year
3-1-1: LICENSE YEAR:
The license year for all annual licenses and permits required by any ordinance
of the village shall commence on July 1 of each year and shall terminate at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on June 30 of the following year. (Ord. 69-O-
159, 11-6-1969)
CHAPTER 2
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-2-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-2-3: Municipal Use Tax
3-2-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the village at the rate of two percent
(2.0%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this chapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.3.
   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or
before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department
of revenue required by section three of “an act in relation to tax upon persons
engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to purchasers for
use or consumption”1, approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state
department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
(Ord. 69-O-158, 10-1-1969; amd. Ord. 12-O-007, 4-25-2012; Ord. 24-O-021, 9-17-
2024; Ord. 24-O-025, 12-17-2024)
3-2-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of making
sales of service in the village at the rate of two percent (2.0%) of the cost
price of all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either
in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.4.
   Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of the village shall file, on or before the last
day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue
required by section nine of the “service occupation tax act” 1 , approved July
10, 1961, as amended.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state
department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Ord. 69-O-157, 10-1-
1969; amd. Ord. 12-O-007, 4-25-2012; Ord. 24-O-021, 9-17-2024; Ord. 24-O-025,
12-17-2024)
 
Notes
1 1 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
3-2-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 8-11-
6 of the Illinois municipal code upon the privilege of using in the village any
item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at
retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of
Illinois government. The tax shall be at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the meaning
as defined in the use tax act 1 , approved July 14, 1955.
   Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.
(Ord. 74-O-199, 11-7-1974)
 
Notes
1 2   35 ILCS 105/2.
CHAPTER 3
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Liquor Control Commissioner, Powers
3-3-3: License Required
3-3-4: License Procedure
3-3-5: License Fees And Conditions
3-3-6: License Classifications
3-3-7: Liquor License Renewals
3-3-8: License Restrictions
3-3-9: Location Restrictions
3-3-10: Closing Hours
3-3-11: Sanitary Regulations
3-3-12: Employment Or Hiring Practices
3-3-13: Inspection
3-3-14: Minors, Restrictions
3-3-15: Acts Of Agents Or Employees
3-3-16: Comply With Other Regulations
3-3-17: Revocation Of License
3-3-18: Penalty
3-3-19: Local Liquor Commission Orders
3-3-20: Consumption And Possession Restrictions
3-3-21: Employee Training Requirements
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this chapter, which are defined in an act
entitled "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", approved January 21, 1934, as
amended, shall have the same meaning ascribed to such words and phrases in said
act 1 . (Ord. 93-O-631, 1-11-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
3-3-2: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER, POWERS:
   A.   The village president shall be the liquor control commissioner.
   B.   The liquor commissioner shall appoint two (2) trustees to assist him in
the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties of such liquor
commissioner. (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
   C.   The liquor commissioner, together with the trustees so appointed by
him, shall have all the powers granted local liquor commissions, as provided
for in the act entitled "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", approved
January 31, 1934, as amended 1 . (Ord. 93-O-631, 1-11-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
3-3-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall sell, barter, transport, deliver, solicit or receive orders
for, keep or expose for sale, keep with intent to sell, or furnish any
alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes for sale at retail without being first
licensed to do so by the village board. (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
3-3-4: LICENSE PROCEDURE:
   A.   Applications for licenses to sell alcoholic liquor at retail shall be
made to the village president as liquor control commissioner on forms furnished
by him. Said applications shall be made not less than sixty (60) days prior to
the date for which the license is sought.
   B.   Applications shall be executed in triplicate by the applicant seeking
license, shall be under oath stating all material information required in
article VI, section 1 of said "act relating to alcoholic liquors" 1 . Initial
application shall be accompanied by a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00)
nonrefundable application fee. (Ord. 91-O-563, 2-4-1991)
   C.   The liquor control commission shall make whatever investigations are
necessary to verify the application data before presentation to the village
board for approval.
   D.   The liquor control commissioner, acting on a majority affirmative vote
of the liquor control commission, shall present the application to the Village
Board for approval. A two-thirds (2/3) majority shall be required for approval,
and upon approval by the Village Board, the license shall be granted upon
receipt of the following within a period of thirty (30) days after approval of
the license application:
      1.   Payment of the license fee to the Village Clerk by certified or
cashier's check. (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
      2.   Proof of insurance including dramshop coverage in the amount of at
least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). (Ord. 10-O-012, 6-15-2010)
   E.   No license shall be issued to any person who is ineligible under 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-2, which statute is hereby adopted herewith by
reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 93-O-631, 1-11-1993)
 
Notes
1 2. 235 ILCS 5/7-1.
3-3-5: LICENSE FEES AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   The license shall be granted for a period of one year, and the license
period shall commence July 1.
   B.   The annual license fee shall be as follows:
Class A   $3,000.00
Class A.1 4,000.00
Class B   3,000.00
Class B.1 4,000.00
Class C   2,500.00
Class D   2,000.00
Class E   1,500.00
Class F   1,500.00
Class G   20.00 per day
Class H   3,000.00
Class I   2,000.00
Class J   2,000.00
Class K   3,000.00
Class L   250.00
Class M   4,000.00
 
Applications filed less than six (6) months prior to the end of the license
year shall be charged one-half (½) of the foregoing license fees for that
partial year. No rebates shall be made.
   C.   A license shall be a personal privilege for the license period, which
shall expire on June 30 next following the date of issuance, unless sooner
revoked, and shall not constitute property nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. In case of death of a licensee, the license and the renewal
rights may descend to the heirs, executors or administrators of the estate of
any deceased licensee for the balance of the license period.
   D.   Each license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only on the premises described in the application and license. Each location
must comply with the zoning regulations 1  of the Village and all other
applicable ordinances. (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963; amd. Ord. 76-O-237, 8-5-1976;
Ord. 16-O-027, 12-20-2016; Ord. 21-O-027, 12-21-2021)
 
Notes
1    See title 5 of this Code.
3-3-6: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
Class A - retail sale of alcoholic liquor for use and consumption on or off
premises; food service may be included.
   Number of licenses - 0
Class A.1 - retail sale of alcoholic liquor for use and consumption on or off
premises with expanded hours; food service may be included. Wine and beer
tasting is permitted no more than once a week, except for the period from
November 15 to December 31 when wine and beer tasting is permitted no more than
twice a week.
   Number of licenses - 1
Class B - retail sale of alcoholic liquor for use and consumption on premises
only.
   Number of licenses - 2
Class B.1 - retail sale of alcoholic liquor for use and consumption on premises
(including formalized patio seating), and incidental to the service of a lunch
or dinner meal consumed at a table or counter; license includes typical bar
service and daily wine tastings and the retail sale of bottled wine and wine
products in the original package for consumption off the premises.
   Number of licenses - 4
Class C - retail sale of alcoholic liquor (beer and wine only) for use and
consumption on or off premises.
   Number of licenses - 0
Class D - retail sale of alcoholic liquor (beer and wine only) for use and
consumption off the premises only. The issuance of a Class D license and the
retention of that license shall only take place where sales of beer shall be
limited to packages of 6-packs or more, and the sale of individual serving
containers of beer is prohibited. Sales of wine in individual containers shall
be not less than seven hundred fifty milliliters (750 mL) volume. Sales of wine
in 4-packs or 2-packs must contain a total volume of not less than seven
hundred forty eight milliliters (748 mL). This license authorizes the sale of
alcoholic liquor, in original package form, for consumption off the premises
where sold subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the total floor area of the
licensed premises may be devoted to the storage and display of alcoholic
beverages.
   B.   At least one store employee of twenty-one (21) years of age or older
must be present on the licensed premises when alcohol is being sold.
   Number of licenses - 1
Class E - retail sale of alcoholic liquor (beer and wine only) for use and
consumption on the premises only.
   Number of licenses - 1
Class F - retail sale of alcoholic liquor for use and consumption on the
premises only and incidental to the service of food; live or recorded music
shall be permitted.
   Number of licenses - 2
Class G - temporary liquor license to authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on a premises situated within the Village may be issued to an
applicant for a period not in excess of forty eight (48) hours; provided, that
said applicant fully satisfies all the requirements of the laws of the State of
Illinois and all other requirements of this chapter. To qualify for a temporary
liquor license, the applicant must demonstrate that he or it is a not for
profit organization.
   Number of licenses - 1
Class G.1 - temporary liquor license to authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on a premises situated within the Village may be issued to an
applicant for a period not in excess of forty eight (48) hours; provided, that
said applicant fully satisfies all the requirements of the laws of the State of
Illinois and all other requirements of this chapter.
   Number of licenses - 1
Class H - retail sale of alcoholic liquor for use and consumption on premises
only, in conjunction with the operation of a golf course/country club,
including: golf course/cart service, bar/cocktail lounge service, meal service
and banquet service.
   Number of licenses - 1
Class I - retail sale of alcoholic liquor for use and consumption on premises
only (including formalized patio seating), and incidental to the service of a
lunch or dinner meal consumed at a table or counter; license does not include
typical bar service.
   Number of licenses - 2
Class J - retail sale of alcoholic liquor (beer and wine only) for use and
consumption off the premises only, in conjunction with retail sale of general
merchandise; total floor space devoted to liquor (beer and wine) sales, not to
exceed ten percent (10%) of total floor square footage. Winetasting is
permitted no more than once a week, except for the period from November 15 to
December 31 when winetasting is permitted no more than twice a week.
   Number of licenses - 0
Class K - retail sale of alcoholic liquor for use and consumption off the
premises only, in conjunction with retail sale of general merchandise; total
floor space devoted to liquor sales, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of total
floor square footage. Winetasting is permitted no more than once a week, except
for the period from November 15 to December 31 when winetasting is permitted no
more than twice a week.
   Number of licenses - 1
Class L - barbershop, beauty shop, spa, salon, cosmetic establishments, and
other retailers. Class L shall permit the dispensing of alcoholic liquor solely
on premises that are exclusively occupied and operated as a barbershop, beauty
shop, spa, salon, cosmetic establishments, and other retailers. Such license
shall permit the dispensing only to customers of the shop or facility and only
for consumption of the drink on such premises while the customer is waiting for
or receiving customary barber, cosmetic, beauty shop, spa services, or other
retail customer service from the facility. The following conditions shall apply
to this license:
   A.   No signage is allowed indicating that the dispensation of alcohol is
available.
   B.   No more than two (2) servings of any alcoholic beverage to a customer
at such a premises shall be allowed during any single calendar day. Alcoholic
beverage shall only include wine, sparkling wine, champagne, or beer.
   Number of licenses - 2
Class M - Licensed truck stop establishments, a facility (i) that is at least a
3-acre facility with a convenience store, (ii) with separate diesel islands for
fueling commercial motor vehicles, (iii) that sells at retail more than 10,000
gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per month, and (iv) with parking spaces for
commercial motor vehicles. “Commercial motor vehicles” has the same meaning as
defined in Section 18b-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The requirement of
item (iii) of this paragraph may be met by showing that estimated future sales
or past sales average at least 10,000 gallons per month. That a licensed truck
stop establishment liquor license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor
for use and consumption off the premises only.
   Number of licenses - 1
Any license may be revoked by the Liquor Control Commission, upon the violation
by any licensee, his agents or employees of any Village ordinance, State or
Federal law. (Ord. 05-O-937, 6-21-2005; Ord. 06-O-967, 4-3-2006; Ord. 11-O-003,
2-1-2011, eff. 2-1-2011; Ord. 13-O-003, 4-16-2013; Ord. 13-O-011, 9-17-2013;
Ord. 14-O-013, 4-15-2014; Ord. 16-O-011, 4-19-2016; Ord. 16-O-017, 6-21-2016;
Ord. 18-O-017, 8-21-2018; Ord. 18-O-032, 12-18-2018; Ord. 20-O-006, 2-18-2020;
Ord. 20-O-015, 9-15-2020; Ord. 21-O-014, 6-15-2021; Ord. 21-O-021, 9-21-2021;
Ord. 21-O-023, 10-19-2021; Ord. 21-O-027, 12-21-2021; Ord. 22-O-006, 3-15-2022)
3-3-7: LIQUOR LICENSE RENEWALS:
All applicants for liquor licenses who have previously secured and hold a valid
liquor license for the year immediately preceding the year for which a liquor
license is sought shall make application for renewal to the Liquor Control
Commission no later than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the
applicant's present liquor license and said applicants shall, at the time of
application for renewal, deliver to the Liquor Control Commission the
applicant's application for renewal of annual retail liquor license. The
applicant shall fully answer all the questions indicated and all applications
shall bear the signature of the applicant and said signature shall be
notarized. The Liquor Control Commission shall make whatever investigations are
necessary to verify the application data before presentation to the Village
Board for approval. All expenses incurred by the Village as a result of the
processing of the renewal application shall be paid by the applicant prior to
issuance of the license. (Ord. 91-O-563, 2-4-1991)
3-3-8: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Permits shall be issued only to persons of good moral character. (Ord.
63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
   B.   Permits will not be issued for any minor. (1981 Code)
3-3-9: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for sale of any alcoholic liquors on any premises
within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home for aged
or indigent persons, or for veterans, their wives or children or a military or
naval station. In determining the distance provided for in this section, the
closest boundaries of the lot or parcel of land upon which a church, school,
etc., as herein defined, shall be construed as being a point from which
measurement shall be taken.
The word "premises" as herein defined, shall include the lot, plot or parcel of
land upon which said alcoholic liquors are sold. (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
3-3-10: CLOSING HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic
liquor in the Village between the following hours with respect to the following
licenses issued:
Classes A, B, B.1, F, H and K:
   Monday through Sunday 2:00 A.M. to 10:00 A.M.
(Ord. 16-O-027, 12-20-2016)
Class A.1:
   Monday through Sunday 10:00 P.M. to 8:00 A.M. for retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for use off premises and Monday through Sunday 10:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M.
for retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on premises.
(Ord. 18-O-033, 12-18-2018)
Classes C and E:
   Monday through Sunday 12:00 midnight to 10:00 A.M.
Class D:
   Monday through Sunday 12:00 midnight to 8:30 A.M.
Class G:
   Monday through Sunday 1:00 A.M. to 10:00 A.M.
Class G.1:
   Monday through Sunday 10:00 P.M. to 8:30 A.M.
Class J:
   Monday through Sunday 10:00 P.M. to 10:00 A.M.
Class I:
   Sunday 10:00 P.M. to 10:30 A.M.
   Monday through Thursday 11:00 P.M. to 10:30 A.M.
   Friday and Saturday 12:00 midnight to 10:30 A.M.
   Patio - Monday through Sunday 9:30 P.M. to 10:30 A.M.
Class L:
   Monday through Sunday 9:00 P.M. to 12:00 noon.
Class M:
   Monday through Sunday 12:00 midnight to 8:00 A.M.
(Ord. 25-O-010, 6-17-2025)
3-3-11: SANITARY REGULATIONS:
All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquors shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition and comply with all regulations, inspections, and
provisions of the Lake County health department. No refuse of any sort shall be
permitted to accumulate thereon, and all such premises shall be thoroughly
cleaned at least once in each twenty four (24) hours; provided, that no
cleaning shall be required on days when no business is conducted on the
premises.
In all premises wherein alcoholic liquors are licensed to be sold for
consumption, there shall be maintained two (2) toilets, one for men and one for
women. Said toilet rooms shall have concrete floor or other floor of waterproof
material and shall at all times be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 90-O-524, 3-5-1990)
3-3-12: EMPLOYMENT OR HIRING PRACTICES:
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to discriminate in the employment or hiring
practices on account of sex, unless there is a bona fide occupational
classification under the rules, regulations and findings of the equal
employment opportunity commission.
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall deliver any alcoholic
liquor to customers or accept payment from customers for the purchase of
alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 90-O-524, 3-5-1990)
3-3-13: INSPECTION:
All premises in the village where alcoholic liquors are sold shall be inspected
at least every three (3) months by the police department to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
3-3-14: MINORS, RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Sales To Minors, Mental Incompetents: No licensee shall sell, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any minor or to any intoxicated person, or to any
person known by him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, feeble
minded or distracted person. (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
   B.   Purchase By Minors: Any minor who purchases or obtains any alcoholic
liquor or misrepresents his age for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic liquor
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and
every offense. (1981 Code)
   C.   Warning: Every licensee shall display at all times in a prominent place
a printed card which shall be issued by the village clerk and which shall read
substantially as follows: (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
   WARNING TO MINORS
   You are subject to a fine of up to $500.00 under the ordinances of the
Village of Kildeer if you purchase alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your age
for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic liquor.
(1981 Code)
   D.   Possession Or Consumption By Minors: No person under the age of twenty
one (21) years shall possess or consume any alcoholic liquor, except in the
performance of a religious ceremony as set forth in 235 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-16. (Ord. 93-O-631, 1-11-1993)
3-3-15: ACTS OF AGENTS OR EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee, if said act is committed or omission is made with
the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and
held to be the act of such employer or licensee and said employer or licensee
shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done
or omitted by him personally. (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
3-3-16: COMPLY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the owner, proprietor, or
person in charge of the premises where alcoholic liquor is sold from the
restrictions and requirements of any other ordinance or ordinances of the
village or the statutes of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
   A.   Sale To Intoxicated Persons: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to
sell, deliver or give any alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person. (Ord. 93-
O-631, 1-11-1993)
3-3-17: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license granted under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked upon
the violation by any licensee, his agents or employees, of any village
ordinance or state or federal law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquors.
Upon the revocation of the license, the liquor commissioner shall post a notice
of revocation on the door of the premises previously licensed and upon each and
every regularly designated posting area for the village 1  within five (5) days
after such revocation. There shall be no rebate of license fees after a
revocation. (Ord. 63-O-90, 9-5-1963)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-15-1 of this code.
3-3-18: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as set forth
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1981
Code; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
3-3-19: LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSION ORDERS:
Pursuant to 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9, the village hereby determines
that any reviews from any order of the local commission shall be limited to the
record before the local commission. A certified official record of any such
proceedings shall be taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or
certified shorthand reporter, and copies of each such proceeding shall be filed
with the local liquor control commissioner within five (5) days after a notice
of filing any appeal is served upon the village, providing that the appellant
shall pay the cost of any such transcript. (Ord. 93-O-631, 1-11-1993)
3-3-20: CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic liquor on,
upon or in any public street, right of way, driveway, parking lot, sidewalk,
patio, plaza, terrace, or other public place in the village of Kildeer.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic liquor
except in the original package, with the seal unbroken, on, upon or in any
public street, right of way, parking lot, sidewalk, patio, plaza, terrace, or
other public place in the village of Kildeer.
   C.   The term "public place" shall include any property under the direct
jurisdiction and control of any public agency, and places where the public is
invited to congregate such as shopping centers, retail stores, and other such
establishments.
   D.   Said restrictions do not apply to areas specifically governed by a
valid liquor license issued by the village of Kildeer. (Ord. 03-O-877, 5-5-
2003)
3-3-21: EMPLOYEE TRAINING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Scope Of Provisions:
      1.   Any original and any renewal application for any class of license
where alcoholic beverages are sold shall be accompanied with proof of
completion of a state certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training program (BASSET), for all persons who serve or sell alcoholic
beverages pursuant to such license.
      2.   a. Any new employees and/or new manager of a licensee of any class
of license issued pursuant to this chapter where alcoholic beverages are sold
shall, within ninety (90) days from the beginning of their employment with that
licensee, complete the BASSET program, and shall, until completion of the
BASSET program, work under the supervision of a person who has completed the
BASSET program.
         b.   Any employee of a licensee of any class of license issued
pursuant to this chapter where alcoholic beverages are sold who is less than
twenty one (21) years of age shall complete the BASSET program prior to
beginning or continuing their employment and shall always work under the
supervision of another employee who has completed the BASSET program and is at
least twenty one (21) years of age.
         c.   Following the initial passage of this section, existing licensees
shall be granted a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Certificates On File:
      1.   A legible photocopy of the certificate of completion of the BASSET
program or identification card must be maintained on the licensed premises of
any class of license issued pursuant to this chapter where alcoholic beverages
are sold.
      2.   Certificates or identification cards for all employees and/or
managers shall be made available for review by any law enforcement officer or
liquor commission member or agent immediately upon demand.
   C.   Employment Without Training Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided in
this section, it shall be unlawful to permit any person to serve or sell
alcoholic beverages in a licensed establishment holding a license issued
pursuant to this chapter where alcoholic beverages are sold unless that person
has completed the BASSET program as required by this section.
   D.   Other Training Programs: Notwithstanding any provisions of this code to
the contrary, any reference to the BASSET program or to the BASSET training
program in this code shall also mean and include any similar training program
which has been approved in writing as an equivalent program in advance by the
Illinois liquor control commission.
   E.   Additional Training Required: In addition to other penalties imposed by
this chapter, any licensee or employee of a licensee found by a court or the
local liquor control commissioner to have violated any regulation of this
chapter shall be required to again complete a BASSET training program as
described in this section. (Ord. 07-O-990, 5-7-2007)
CHAPTER 4
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definition
3-4-2: Permitting Of Peddlers And Solicitors
3-4-3: Application For Permit
3-4-4: Permit Fees
3-4-5: Issuance And Revocation Of Permits
3-4-6: Regulation Of Fund Soliciting
3-4-7: Policy On Soliciting And Peddling
3-4-8: Notice Regulating Soliciting
3-4-9: Restrictions Applicable To All Soliciting And Peddling
3-4-10: Place Of Conducting Business
3-4-11: Panhandling Or Begging And Soliciting Publicly On Roadways
3-4-12: Soliciting By Means Of Printed Materials
3-4-13: Individuals Exempt From Permit
3-4-14: Fees
3-4-15: Penalties
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
                         An organization that has applied for, and is
                         recognized by the Illinois Attorney General as a
                         Charitable Organization and is catalogued in the
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Illinois Attorney General Charitable Trust database.
                         Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or
                         eleemosynary person or one purporting to be such which
                         solicits and collects funds for charitable purposes.
                         The door-to-door selling, offering for sale or
                         solicitation of offers to purchase property or
                         services of any kind, character or description
                         whatever, for any kind of consideration, for future
COMMERCIAL SOLICITING:   delivery from other than a fixed place of business on
                         private property, including the sale of foods and
                         refreshments from a vehicle, except fund soliciting.
                         Commercial soliciting shall not include the sale of
                         goods by persons conducting fund raising activities
                         for charitable organizations.
                         Soliciting of funds not involving the sale of
FUND SOLICITING:         property, including solicitation where pamphlets are
                         given to a donor of funds but not including the sale
                         of books or pamphlets.
                         The practice of imploring others to grant a favor,
PANHANDLING or BEGGING:  often a gift of money, with little or no expectation
                         of reciprocation.
                         The door-to-door sale or offering for sale of
                         property, for immediate delivery from other than a
                         fixed place of business on private property, including
PEDDLING:                the sale of charitable or religious books or
                         pamphlets. Peddling shall not include the sale of
                         goods by charitable organizations for charitable
                         purposes.
                         Any person who obtained a valid certificate of
                         registration as provided in this Chapter, and the
REGISTERED SOLICITOR:    Village-issued permit is in the possession of the
                         solicitor on his or her person while engaged in
                         soliciting.
                         Residence shall mean and include every separate living
                         unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more
RESIDENCE:               persons, contained within any type of building or
                         structure and the yard or grounds upon which such
                         structure is located.
                         Includes any of the following activities: 1) Seeking
                         to obtain sales or orders for the purchase of goods,
                         wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind,
                         character or description whatsoever, for any kind of
                         consideration, whatsoever, except for the sale of
                         books, periodicals or other publications or
SOLICITING:              subscriptions to such, through person-to-person
                         contact, or 2) Seeking to obtain gifts or
                         contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable
                         thing for the support or benefit of any charitable
                         organization, either by door-to-door residential
                         solicitation or by engaging in solicitation on public
                         roadways or other public property. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-
                         20-2021; amd. Ord. 25-O-014, 10-21-2025)
 
3-4-2: PERMITTING OF PEDDLING AND SOLICITOR:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
peddling or soliciting in the Village without first having registered for and
received a permit from the Chief of Police or designee, and provided a permit
fee payment to the Village.
   B.   Said permit shall be prominently displayed by the registered solicitor
while engaged in peddling/soliciting. A photo ID badge and safety vest issued
by the Police Department shall be worn as the outer most layer of clothing at
all times of peddling and soliciting, unless precluded by the Village code.
(Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   The application for a permit shall be made under oath and signed by the
applicant upon a form provided by the Chief of Police. Each original
application shall be completed by the applicant in full. The application shall
only collect information required to determine the applicant's eligibility,
enforce the regulations in this Chapter, and the advance the Village's
interests in protecting the privacy of its citizens, including the quiet
enjoyment of their homes, and preventing crime. Incomplete or unreadable
applications will not be processed.
   B.   Applicants shall sign and notarize the release of liability waiver for
a criminal history records check.
   C.   The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in his or her office an
accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all
other information and data pertaining thereto and all permits issued under the
provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of applications. Applications for
permits shall be numbered in consecutive order proceeded by the year of
issuance, as filed, and every permit issued shall be identified with the
duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
   D.   No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the
commission of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other
state or Federal laws of the United States, within five (5) years of the date
of the application; or has been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter; or whose permit issued hereunder has previously
been revoked within the last twelve (12) months, as herein provided.
   E.   All applicants applying for a permit under this chapter are required to
provide a current driver's license or state identification card. In addition,
applicants will have a photo taken by a Village staff member during Village
business hours. The photo will be used to create the required photo
identification card worn by the registered solicitor.
   F.   Individuals or groups soliciting or peddling on private property, with
the approval of the property owner or tenant, are not required to register for
a permit. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-4: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   The non-refundable permit fee for peddlers and solicitors shall be as
established in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule set forth in Section 3-4-14 of
this code, each permit to be valid for no more than thirty (30) days from the
date of issuance with the opportunity for additional monthly renewals.
   B.   Prior to soliciting door-to-door in the Village, the registered
solicitor must acquire a photo identification card and a vest to wear, both of
which are provided by Village staff. A refundable cash only deposit is required
upon issuance of the vest and will be refunded when each vest and photo
identification card is returned to the Police Department. The cash deposit will
be automatically forfeited to the Village of Kildeer for any safety vest or
photo identification card not returned to the Police Department within five (5)
days of the expiration of the permit.
   C.   An additional fee will be assessed for requests made for replacement
badges. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-5: ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
   A.   The Chief of Police or designee, upon receipt of a properly completed
application, but in no event later than seven (7) working days after the
receipt of the application, shall either issue a license, or notify the
applicant in writing that the application has been denied because of the
applicant's failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Approved permits will be valid for a maximum of thirty (30) days from
the date of issuance. Immediately upon giving such notice, the permit shall
state the expiration date thereof. Permits may be renewed.
   C.   Permits/badges will consist of a photograph of the permit holder, name
of the permit holder, the soliciting entity name, the expiration date of the
permit, and the Village of Kildeer and Police Department logos.
   D.   Permits are issued to an individual and are not transferable.
   E.   Any permit issued under this section shall be revoked by the Chief of
Police, or designee, if the holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions in this chapter, or any violation of any other ordinance
of the Village, or of any State or Federal Law within five (5) years of the
date of application, or has made a false material statement in the application,
or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms
of this chapter. Revocation of any permit may be in addition to any fine or
penalty which may be imposed for any violation in this chapter. Should a permit
be revoked, any payments made to the Village will be non-refundable.
   F.   Any person whose permit has been revoked may not apply for another
permit for twelve (12) months from the date of revocation.
   G.   An applicant whose permit has been denied or a registered solicitor,
whose permit has been revoked, shall have the right to appeal to the Chief
Village Officer the denial of the application for or revocation of the
solicitor's permit. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision by
filing a written request for a hearing with the Chief of Police within ten (10)
days of the postmarked date of the denial or revocation of the permit. The
Chief Village Officer shall conduct a hearing within five (5) business days of
the request. All notices to the applicant or permit holder shall be delivered
by sending the notice by certified mail. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-6: REGULATION OF FUND SOLICITING:
   A.   Any person engaged in fund soliciting must comply with the
"Solicitation for Charity Act", 224 ILCS 460 et. al., and must register with
the Police Department prior to soliciting funds. The applicant in registering
must furnish all the information required in the application for permit
provided in Section
3-4-3 of this Chapter and evidence of compliance with said State law.
   B.   Permit fees shall be waived for qualifying charitable organizations
falling into one of the following categories:
      1.   Having a membership of forty-four percent (44%) or more reside
within the corporate limits of the Village;
      2.   Having a charter or other official recognition by a parent, state,
or national organization that designates it a Kildeer chapter; or
      3.   Having a principal or sole place of business located in corporate
limits of the Village; or
      4.   Being an organization supporting exclusively a local unit of
government which provides services of the Village. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-7: POLICY ON SOLICITING AND PEDDLING:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the corporate authorities of the
Village that the occupant or occupants of the residences in the Village shall
make the determination of whether solicitors and/or peddlers shall be, or shall
not be, invited to their respective residences. If no determination is made, as
is provided in Section
3-4-8 hereof, then, in that event, the solicitation and/or peddling is
permitted. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-8: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the
regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall comply
with the following directions:
   A.   Occupants wanting to refuse invitation to solicitors to their residence
shall affix a "No Solicitors" decal, or similarly worded decal or sign, upon or
near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the determination by
the occupant. Such decal exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
   B.   The absence of either a "No Solicitors" decal, or a similarly worded
decal or sign, shall mean the occupant of such residence has given invitation
to a solicitor. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-9: RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SOLICITING AND PEDDLING:
   A.   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises,
as defined as a residence in Section
3-4-1, to first examine if there is any attached notice as provided in Section
3-4-8. If the notice states, "No Soliciting," or a similarly worded decal or
sign then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person:
      1.   To continue to engage in solicitation or peddling upon any premises
or in any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located thereon after
having been requested by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises
or residence.
      2.   To engage in peddling or solicitation upon any premises or residence
located thereon if such premises or residence is posted against solicitation or
peddling by means of the notice described in Section
3-4-8.
      3.   Who engages in solicitation or peddling to engage in any conduct or
communication in furtherance of any plan, scheme or ruse which indicates or
implies that the purpose of such person's peddling or solicitation is other
than to obtain orders for or to make sales of goods or services or solicit
funds.
      4.   Who engages in peddling or soliciting to misrepresent the right of a
buyer to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of applicable law.
      5.   Who engages in peddling or soliciting to cheat, deceive, or
fraudulently misrepresent, whether through himself or through an employee,
while acting as a peddler or solicitor in the Village, or to barter, sell or
peddle any goods, merchandise or wares other than those specified in his
application for a license.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether registered under this
chapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any
door of a residence located thereon or rap or knock upon the door or create any
sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant
of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant
thereof and engage in soliciting or peddling, as herein defined, prior to nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday
or at any time on Sunday or a state or national holiday.
   D.   The permit and vest as described in Section
3-4-2 shall be displayed conspicuously on the outer garment of a registered
peddler or solicitor at all times when the person is engaged in soliciting or
peddling in the Village of Kildeer. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-10: PLACE OF CONDUCTING BUSINESS:
No peddler or solicitor may peddle or solicit on public property in a manner
which obstructs reasonable access to the intended and permitted use of the
property. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-11: PANHANDLING OR BEGGING AND SOLICITING PUBLICLY ON ROADWAYS:
   A.   No person shall engage in soliciting on any street, highway, or right-
of-way in the Village in any manner which tends to impede vehicle or pedestrian
traffic or interfere with the permitted and intended uses of the right-of-way.
   B.   No solicitation shall be conducted on any public street in the Village
from November 1 to March 31 and solicitation must be done during daylight
hours.
   C.   Soliciting publicly on roadways is limited to intersections controlled
with a traffic signal.
   D.   Any person engaged in soliciting on public roadways must be sixteen
(16) years of age or more.
   E.   The soliciting agency shall be liable for any injuries to any person or
property during the solicitation which is causally related to an act of
ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent.
   F.   Panhandling or begging shall be prohibited at all times at the
following intersections due to the volume of traffic and the risk of
distracting drivers:
      1.   All portions of Quentin Road (County Highway V62); and
      2.   All portions of Lake Zurich Road (State Highway 22). (Ord. 21-O-015,
7-20-2021; amd. Ord. 25-O-014, 10-21-2025)
3-4-12: SOLICITING BY MEANS OF PRINTED MATERIALS:
   A.   Subject to Section
3-4-9-B, individuals may solicit business by means of distributing literature
advertising the services or goods offered by their organization by securely
affixing the printed material to the exterior portion of an entryway (door to
porch). Such distribution of printed material will be conducted in such a
manner as to not alert the occupant of the premise.
   B.   The printed material may not be any larger than one (1) eight and one-
half inches by eleven inches (8 ½” x 11") sheet of paper, or similar material,
and shall include the name of the organization, or person, soliciting business
and a contact telephone number.
   C.   No permit is required for soliciting by means of printed material.
   D.   Distributing material soliciting services or goods in any other manner
not listed in this section, except through means of a common carrier, printed
newspapers traditionally delivered or the delivery of materials by the U.S.
Postal Service, will be a violation of this section and the advertising
individual or organization will be liable for a penalty for the violation of
this code. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-13: INDIVIDUALS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT:
   A.   Individuals under the age of eighteen (18) shall not be required to
obtain an individual solicitation permit to engage in solicitation within the
Village, but must be sponsored by a supervising adult. The supervising adult is
subject to the same conditions set forth in this Chapter as other adult
solicitors. The supervising adult may be responsible for more than one
juvenile. Individuals under the age of eighteen (18) will not be required to
undergo a background investigation.
   B.   Individuals seeking to influence the personal belief of an occupant of
any residence on any political or religious matter.
   C.   Individuals seeking to obtain donations made incidental to canvassing
door-to-door on behalf of any charitable, religious, or political purpose.
(Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
3-4-14: FEES:
   A.   Fifty dollars ($50.00) Peddlers and Solicitors License Fee, per thirty
(30) days.
   B.   Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) Peddlers and Solicitors Renewal Fee, up to
two (2) additional thirty (30) day periods in one (1) calendar year.
   C.   Seventy-five dollars ($75.00) Photo ID card and vest deposit.
   D.   Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) Replacement photo ID card. (Ord. 21-O-015,
7-20-2021)
3-4-15: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the
fine set forth in Village Code
1-22-2. (Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
CHAPTER 5
VENDING MACHINES
SECTION:
3-5-1: License Required, Application
3-5-2: License Fees
3-5-3: Analysis And Inspection
3-5-4: Consent From Owner Required
3-5-5: Guarantee
3-5-6: Responsibility
3-5-7: Location Restrictions
3-5-8: Penalty
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling or
offering for sale any cigarettes, food, beverages, candies, nuts or gum or
other items of food or other products by means of any vending machine, coin-
controlled or coin-operated machine or other mechanical device without having
first procured a license as herein required.
Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing and shall contain the
following information: 1) the number of machines for which application is made;
2) the serial number, brand name and type, size and capacity of each machine;
3) the name of the owner of the machine, such owner's address and telephone
number; 4) the type of food, beverages or other products to be dispensed from
each vending machine; 5) the manufacturing or distributing company of the
product dispensed in each machine whenever the product consists of milk or
dairy products; and 6) the type of refrigeration and the manner of testing the
temperature of each machine vending or dispensing milk or dairy products.
   A.   No application for an outside vending machine for the sale or
dispensing of milk or dairy products shall be granted unless a plot plan is
submitted with the application showing the proposed location of the milk or
dairy vending machine disclosing the following information:
      1.   Complete dimensions of the vending machine;
      2.   Its location with reference to the lot line of the lot or parcel of
real estate on which said machine is to be located;
      3.   Drawing showing the proposed lighting for the machine and the
surrounding area;
      4.   The name and address of the title holder of the real estate on which
said machine is to be located;
      5.   The parking area designated for patrons or customers using said
machine, which shall be for a minimum of two (2) automobiles; and
      6.   The ingress and egress for motor vehicles onto said property wherein
said machine is located.
   B.   No license for a milk or dairy product vending machine shall be issued
if any one or more of the following are not complied with:
      1.   The area in which said machine is to be located must be in an area
zoned for a business use under the zoning provisions of this Code;
      2.   Each such vending machine shall be set back from the front lot line
at least twenty feet (20') and from the side lot lines at least five feet (5');
      3.   Sufficient parking must be located on the real estate whereon said
vending machine is to be located for two (2) motor vehicles in accordance with
the dimensions required under the zoning provisions of this Code per parking
place;
      4.   Adequate ingress and egress from and to the street must be provided
for providing for one lane for ingress and one lane for egress to the street;
      5.   At least five-tenths (0.5) foot-candles of illumination at the
ground surface whereat said machine is located;
      6.   The postal address and telephone number of the permittee or licensee
of the machine; and
      7.   A temperature gauge located on the outside exterior of the machine,
which temperature gauge is to register the interior temperature of the vending
machine. (Ord. 76-O-222, 4-1-1976)
3-5-2: LICENSE FEES:
The following annual license fees shall be paid for such licenses at the time
of application, which fees shall be good until June 30 following the date of
the application:
 
All types Annual, per machine $25.00
 
(Ord. 95-O-693, 4-3-1995)
3-5-3: ANALYSIS AND INSPECTION:
   A.   Inspection: It shall be the duty of the Village authorized designate to
inspect all such vending machines at least once each month to determine if they
are kept in a good state of repair and if they are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and if the merchandise or food products offered for sale are pure and
wholesome. In addition, whenever any outside milk or dairy vending machine is
licensed hereunder, weekly temperature reports shall be submitted by the owner
or permittee for said machine as to the testing of the temperature control and
operation of said vending machine.
   B.   Notice And Repair: If, upon an inspection of any such vending machine,
it is found to be unsafe or in need of repairs and is not maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition, and if the merchandise offered for sale is not pure and
wholesome, the owner or the person maintaining such vending machine shall be
notified in writing by the Village officer that such machine is unsafe, or in
need of repairs, or is not maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and
that the merchandise therein is impure and unwholesome, and such owner or
person maintaining said vending machine shall, within five (5) days of receipt
of such notice, make such vending machine safe or make the necessary repairs as
recommended, or shall remove the spoiled and unwholesome food. (Ord. 76-O-222,
4-1-1976)
3-5-4: CONSENT FROM OWNER REQUIRED:
The owner, lessee, tenant or proprietor of the premises wherein such machine
shall be located shall submit with the application aforesaid, in writing, his
consent to the placing of said vending machine in the premises, fully
describing in said consent the exact location of said machine, a description of
said machine and a description of the type of products which shall be dispensed
or sold through said machine. (Ord. 76-O-222, 4-1-1976)
3-5-5: GUARANTEE:
Accompanying such application and consent, the owner, lessee, tenant or
proprietor of said premises shall guarantee to the City payment of any and all
license fees duly imposed upon said vending machines by the City for the period
during which such vending machines shall be located on said premises. (Ord. 76-
O-222, 4-1-1976)
3-5-6: RESPONSIBILITY:
The owner, lessee, tenant or proprietor of the premises in and whereupon such
vending machines are located shall be held responsible for the payment of any
and all duly imposed license fees which may be due and owing by virtue of the
provisions hereof, and which have not been paid by the owner of said vending
machines. (Ord. 76-O-222, 4-1-1976)
3-5-7: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No such vending machine for the distribution of food or beverages shall be
allowed in any location, place, building or room unless the same is located in
a clean and sanitary and well-lighted building, room or location. (Ord. 76-O-
222, 4-1-1976)
3-5-8: PENALTY:
Any violation of this Chapter shall subject the owner of the vending machine,
the owner of the premises, and the lessee, if any, of the premises, in which
the machine is located, to a fine as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 6
WASTE HAULERS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose
3-6-2: Exclusive Contract Required
3-6-3: Compliance With Exclusive Contract Required
3-6-4: Service Provision Summary
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
State law provides that the Village may enter into exclusive contracts with
private firms for the final disposition of garbage and refuse and for the
delivery of waste to recycling facilities; State law has mandated the proper
disposal of landscape waste. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for
proper disposal of refuse, recyclables and landscape waste, and further to
provide for the most responsive and responsible service delivery, a reduction
in overall cost to the residents, and a reduction in the amount of heavy weight
trucks on Village roads. (Ord. 96-O-736, 12-2-1996)
3-6-2: EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the enterprise of collecting, transporting,
processing, storing or disposing of garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse,
recyclables, landscape waste or solid waste of any kind from any residence or
dwelling within the corporate limits of the Village without first having
secured an exclusive contract with the Village for such purposes, consistent
with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 96-O-736, 12-2-1996)
3-6-3: COMPLIANCE WITH EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT REQUIRED:
All residents within the Village shall comply with all applicable provisions of
a certain contract dated November 4, 1996, and entitled "Contract for Refuse
Collection and Disposal, and Collection of Recyclables and Landscape Waste for
Delivery to Permitted and/or Approved Facilities with the Village of Kildeer"
between the Village and Waste Management-Northwest, and any extensions or
amendments thereto. Said Contract, as well as any extensions and amendments are
on file at the Village office. (Ord. 96-O-736, 12-2-1996)
3-6-4: SERVICE PROVISION SUMMARY:
The services provided by the contractor shall include, but not be limited to:
weekly/Wednesday curbside pick up of all garbage, refuse and recycling
deposited in proper containers; provision of wheeled carts and/or recycling
bins at an additional cost upon customer request; collection of landscape waste
during specific months, if in proper containers or bundled, the cost being on a
sticker basis; and direct billing of customers. (Ord. 96-O-736, 12-2-1996)
CHAPTER 7
CATV SYSTEM
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Grant Of Authority
3-7-3: Construction Approval By Village
3-7-4: Conditions Of Street Occupancy And System Construction
3-7-5: Service Protection
3-7-6: Performance By Operator
3-7-7: Rate Schedules (Rep. by Ord. 96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
3-7-8: System Standards
3-7-9: Payments To Village
3-7-10: Records And Reports
3-7-11: List Of Subscribers; Confidentiality
3-7-12: Company Liability Insurance
3-7-13: Defaults
3-7-14: Sale, Assignment Or Transfer
3-7-15: Term Of Franchise
3-7-16: Final Termination Of The Franchise
3-7-17: Compliance With Laws
3-7-18: Conflicting Ordinances
3-7-19: Notices
3-7-20: Liquidated Damages
3-7-21: Evaluation Of Grantee's Performance
3-7-1 : DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
given herein:
CATV SYSTEM: A combination of facilities constructed in whole or in part in,
on, under or over any highway, street, alley, bridge, river or other public
place which is operated to perform for hire the service of receiving and
amplifying signals and redistributing such signals by wire, cable or other
means to members of the public who subscribe to such service.
CABLE MILE: Five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) consecutive feet of
installed cable, excluding "individual service drops", as defined herein.
FACILITIES: The lines, wires, poles, equipment, cables, underground conduits,
conductors, fixtures and all appurtenances thereto which are necessary for the
construction, installation, maintenance and operation in the Village of the
CATV system herein authorized.
GROSS OPERATING REVENUE: The revenues derived by the Company from all cable
services generated by the system facilities or from the use of the system
facilities, including, but not limited to, sale of personal property at retail,
data transmission, alarm or signal transmission, advertising revenue, charges
to subscribers for basic cable, premium programming, FM services, installation
charges, and any and all revenue received from any source whatsoever for use of
the system facilities for the transmission of electronic or microwave impulses.
INDIVIDUAL SERVICE DROPS: The cable connection from the main cable to the
residence or other place of service. The lineal feet involved in the individual
service drop shall not be included in computing a cable mile.
OPERATOR: A company, firm, corporation which holds a valid and current
franchise to construct, own, operate and maintain a cable television system
within the Village of Kildeer.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company or organization of
any kind.
SUBSCRIBER: A person who for a charge receives broadcast television programs
distributed by CATV system and does not further distribute it.
UTILITY: Any public utility which facilities are located within the Village.
VILLAGE: The Village of Kildeer, Illinois. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981; amd. Ord.
96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
3-7-2: GRANT OF AUTHORITY:
The operator is hereby granted by the Village a nonexclusive franchise to
construct, install, maintain and operate a CATV system in, upon, along, across,
above, over and under, the highways, streets, bridges, rivers, and other public
places, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, in the Village. The
franchise herein granted shall extend to any area annexed to the Village, and
the operator shall be bound by the same rules and regulations as to such area
as are otherwise provided herein.
This grant of authority to the operator shall be subservient to all Municipal
uses of public property and all existing uses or future uses of public property
by public utilities in that the operator herein shall not during the course of
its operation or construction interfere with the Municipal uses of said public
property or the uses of said property by public utilities. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-
1981)
3-7-3: CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL BY VILLAGE:
Except for individual service drops, the operator shall not construct, install,
maintain or operate any facility without the prior approval (which shall not be
unreasonably withheld) of the Village. Such approval shall be in the form of a
permit issued by the Village, upon approval of layout maps showing the location
of the facility to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated. The
Village shall have the right to inspect, at reasonable intervals, the
construction, installation, maintenance and operation of the CATV system by the
operator to ensure the proper compliance with the terms of this Chapter. All
construction shall conform with the plans approved at the time of issuance of
permit.
Such inspections, whether made or not, shall not operate to relieve the
operator of any responsibility, obligations, or liability assumed under this
franchise. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
3-7-4: CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY AND SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   All facilities shall be located so as to not interfere with the proper
use of highways, streets, bridges, rivers and other public places of the
Village, to not interfere with the rights or reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin any of said highways, streets, bridges, rivers or other
public places by utilities.
   B.   In case of any disturbance by the operator of pavement, sidewalks,
driveways, or other surfaces owned by the Village, the operator shall, at its
own expense and in a reasonable manner approved by the Village, replace and
restore such areas so disturbed, in as good condition as before said work of
the operator was commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in a good
condition approved by the Village for one year.
   C.   In the event that at any time during the term of this franchise, the
Village shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any highway,
street, bridge, river or public place of the Village, the operator upon
reasonable written notice by the Village shall promptly (except to the extent
that the operator's facilities are located on private property) remove and
relocate its facilities at its own expense.
   D.   The operator shall, at the request of the Village, temporarily raise or
lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. This work shall be at the
expense of the person owning the building, and the operator shall be given at
least forty eight (48) hours' prior written notice of such request.
   E.   When necessary for the construction, installation, maintenance, or
operation of its facilities, operator is hereby authorized, after giving twenty
four (24) hours' prior notice to the Village Clerk, to trim trees located on
public property. Such trimming shall be done in a reasonable and workmanlike
manner under the supervision of properly designated Village personnel and shall
be done at the operator's sole expense. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
3-7-5: SERVICE PROTECTION:
The CATV system shall be constructed, installed, maintained and operated in
such a manner so as to not interfere with the reception of signals from
standard television broadcast stations or the reception of signals transmitted
by any communications service authorized by any Federal agency. (Ord. 81-O-324,
8-6-1981)
3-7-6: PERFORMANCE BY OPERATOR:
   A.   Customer Service:
      1.   The operator shall, within two (2) years from the effective date of
the franchise granted herein, provide service requested by subscribers residing
in the dwelling units within the Village boundaries at the time of the
effective date of this franchise, excluding for any and all purposes at any
time during the term of this franchise, dwelling units in any and all areas
having a population of less than thirty (30) dwelling units per cable mile.
(Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981; amd. Ord 96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
      2.   The operator shall establish and maintain in close proximity to the
Village limits a studio for local programming, consisting of at least one view
finder color video camera, switcher fader controls, audio system, lighting
system, and one video tape recorder. In addition, the operator has purchased
and added new equipment to this studio as listed in this subsection A2. All
equipment is remote controlled from a master control unit. These facilities
shall be available on a time-sharing basis to the Village, its agencies, public
service organizations, and school districts lying wholly or partly within the
Village. Operator shall maintain all equipment in proper working order at all
times.
EQUIPMENT ADDED TO THE LOCAL ORIGINATION STUDIO
Quantity Item
Quantity Item
1        Sony DXL-327AL production application camera
1        Sony CA-327 general camera accessories
2        Sony CCU-M5 camera control units
2        Sony CCQ-25AM camera cables
2        Sony YH13x7.5BKRS 13x1 lenses
2        Sony DXF-50B 5 inch viewfinders
2        Canon MS 15M studio conversion kits
1        Panasonic AG456-U Proline SVHS camcorder
 
      3.   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
enforcement of any Federal, State or local law or regulation concerning
customer service or consumer protection that imposes customer service standards
or consumer protection requirements that exceed the customer service standards
set out in this Chapter or that address matters not addressed in this Chapter.
      4.   The operator shall maintain a local or toll-free telephone access
line which is available to its subscribers and shall have knowledgeable,
qualified representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries
twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
      5.   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time, including
wait time and the time required to transfer the call, shall not exceed thirty
(30) seconds. This standard shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of
the time as measured on a quarterly basis.
      6.   Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy
signal less than three percent (3%) of the total time that the office is open
for business.
      7.   Bill payment locations will be open for walk-in customer
transactions during normal business hours. Normal business hours shall mean
those hours of operation in existence as of the effective date of this
franchise.
      8.   Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards
will be met no less than ninety five percent (95%) of the time as measured on
an annual basis.
         a.   Standard installations will be performed within seven (7)
business days after an order has been placed. A standard installation is one
that is within two hundred ten feet (210') of the existing system.
         b.   Excluding those situations that are beyond its control, the
operator will respond to any service interruption promptly and in no event
later than twenty four (24) hours from the time of initial notification. All
other regular service requests will be responded to within thirty six (36)
hours during the normal workweek for that system. The appointment window
alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities
will be: "morning" or "afternoon"; not to exceed a four (4) hour "window"
during normal business hours for the system, or at a time that is mutually
acceptable. The operator shall schedule supplemental hours during which
appointments can be scheduled based on the needs of the community. If at any
time an installer or technician is running late, an attempt to contact the
customer will be made and the appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time
that is convenient to the customer.
         c.   In the case of a complete loss of picture or sound on all
channels that remains uncorrected for longer than twenty four (24) hours after
reported to the operator by the customer, then upon request by the customer,
the operator shall give a rebate to any affected customer equal to a pro rata
share of the customer's monthly bill for each day or fraction thereof in excess
of the repair time limit during which the malfunction goes uncorrected. (Ord.
96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
   B.   Operator Service Limits: At the request of the Village, the operator
shall provide service (at no charge other than the direct charge, if any, which
the operator pays a utility in connection with the provision of such service
under an agreement of the type contemplated by subsection C of this Section) to
all Municipal buildings, police and fire stations, public park buildings,
public libraries, and public and private schools within the Village; provided,
however, that the operator shall not be required to provide service to any such
building which is located in any area having a population of less than thirty
(30) dwelling units per cable mile. The operator's obligation under this
subsection shall be limited to provide service to one matching transformer in
each such building. The Village shall be allowed to make such use of the drop
line into its Municipal buildings as it shall deem desirable.
   C.   Individual Service Drops:
      1.   Grantee shall extend and make cable television service available to
any potential subscriber within the Village and the area requesting connection
at the standard connection charge, if the connection to such subscriber would
require no more than a standard one hundred fifty foot (150') aerial or buried
drop line from the closer of any public way, or any trunk or feeder cable.
      2.   With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial or
buried drop line in excess of such one hundred fifty feet (150'), grantee shall
extend and make available cable television service to such subscribers at the
connection charge not to exceed the actual installation costs incurred by the
grantee for the distance exceeding one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 81-O-
324, 8-6-1981)
   D.   Extension Of Service: Whenever the density of dwelling units in a given
area is less than thirty (30) dwelling units per cable route mile, connection
and service rates may be charged which reflect the additional cost of such
service. (Ord. 83-O-355-C, 4-4-1983; amd. Ord. 96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
   E.   CATV Broadcast Requirements: The CATV system shall carry those
television broadcast signals of every television broadcast station which are
required to be carried pursuant to the applicable rules and regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
3-7-7: RATE SCHEDULES:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
3-7-8: SYSTEM STANDARDS:
   A.   The CATV system shall have a single trunk fifty four (54) channel
capacity; and shall be capable of receiving and transmitting all VHF, UHF and
FM signals and carry all available local television stations as required by the
FCC; and shall carry at least one channel for the following purposes:
      1.   Municipal access.
      2.   Educational access.
      3.   Public access.
In addition, as of the effective date of this Chapter the operator has added
two (2) new video programming products to the CATV system. (Ord. 96-O-732, 10-
7-1996)
   B.   The operator shall establish and construct the system in accordance
with the highest standards of the art of cable communications and in accordance
with the highest standards of code of conduct of the cable TV industry.
   C.   The operator, through the system, shall provide effective and efficient
service in accordance with the rules and regulations of all governmental units
and agencies having regulatory and licensing authority in connection with the
system.
   D.   The operator shall cause to be delivered to the subscribers home
signals that meet FCC technical standards.
   E.   The operator shall not interrupt all or part of the services of the
system except under emergency circumstances or circumstances beyond the
operator's control. Interruption of services on the system for routine
maintenance shall be confined to the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and not otherwise.
   F.   The operator shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the
system, including system facilities, so as to at all times meet FCC technical
standards, including, without limitation, specifications for frequency levels,
channel frequency response, terminal isolation and radiation.
   G.   The operator shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the
system in accordance with all applicable national, State and local building and
safety codes. In the absence of any otherwise applicable building and safety
codes, the operator shall establish, construct, operate, and maintain the
system in accordance with the most recent edition of the National Electrical
Code.
   H.   The system shall be designed, established, constructed, operated and
maintained for a twenty four (24) hour-a-day continuous operation.
   I.   The system shall produce for receipt on subscriber's receivers, which
are in good working order, either monochrome or color pictures (providing the
receiver is color capable) that are free from any significant interference,
distortion, or ghosting which would cause any material degradation of video or
audio quality.
   J.   The system shall be capable of providing emergency override alerts
whereby the Village or other governmental units or agencies designated by the
Village may be able to issue a bulletin on all channels simultaneously.
   K.   In connection with the system, the operator shall only employ personnel
with necessary and sufficient skills and experience or training as such shall
relate to their respective jobs and positions. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
   L.   The cable drop connection to the subscriber's building will be
installed in a manner similar to the telephone connection for the same
building. The desires of the subscriber as to point of entry shall be observed
wherever practicable. Cable runs in building interiors will be installed
unobtrusively as possible. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981; amd. Ord. 96-O-732, 10-7-
1996)
3-7-9: PAYMENTS TO VILLAGE:
   A.   The operator shall pay to the Village for the privilege of operating a
CATV system under this franchise an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the
operator's gross revenues. (Ord. 96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
   B.   The Village reserves the right to increase or decrease the franchise
fee provided in subsection A of this Section, in compliance with applicable
law. In the event the Village determines that the franchise fee percentage
should be increased or decreased, it shall do so only after a public hearing
has been held before the Village Board to consider the question. The Village
shall provide the operator with ninety (90) days' prior written notice of such
hearing. The notice shall contain the following information:
      1.   Date of hearing;
      2.   Place of hearing; and
      3.   Proposed increase or decrease in franchise fee percentage.
At the hearing the operator shall be allowed to present any testimony or
evidence to the Village Board as to its position on increase or decrease. In
addition, the Village Board shall hear the testimony of any subscribers as to
their opinion or opinions concerning the proposed increase or decrease. After
all such testimony and evidence has been heard and adduced, the Village Board
by majority vote shall determine whether such franchise fee increase or
decrease shall take place and the operator shall be given written notice as to
such increase or decrease. The operator may on the effective date of any such
increase or decrease, increase or decrease its monthly charges for system
services by the amount of such increase or decrease.
   C.   In the event that the operator agrees to pay a franchise fee for any
franchise granted after the date hereof by any other municipality of like size
within fifty (50) miles of the Village, which said fee is in excess of the
amounts set forth in subsection A of this Section, the franchise fee payable
hereunder shall at the option of the Village, be increased to be a like amount.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other terms to the contrary, the operator may on
the effective date of any increase in such fee, pursuant to the provisions of
subsection A, B, or C of this Section, increase its monthly charges for system
services by the amount of such increase.
   E.   All payments of such franchise fee shall be quarterly within thirty
(30) days following March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each
year. Payments shall commence within thirty (30) days from the end of the
quarter in which the operator begins to provide service to its subscribers in
the Village.
   F.   In addition to all other fees provided herein, the operator shall pay
the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to the Village being the amount
reasonably expended by the Village in connection with the adoption of this
Chapter. One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall be payable upon
application of the operator for the franchise and the balance of one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall be payable at time of passage of this
Chapter. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
3-7-10: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
On or before March 1 of each year, commencing with the year following the year
in which the operator begins to provide service to its subscribers in the
Village, the operator shall submit to the Village a summary report sharing
gross revenue received by the operator from the operation of the CATV system
within the Village during the preceding year. The Village or their authorized
representative shall have the right to inspect the operations within the
Village during regular business hours and upon first giving reasonable notice.
(Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
3-7-11: LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS; CONFIDENTIALITY:
Operator shall not, without consent of the Village, knowingly release or
disclose its list of subscribers residing within the Village to any other
person or corporation. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
3-7-12: COMPANY LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   The operator hereby agrees to indemnify, defend and save whole and
harmless the Village and its officers and employees from liabilities and
related expenses (including reasonable attorney fees) of any kind, which may
arise out of or from the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance
of the system or system facilities or the execution and implementation of this
Chapter. This undertaking includes liabilities or claims of liability with
respect to property damage, personal injury, invasions of the right of privacy,
defamation of any person, the violation or infringement of any copyright,
trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or any right of any person and
failure of the operator to comply with the provisions of any Federal, State or
local statute, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to the operator in
connection with this Chapter.
The operator shall keep the system and system facilities continuously insured
against such risks as are customarily insured against by businesses of like,
size and type including but not limited to:
      1.   Insurance upon the repair or replacement basis, if available, and
otherwise to the full insurable value of the system facilities with reasonable
deductible provisions against loss or damage by fire and lightning with uniform
standard extended coverage endorsement limited only as may be provided in the
standard form of extended coverage endorsement at the time in use of this
State.
      2.   Boiler explosion insurance on steam boiler, pressure vessels and
pressure piping in an amount not less than repair or replacement costs with
reasonable deductible provisions, provided that such insurance need not be
taken out until the steam boilers, pressure vessels and pressure piping has
been installed in the system facilities.
      3.   Insurance to the extent of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence against liability for bodily injury including death and to the
extent of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence against
liability for damage to property including loss of use occurring on or arising
out of or in any way related to the system and to the system facilities.
      4.   During any period of construction adequate coverage to meet
liability under the Illinois Structural Work Act in an amount not less than
required by statute.
      5.   Workman's Compensation Insurance within the statutory limits and
employer's liability insurance of not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).
      6.   Comprehensive automobile liability insurance to the extent of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence against liability for bodily
injury including death and to the extent of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) per occurrence against liability for damage to property including
loss of use occurring on, arising out of, or in any way related to the system.
   B.   There shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk a certificate
of insurance naming the Village as an additional insured under the liability
insurance required by this Chapter. The insurance company providing and writing
such insurance coverage and certificate of insurance shall carry a "Class XV"
financial size category rating in the then current edition of Best's Insurance
Guide.
   C.   The Village, its officials and employees shall not be liable for any
damage occurring to the property of the operator caused by officials or
employees of the Village in performance of their duties. The Village, its
officials and employees shall not be held liable for the interruption of
service by actions of the Village. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
3-7-13: DEFAULTS:
   A.   Requirement For Surety Bond: Prior to the commencement of any
construction pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter the operator shall file
with the Village, and shall maintain during the construction of and for a
period of one year after completion of the facilities to be provided under this
Chapter, a surety bond from a company authorized to do business in the State,
or a letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business in the State, in
the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) conditioned upon the
operator fulfilling and performing in connection with each provision, term and
condition of this Chapter, and that in case of any breach the Village shall be
entitled to recover from said bond or letter of credit the amount of any
damages, and all costs incurred by the Village resulting from the failure of
the operator to well and faithfully observe and perform under any and all the
undertakings, terms and conditions of this Chapter. Any surety bond or letter
of credit deposited with the Village pursuant to the terms of this Section
shall be in a form approved by the Village Attorney. The one hundred thousand
dollar ($100,000.00) surety bond required herein may be reduced to twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00), six (6) months after the completion of all
construction.
   B.   Revocation:
      1.   In addition to all other rights, powers or remedies pertaining to
the Village in connection with this Chapter or otherwise, the Village reserves
the right to terminate, cancel and revoke the franchise and all rights and
privileges of the operator under this Chapter in the event the operator:
         a.   Violates any material provisions of this Chapter or any rule,
order or determination of the Village made pursuant to this Chapter except
where such violation other than subsection B1b and B1c of this Section is
without fault of the operator or through excusable neglect;
         b.   Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is
adjudicated bankrupt;
         c.   Fails for a substantial time to provide effective transmission
and receiving services and capabilities to subscribers except for strikes, war,
civil commotions, acts of God or other causes beyond the control of the
operator;
         d.   Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this Chapter or
practices any fraud or deceit upon the Village or subscribers;
         e.   Fails to establish, construct and operate the system
substantially in compliance with the terms of this Chapter with due
consideration having been given to the nature and cause of any delays incurred.
      2.   Such termination, cancellation and revocation shall be by ordinance
after a hearing before the Village Board. The Village shall give the operator
at least sixty (60) days' prior written notice of the hearing. The operator
shall have an opportunity before the Village Board to be fully heard and be
given a reasonable period of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, to cure any
and all defaults, omissions, breaches or causes for such termination,
cancellation or revocation. The Village Board shall make findings of fact in
connection with any termination, cancellation or revocation.
      3.   Upon such termination, cancellation or revocation and upon the
expiration of the term of the grant under this Chapter, the Village Board shall
have the option to be exercised within thirty (30) days thereof, of accepting
ownership of all system facilities at fair market value or of ordering the
operator to remove all system facilities from the Village. This shall not be a
limit upon any other remedies the Village may have in connection with the
operator's performance under this Chapter.
   C.   In the event the operator does not make such correction within sixty
(60) days from the receipt of such written notice, the Village may make such
correction itself and charge the cost of the same to the operator; provided,
however, that in the event the operator cannot reasonably make such correction
within such sixty (60) day period, the operator shall receive an additional
period of time as agreed upon by and between the operator and the Village to
make such correction.
   D.   The operator shall not be deemed nor declared to be in default under
any of the conditions, provisions, requirements or limitations of this Chapter
in any case in which the performance of any such condition, provision,
requirement or limitation by the operator is prevented by reason of strikes,
injunctions or any other cause, including acts of God, any lawsuit or
administrative agency proceedings, reasonably beyond the control of the
operator. In the event that the operator's performance is prevented by any such
cause, the time for performance shall be extended by the period during which
such cause was in effect. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
3-7-14: SALE, ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER:
The operator shall not sell, assign or transfer its CATV system nor transfer
any rights to privileges granted under this franchise without the approval of
the Village, unless such assignment or transfer is to a wholly owned subsidiary
or affiliated company of the operator. Any sale, assignment or transfer of the
CATV system shall not be effective until the transferee has filed in the office
of the Village Clerk an instrument duly executed and acknowledged,
acknowledging the fact of such sale, assignment of transfer, excepting the
terms and conditions of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the
obligations thereunder and fully complying with all bonding and insurance
requirements herein contained. (Ord. 96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
3-7-15: TERM OF FRANCHISE:
The term of this franchise shall remain in effect for a period of four (4)
years beginning August 7, 1996, and expiring August 7, 2000. If on or before
August 7, 2000, the CATV operator makes available eighty five (85) video
programming channels, or such other number of channels on a comparable basis as
is provided to the subscribers of Lake Zurich, the term of this franchise shall
be automatically extended, without further Village action, to August 7, 2008.
(Ord. 96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
3-7-16: FINAL TERMINATION OF THE FRANCHISE:
Within sixty (60) days of the termination of the franchise, or any renewal
thereof, except for underground cable, the operator shall remove its facilities
from all property of the Village and all space reserved for the Village's use
on property belonging to others. If not removed within the sixty (60) day
period, the Village shall have the right to remove or have its contractors
remove such facilities where such removal is necessary and practical at the
risk, cost and expense of the operator and with liability therefor.
Upon such termination of the franchise, the Village shall have the option,
exercisable within ten (10) days thereof, to purchase the CATV system at a
price mutually agreed upon by the parties. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
3-7-17: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
The franchise herein granted by this Chapter shall be subject to and controlled
by all of the provisions of the laws of the State and of the United States, and
State and Federal regulations, now existing or hereafter enacted, and all
permits required in connection therewith shall be obtained by the operator at
its own expense. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-1981)
3-7-18: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
Where the provisions of any prior ordinance or any portion thereof is in
conflict herewith, the more restrictive provision shall apply. (Ord. 81-O-324,
8-6-1981)
3-7-19: NOTICES:
Notices herein provided for shall be sent to the Village and/or operator via
prepaid, registered or certified mail. (Ord. 96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
3-7-20: LIQUIDATED DAMAGES:
In the event that the operator fails to perform in accordance with any of the
provisions of this Chapter and a forfeiture or revocation is declared then it
is understood and agreed that the Village shall be entitled to the sum of
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) as liquidated damages, which sum
shall be payable from the bond or letter of credit deposited with the Village
by the operator pursuant to the terms of this Chapter. (Ord. 81-O-324, 8-6-
1981)
3-7-21: EVALUATION OF GRANTEE'S PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Schedule For Evaluation: The franchising authority shall evaluate the
performance of the grantee for purposes of determining compliance with this
Chapter and to provide for consideration of technological changes in the state
of the art of cable television. The Village and the grantee shall hold
performance evaluation sessions within ninety (90) days of the second, third,
fifth, seventh, and ninth anniversary dates of the grantee's award of the
franchise (in accordance with the terms of the franchise agreement).
   B.   Information Required Of Grantee For Evaluation: Upon request by the
Village during the evaluation of grantee's performance, grantee shall cooperate
fully with the Village and provide such documents, records, schedules, logs,
reports, memoranda, ledgers, and other pertinent information which the Village
may request in order that a reasonable review of the cable system can be
performed. The Village may inquire in particular whether the grantee is
supplying at a level and variety of services equivalent to those being
generally offered at the time in the industry in comparable market situations.
   C.   Topics For Discussion During The Evaluation Process: Topics which may
be discussed during the evaluation process or at evaluation sessions shall
include, but not be limited to, the following: service rate structures,
franchise fees, penalties, applications of new technologies, repair and
maintenance services, billing procedures, service provided by customer service
representatives, system performance, programming offered, programming desired
by subscribers, subscriber complaints, rights of privacy, above and below
ground extension of cables and equipment, modifications to the franchise,
rulings of the Federal Communications Commission, Federal and State Courts of
law, and grantee or Village ordinances and other topics of concern in a
mutually beneficial business relationship. Franchising authority shall provide
grantee with a listing of topics for discussion fourteen (14) calendar days
prior to the date of a scheduled evaluation session.
   D.   Public Notice: Evaluation meetings shall be open to the public. The
Village shall be responsible for notifying the grantee, in writing, at least
sixty (60) days in advance, of each of the specified performance evaluation
sessions. Grantee shall provide notification of the sessions on the local
origination channel on the system no less than two (2) times between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. for two (2) weeks
prior to the week preceding the scheduled evaluation meeting or session. (Ord.
96-O-732, 10-7-1996)
CHAPTER 8
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE
SECTION:
3-8-1: License Required
3-8-2: License Fee
3-8-3: Limitation Of Number Of Licenses
3-8-4: Licenses Nontransferable
3-8-5: Ineligibility
3-8-6: Application
3-8-7: Penalty Fee
3-8-8: License Revocation
3-8-9: Proximity To Churches And Schools
3-8-10: Person Defined
3-8-11: General Penalty
3-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
An annual license shall be required for the privilege of operating any coin
operated amusement device within the village, within any premises open to the
public. (Ord. 82-O-340, 2-1-1982)
3-8-2: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for each coin operated amusement device shall be three hundred
seventy five dollars ($375.00) per device, per year. (Ord. 95-O-693, 4-3-1995)
3-8-3: LIMITATION OF NUMBER OF LICENSES:
No more than five (5) licenses shall be issued for no more than five (5) coin
operated amusement devices in any one premises. (Ord. 82-O-340, 2-1-1982)
3-8-4: LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE:
All licenses issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be
nontransferable and shall constitute merely a personal privilege, not property,
nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it
be alienable or transferable voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to be
encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of
testate or intestate devolution, but shall cease upon the death of the
licensee, provided that the executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee may
continue to operate the device until the expiration of the then current
license. (Ord. 82-O-340, 2-1-1982)
3-8-5: INELIGIBILITY:
No license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   B.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   C.   A person who has been convicted of a felony.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   E.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   F.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued pursuant to this chapter, would not be eligible for such license upon a
first application.
   G.   A copartnership, unless all members of such copartnership shall be
qualified to obtain a license.
   H.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship.
   I.   A corporation, unless it is incorporated within the state, or unless it
is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois business
corporation act 1  to transact business in Illinois.
   J.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required for the
licensee.
   K.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises within which the
device is to be located or who does not have a lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be issued.
   L.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any subsections of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 or as proscribed by
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-3 of the criminal code of 1961, approved
July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a
statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
   M.   A person to whom a federal gambling device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
   N.   A copartnership to which a federal gambling device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gambling device
stamp or a federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax
period.
   O.   A corporation if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock
of such corporation has been issued a federal gambling device stamp or a
federal wagering stamp for the current tax period.
   P.   Any premises for which a federal gambling device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period. (Ord. 82-O-340, 2-1-1982)
   Q.   Any person, corporation or other entity for the purposes of operating a
video gaming device as defined in the Illinois video gaming act 2 . (Ord. 09-O-
1044, 8-4-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.
2 1. 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
3-8-6: APPLICATION:
All applications for a license for a coin operated amusement device shall be in
the form available from the village clerk, which shall be properly sworn to by
the applicant for a license. The form shall include the name and the address of
the proposed licensee, a brief description of the device to be displayed, and
the premises in which the device will be located, with such other relevant data
as the village clerk shall require. The application for a license shall be
accompanied by the required license fee. (Ord. 82-O-340, 2-1-1982)
3-8-7: PENALTY FEE:
In addition to all other remedies found in this chapter, a penalty fee of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) shall be charged for any and all devices
which have been found to have been displayed without a license having been
secured therefor prior to the display. (Ord. 82-O-340, 2-1-1982)
3-8-8: LICENSE REVOCATION:
The village liquor control commission is hereby authorized to revoke any
license issued by it after notice and hearing if it finds that there has been a
violation of this chapter. No license shall be revoked except after a hearing
by the village liquor control commission. The village liquor control commission
may fix the time and place of such hearing, but shall give at least seven (7)
days' notice of the time and place of the hearing to the person displaying the
device on which the license is sought to be revoked. The order revoking such
license shall not be effective until after such hearing has been held. (Ord.
82-O-340, 2-1-1982)
3-8-9: PROXIMITY TO CHURCHES AND SCHOOLS:
No license shall issue for the display of any coin operated amusement device
within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school as measured from
property line to property line. (Ord. 82-O-340, 2-1-1982)
3-8-10: PERSON DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "person" as used herein shall mean
and include any individual, corporation, partnership, association or any other
legal entity. (Ord. 82-O-340, 2-1-1982)
3-8-11: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined a sum
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the maximum as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have
been committed on each day in which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 82-
O-340, 2-1-1982; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 9
SOLICITATION OF FUNDS FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES
(Rep. by Ord. 21-O-015, 7-20-2021)
CHAPTER 10
REGISTRATION OF BUSINESS REQUIRED
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definitions
3-10-2: Purpose
3-10-3: Registration Required
3-10-4: Registration Form
3-10-5: Fees
3-10-6: Inspections
3-10-7: Registration Certificate
3-10-8: Penalty
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: Any commercial or business use located in a building
situated within the B, PD-1, PD-3, or PD-4 Zoning District.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, association, partnership or any other
legal entity. (Ord. 88-O-485, 9-12-1988)
3-10-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide sufficient information for the
Village to enable the Village to provide better life, health, and safety
services to business establishments and better security for them, as well as
provide a means to facilitate communication from the Village to owners of
business establishments. (Ord. 88-O-485, 9-12-1988)
3-10-3: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business establishment in the
Village without having previously thereto obtained a registration certificate
for said place of business from the Village Clerk in accordance with the terms
contained herein. (Ord. 88-O-485, 9-12-1988)
3-10-4: REGISTRATION FORM:
All owners of business establishments shall, on or before June 30 of each
calendar year, register with the Village Clerk each business establishment on a
form provided by the Village Clerk. (Ord. 15-O-002, 3-17-2015)
3-10-5: FEES:
The fee for a registration certificate and each annual renewal shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) plus the cost of any inspections.
   All business square footage:
 
0 to 2,000       $ 65.00
2,001 to 5,000   100.00
5,001 to 10,000  200.00
10,001 to 50,000 400.00
50,001 and over  800.00
 
(Ord. 17-O-006, 4-18-2017)
3-10-6: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Application Investigation: An inspector of the Fire Protection District
serving the property, the Police Chief, and the Building Commissioner shall
make or cause to be made such investigations as they deem necessary to
determine that the applicant's proposed occupation and operation of the
premises is in conformity with the provisions of this Code. No certificate
shall be issued to any applicant whose proposed occupation or operations do not
comply with the applicable provisions of this Code. In the event that a
certificate is denied, the reasons for denial shall be submitted in writing to
the applicant.
   B.   Compliance Inspections: The above described officials shall inspect as
often as they deem necessary the operations and premises of any licensee during
normal business hours, to confirm that the occupancy and utilization of the
premises is in conformity with the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 88-O-485, 9-
12-1988)
3-10-7: REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE:
The Village Clerk shall, upon receipt of the registration forms from the owner
of the business establishment, supply to that owner, after the required
inspection, a registration certificate which shall in turn be prominently
displayed by the applicant upon the premises of the business establishment.
(Ord. 88-O-485, 9-12-1988)
3-10-8: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful to own or operate a "business establishment" within the
Village as herein defined without having registered such business establishment
with the Village Clerk in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Any person
violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the maximum as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have
been committed on each day in which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 88-
O-485, 9-12-1988; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 11
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: Tax Imposed
3-11-3: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-11-4: Returns To Department
3-11-5: Resellers
3-11-6: Effective Date Of Rate Amendment
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross
charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
termination point within this municipality and charges for that portion of the
interoffice channels provided within this municipality. Charges for that
portion of the interoffice channel connecting two (2) or more channel
termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional
boundary of this municipality, shall be determined by the retailer by
multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the interoffice channel by
a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points
that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of this municipality and
the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points
connected by the interoffice channel. However, "gross charge" shall not include
any of the following:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to customers'
bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public
utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce
commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the
village;
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the department of commerce and economic
opportunity;
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
   G.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication
devices;
   I.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act;
   J.   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those
charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable, 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice, and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on
the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the
nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the
sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a
combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of
any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision
of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state,
who, to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to
ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be
the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state.
The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and
state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or
permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means
a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this section,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the retailers' occupation tax act. (Ord. 11-O-002, 2-1-2011, eff. 2-1-
2011)
3-11-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts or privileges:
   A.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of four
percent (4.0%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multimunicipal taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event,
shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by
this section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in
the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
municipal tax.
   B.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of four
percent (4.0%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate or multimunicipal taxation
of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any
taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or
municipality in this state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any
tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the
amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax
properly due and paid in a municipality in this state which was not previously
allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this state.
   C.   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege
to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality. (Ord. 11-O-002, 2-1-2011, eff. 2-1-2011)
3-11-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale
at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the
manner provided by the department.
   B.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 11-O-002, 2-1-2011, eff. 2-1-2011)
3-11-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before the last day of February 2003, and on or before the last day of
every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication
retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required
by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act 1  and any accompanying rules and regulations
created by the department to implement the act. (Ord. 11-O-002, 2-1-2011, eff.
2-1-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 636/5-50.
3-11-5: RESELLERS:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax
free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active
resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is
nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 11-O-002, 2-1-2011, eff.
2-1-2011)
3-11-6: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATE AMENDMENT:
   A.   Four Percent Tax Rate Effective On And After July 1, 2011: The
simplified municipal telecommunications tax authorized by this chapter to be
imposed at the rate of four percent (4.0%) with respect to the gross charges
billed by telecommunications retailers with respect to the act or privilege of
originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate and
interstate telecommunications shall be effective with respect to the gross
charges billed by telecommunications retailers on or after July 1, 2011.
   B.   One Percent Tax Rate Effective Until July 1, 2011: The simplified
municipal telecommunications tax now imposed by the village at the rate of one
percent (1.0%) with respect to the gross charges billed by telecommunications
retailers with respect to the act or privilege of originating in the
municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate and interstate
telecommunications shall continue in effect until July 1, 2011, provided,
however, that any amounts due or payable to the village for any tax periods
ending prior to July 1, 2011, shall nevertheless remain payable as if this
chapter had not been adopted. (Ord. 11-O-002, 2-1-2011, eff. 2-1-2011)
CHAPTER 12
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-12-3: PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
3-12-4: Applicable Principles
3-12-5: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-12-6: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-12-7: Late Fees; Payments
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 07-O-996, 10-16-2007)
3-12-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the village.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance codified herein by the holder. The ordinance codified herein
shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's
application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)
(6) to the village.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 07-O-996, 10-16-2007)
3-12-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to section
3-12-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village
or its designee for PEG access support in the village.
   C.   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village
or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in subsection
3-12-2D of this chapter.
   D.   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   E.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to this subsection may be credited
against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this section.
(Ord. 07-O-996, 10-16-2007)
3-12-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 07-O-996, 10-16-2007)
3-12-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 07-O-996,
10-16-2007)
3-12-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for
the sum. (Ord. 07-O-996, 10-16-2007)
3-12-7: LATE FEES; PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 07-O-996, 10-16-
2007)
CHAPTER 13
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
3-13-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
3-13-2: Enforcement
3-13-3: Penalties
3-13-4: Customer Credits
3-13-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   A.   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
   B.   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 07-O-997, 10-
16-2007)
3-13-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village. (Ord. 07-O-997, 10-16-2007)
3-13-3: PENALTIES:
The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does
hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable
and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer.
   A.   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   B.   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified
material breach.
   C.   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 07-O-997, 10-16-2007)
3-13-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the
customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the
discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for
providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the
credit. (Ord. 07-O-997, 10-16-2007)
CHAPTER 14
CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Contractor's Registration Required
3-14-2: Violations And Penalties
3-14-1: CONTRACTOR'S REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall engage as a
general contractor, subcontractor, or construction manager, for electrical,
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, sewer work, water, septic or sewage
disposal systems, storm sewer, fence, concrete, driveway, patio, roadway,
roofing, siding, or construction work of any nature and description in the
village, unless they first register and pay the required fee to do business in
the village. The annual fee for such contractor's registration shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00), and each such registration shall be valid for twelve (12)
months from the date of issuance. The village administrator, or his or her
designee, shall have the right to suspend or revoke any such registration,
after thirty (30) days' notice sent by regular U.S. mail to the last known
address of the registrant in order to provide the registrant with an
opportunity to be heard. The village administrator, or his or her designee, may
consider customer complaints, previous job related issues, failed inspections,
and other relevant information in determining whether or not to revoke,
suspend, and/or decline to reissue a registration. (Ord. 11-O-013, 6-7-2011,
eff. 6-7-2011)
3-14-2: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person or entity who shall fail to register pursuant to this chapter, shall
pay a penalty of one and one-half (1.5) times the current registration fee. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 11-O-013, 6-7-2011, eff. 6-7-2011)
CHAPTER 15
SHORT TERM RENTALS
SECTION:
3-15-1: Purpose
3-15-2: Definitions
3-15-3: Short Term Rentals Restricted
3-15-4: Penalties
3-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and preserve the quiet enjoyment of
residential properties and neighborhoods within the Village and to mitigate
and/or eliminate adverse secondary effects the Village and its residents have
experienced by reason of short term rental(s) of certain residential structure
(s) in the Village, including, but not limited to, gatherings by attendees who
have little connection to or consideration for the neighborhoods or neighbors,
which gatherings have been characterized by excessive noise, overcrowded
parking, and most recently, suspected criminal activity. (Ord. 17-O-022, 11-21-
2017)
3-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following phrases shall have the definitions
as set forth below:
RENTAL PREMISES: All or part of a principal structure or accessory structure
being rented or otherwise let to person(s) other than the owner of the subject
property.
SHORT TERM RENTAL: The accessory use and/or occupancy for a period of less than
twelve (12) months of a principal structure or accessory structure pursuant to
a written or oral agreement which permits and/or provides for occupancy of all
or part of such structure by any person other than the owner thereof, or an
immediate family member of the owner thereof, and whether or not the permission
of such occupancy is in exchange for consideration therefor. (Ord. 17-O-022,
11-21-2017)
3-15-3: SHORT TERM RENTALS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, leasing, renting, offering or
inviting the leasing or renting, or otherwise permitting the short term rental
and/or occupancy of any dwelling and/or accessory structure located within the
Village for less than twelve (12) consecutive months at a time shall be
prohibited, with the exception of a hotel or similar establishment duly
licensed by the Village, and such conduct shall be prohibited, whether engaged
in or participated in by the owner(s) of the property, one or more agent(s) of
the property owner(s), and/or by any person(s) leasing, or seeking to lease as
a lessor(s), or renting or seeking to rent as lessee(s) and/or otherwise occupy
a premises as tenant(s) and/or temporary occupant(s) thereof.
   B.   The term of any lease or occupancy agreement which has satisfied the
minimum term required by this section may be extended on a month to month basis
on the condition that the tenant(s) remain(s) the same.
   C.   Dwellings shall not be leased, or otherwise permitted to be occupied by
other than the same tenant, more than two (2) times during any consecutive
twelve (12) month period unless the rental agreement therefor has been
terminated by reason of a tenant default.
   D.   The restrictions of this chapter shall be applicable whether the rental
premises comprise(s) all or a part of the principal structure, or all or part
of any accessory structure.
   E.   Whether or not consideration is exchanged for the lease and/or rental
of a premises shall not affect the fact that the occupancy thereof is treated
as a short term rental for the purposes of this chapter if the definition
thereof is otherwise applicable to such activity.
   F.   The property owner shall remain responsible for compliance with all
applicable provisions of this Code and/or the Village zoning ordinance during
the term of any rental and/or occupancy agreement and/or during the term of any
occupancy of the rental premises by persons other than the property owner.
   G.   No temporary structure shall be permitted to be used for a short term
rental.
   H.   The prohibition on short term rentals as herein provided shall not
apply when the immediately preceding owner of a property maintains possession
of the dwelling unit after closing on a real estate transaction for the sale
thereof and leases said property back from the successor owner for a period of
time pursuant to a written agreement.
   I.   Each day a principal structure or any accessory structure in the
Village is offered for rent as a short term rental, is leased or rented as a
short term rental, and/or each day a principal structure or any accessory
structure is occupied as a "short term rental", as that term is defined herein,
shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-022, 11-21-
2017)
3-15-4: PENALTIES:
Notwithstanding anything otherwise provided in this Code to the contrary, any
person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day, nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. Each day a principal
structure or any accessory structure is offered for rent as a short term
rental, is leased or rented as a short term rental, and/or each day a principal
structure or any accessory structure is occupied as a short term rental shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter. Without any limitation on the
foregoing, each day a violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be a
separate offense, and each such offense shall be subject to not less than the
minimum mandatory daily fine. (Ord. 17-O-022, 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 16
TATTOOS AND BODY PIERCING
SECTION:
3-16-1: License Required
3-16-2: Closing Hours
3-16-3: Location
3-16-4: Minors, Restrictions
3-16-5: Acts of Agents Or Employees
3-16-6: Comply With Other Regulations
3-16-7: Revocation Of License
3-16-8: Penalty
3-16-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required: No person shall operate a business in which the
practice of marking the skin with indelible patterns or pictures by making
punctures and inserting pigments or the puncturing or piercing of the skin of a
person for the insertion of jewelry or other adornment takes place without
first procuring a license in the manner provided by this section.
   B.   Applicant: A person, business, or corporation may apply to the Village
Board of Trustees for a license to allow the establishment of a tattoo or
piercing studio. No license shall be issued unless the applicant, along with
other requirements in this section, shows proof of compliance, to the
satisfaction of Village staff, with the conditions listed in subsection C of
this section. In the application the applicant shall be responsible for naming
the person who shall be responsible for assuring compliance and giving notice
to the Village should that person change during the term of the license.
   C.   Conditions: Before any applicant is granted a license or renewal
pursuant to this section and throughout the duration of an issued license, the
applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of Village staff, compliance
with the following conditions and requirements:
      1.   Copy of State License;
      2.   Copy of a Lake County Health Department Inspection Report; and
      3.   Completed Village of Kildeer Business Registration form with
payment.
   D.   Application: An application for such license shall be signed by the
applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a
corporation, with a nonrefundable fifty dollar ($50.00) fee and shall contain
the following:
      1.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; if a corporation the name and address of the duly authorized agent
who signed the application;
      2.   The name, location and a description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated with the license authorized pursuant to this
section;
      3.   Proof of compliance with the provisions of Village Code
3-16-1(C);
      4.   The name and address of the person who shall be responsible for
ensuring compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. This person may be
the same as the applicant.
   E.   Village Rights: The Village retains the right to review, renew, or
revoke a license granted under this section.
   F.   Number of Licenses: One (1). (Ord. 20-O-012, 8-18-2020)
3-16-2: CLOSING HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business pursuant to this
Chapter 16 between the hours of 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. Monday through Sunday.
(Ord. 20-O-012, 8-18-2020)
3-16-3: LOCATION:
Each license issued hereunder shall permit the services to be provided only on
the premises described in the application and license. (Ord. 20-O-012, 8-18-
2020)
3-16-4: MINORS, RESTRICTIONS:
Sales To Minors, Mental Incompetents: No licensee shall provide tattooing or
body piercing services to any person who is not reached the age of twenty-one
(21) or to any intoxicated person, or to any person known by him to be insane,
feeble minded or a distracted person. (Ord. 20-O-012, 8-18-2020)
3-16-5: ACTS OF AGENTS OR EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee, if said act is committed or omission is made with
the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and
held to be the act of such employer or licensee and said employer or licensee
shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done
or omitted by him personally. (Ord. 20-O-012, 8-18-2020)
3-16-6: COMPLY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the owner, proprietor, or
person in charge of the premises where tattooing or body piercing services are
provided from the restrictions and requirements of any other ordinance or
ordinances of the Village or the statutes of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 20-O-
012, 8-18-2020)
3-16-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license granted under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked upon
the violation by any licensee, his agents or employees, of any Village
ordinance or state or federal law pertaining to tattooing or body piercing.
Upon the revocation of the license, a notice of revocation shall be posted on
the door of the premises previously licensed and upon each and every regularly
designated posting area for the Village within five (5) days after such
revocation. There shall be no rebate of license fees after a revocation. (Ord.
20-O-012, 8-18-2020)
3-16-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as set forth
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
20-O-012, 8-18-2020)
CHAPTER 17
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
3-17-1: Applicability Of Provisions
3-17-2: Definitions
3-17-3: License
3-17-4: License Application Requirements
3-17-5: Application Filing; Renewals
3-17-6: License Fees
3-17-7: License Revocation Or Suspension
3-17-8: Video Gaming Permitted Only In Designated Licensed Premises
3-17-9: Limitations On Number Of Video Gaming Terminals On Premises
3-17-10: Prohibition
3-17-11: Exceptions
3-17-12: Licensed Establishments
3-17-13: Privilege Granted By License; Transferability
3-17-14: Licenses Subject To Amendments
3-17-15: Seizure Of Unauthorized Gambling Devices And Gambling Funds
3-17-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided, shall apply to
all video gaming as hereinafter defined, whether specifically licensed or
regulated under other provisions of this code or other ordinances, or not.
(Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021)
3-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
BOARD:                             The Illinois Gaming Board.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES:         As defined in Section 18b-101 of the
                                   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/18b-101.
                                   Any business licensed by the State of
                                   Illinois to have or operate a video gaming
                                   device in the Village, including any
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT:            licensed fraternal establishment, licensed
                                   veterans establishment and licensed truck
                                   stop establishment as those terms are
                                   defined in the VGA, 230 ILCS 40/5.
                                   The location where a qualified fraternal
LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT:  organization that derives its charter from a
                                   national fraternal organization regularly
                                   meets.
                                   A facility (i) that is at least a three-acre
                                   facility with a convenience store; (ii) with
                                   separate diesel islands for fueling
                                   commercial motor vehicles; (iii) that sells
                                   at retail more than 10,000 gallons of diesel
LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT: or biodiesel fuel per month; and (iv) with
                                   parking spaces for commercial motor
                                   vehicles. The requirement of item (iii) of
                                   this paragraph may be met by showing that
                                   estimated future sales or past sales average
                                   at least 10,000 gallons per month.
                                   The location where a qualified veterans
LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT:   organization that derives its charter from a
                                   national veterans organization regularly
                                   meets.
                                   Any electronic video game machine that, upon
                                   insertion of cash, is available to play or
                                   simulate the play of a video game, including
                                   but not limited to, video poker, line up and
                                   blackjack, as authorized by the Board
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL:             utilizing a video display and
                                   microprocessors in which the player may
                                   receive free games or credits that can be
                                   redeemed for cash. The term does not include
                                   a machine that directly dispenses coins,
                                   cash or tokens or is for amusement purposes
                                   only. (Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021)
 
3-17-3: LICENSE:
   A.   No person, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent, or in
any other capacity, shall operate or permit to be operated any video gaming
terminal, as defined herein, at any premises within the Village without first
having obtained a video gaming license from the Village. The license provided
for in this Article shall permit a licensee to operate video gaming terminals
at the specified establishment.
   B.   No applicant, including any person, either as owner, lessee, manager,
officer or agent, shall be eligible for a video gaming license from the
Village, nor shall an existing license holder be entitled to maintain a video
gaming license, unless each of the following requirements are met and continue
to be met:
      1.   The applicant holds the appropriate certificate or license from the
State of Illinois permitting video gaming and is in good standing with same;
      2.   The establishment must maintain customer seating outside of the
gaming area but within the premises at a ratio of at least five seats for each
permitted video gaming terminal, however, this requirement shall not apply for
Licensed Truck Stop Establishments;
      3.   The applicant is not in arrears in any tax, fee or bill due to the
Village or State of Illinois;
      4.   The applicant has completed and complies with all the application
requirements set forth in Section
3-17-4 of this Article and is not disqualified due to a felony, gambling
offense, or crime of moral turpitude; and
      5.   The establishment is located within a business zoning district.
   C.   To be eligible to have video gaming at an establishment, the net
terminal income generated at the establishment from video gaming cannot exceed
20% of the total gross revenues generated.
   D.   The Village President shall be the approving authority for all
licenses. In the event a licensee or prospective licensee disagrees with any
action taken by the Village President, an appeal may be made directly to the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village at its next regularly scheduled
meeting after written notice of the action from which an appeal is made.
   E.   License Classifications:
      1.   Class VB - Video gaming is permitted only where there is a valid
Class B liquor license.
      Number of licenses - 1
      2.   Class VM - video gaming is permitted only where there is a valid
Class M liquor license.
      Number of licenses - 1
   (Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 24-O-014, 6-18-2024; Ord. 24-O-023,
11-19-2024)
3-17-4: LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The license applicant shall provide the following information to the Village on
a form provided by the Village:
   A.   The legal name of the establishment;
   B.   The business name of the establishment;
   C.   The address of the establishment where the video gaming terminals are
to be located;
   D.   The type of establishment, including whether it is classified as a
veteran, fraternal, regular truck stop or liquor establishment and supporting
documentation demonstrating the classification;
   E.   A floor plan, drawn to scale using a computer, detailing the overall
layout of the establishment, including the location and count of dining
seating, the location and count of video gaming terminals and seating for said
terminals, and other significant features of the establishment, including exit
locations, restrooms and other equipment. A high-resolution electronic copy of
the floor plan as well as a paper printed copy (no smaller than 11 inches by 17
inches) shall be submitted at the time of application; hand-drawn floor plans
and floor plans not including a scale will not be accepted. This requirement
shall not be required for Licensed Truck Stop Establishments;
   F.   The amount of time the establishment has been in business under the
ownership of the applicant at the location where video gaming is proposed to
take place;
   G.   The business office address of the establishment if different from the
address of the establishment;
   H.   In the case of a corporation, limited liability company or trust, the
name and address of an agent authorized and designated to accept service on
behalf of the licensee;
   I.   A phone number for the establishment;
   J.   An e-mail address for the establishment;
   K.   The name and address of every person owning more than a 5% share of the
establishment;
   L.   The name, address, phone number and e-mail address of any terminal
operator or distributor proposed to own, service or maintain video gaming
terminals at the establishment;
   M.   A copy of the establishment’s State of Illinois video gaming license;
   N.   In the case of a corporation, limited liability company or partnership,
a copy of the establishment’s state certificate of good standing;
   O.   A statement as to the number of video gaming terminals which the
establishment proposes to have on its premises (not to exceed ten for all
establishments);
   P.   A statement that the establishment is not in arrears in any tax, fee or
bill due to the Village or State of Illinois;
   Q.   A statement that the establishment agrees to abide by all state and
federal laws and any local ordinance;
   R.   A statement that no manager or owner with more than 5% interest in the
establishment has ever been convicted of a felony, a gambling offense or a
crime of moral turpitude. In the event that an establishment cannot provide
such statement, the establishment may apply for a certificate of rehabilitation
from the Chief Village Officer indicating that the individual who would
disqualify the establishment from obtaining the video gaming license has been
rehabilitated and is no longer a threat to violate the law. The Chief Village
Officer may consider the nature of the offense, the length of time since the
offense, the length of time since release from custody and other factors to
determine if the individual has been rehabilitated such that he or she is no
longer likely to commit another offense;
   S.   If the application is for a new establishment based on the business
model of another existing location, information regarding the existing business
location must be provided, including the type of business, the gross receipts
as compared to any video gaming revenue for the prior 12-month period, proof of
the length of time the existing business has been operational and proof of
ownership verifying the applicant’s ownership rights;
   T.   For renewal applications, a report or reports showing its gross annual
revenue for the previous calendar year by category of revenue generated and
showing the percentage of gaming revenue payable to the establishment as
compared to the total gross revenues of the establishment.
(Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 23-O-011, 6-20-2023)
3-17-5: APPLICATION FILING; RENEWALS:
Applications shall be processed by the Village Clerk on a first come, first
served basis. Every application shall be date and time stamped upon filing. An
application received in the mail shall be considered filed on the date and time
it is opened by the Village Clerk’s department.
   A.   Every video gaming license holder shall be required to file a renewal
application, which may contain the same or similar information as set forth in
Section
3-17-4. Renewal applications shall be due on or before July 1 unless that day
falls on a holiday, in which case the application may be received by the Clerk
on the following business day. (Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021)
3-17-6: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for operation of a video gaming terminal shall be $1,000.00 per
terminal annually. Said fees are not subject to proration or refund and are due
prior to issuance of the license.
All licenses required by this division shall be prominently displayed next to
the video gaming terminal. (Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 23-O-005, 2-
21-2023)
3-17-7: LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
The Village President, at any time, may notify any licensee under this division
within five (5) business days of any charge of a violation of any of the
provisions of this Article in connection with the operation of any video gaming
terminal. After a hearing presided over by the Village President, the Village
President may order the revocation, suspension for up to 7 days or the
imposition of a fine in an amount not to exceed $750.00 per occurrence as to
any license upon a finding that the violation has occurred. The licensee may
appeal the revocation, suspension or imposition of a fine by filing a written
appeal to the Village Board within thirty (30) days of the entry of the Village
President’s order.
In the event of the revocation or denial of any license or registration under
this Section, such person shall not be issued any license provided for in this
Article for one calendar year following the revocation or any appeal thereof.
(Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021)
3-17-8: VIDEO GAMING PERMITTED ONLY IN DESIGNATED LICENSED PREMISES:
Video Gaming as defined under the Illinois Video Gaming Act 230 ILCS 40/1 et
seq. and this Chapter shall be permitted only where there is a valid Class B,
B.1 and M liquor license.
(Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 23-O-011, 6-20-2023)
3-17-9: LIMITATIONS ON NUMBER OF VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS ON PREMISES:
There shall be no more than ten (10) video gaming terminals allowed for each VM
licensee at any one location.
(Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 24-O-015, 6-18-2024)
3-17-10: PROHIBITION:
Except as otherwise excepted in this Article, it shall be unlawful for any
person to gamble within the corporate limits of the Village, or for any person
or entity which owns, occupies or controls an establishment within the Village
to knowingly permit others to gamble on the premises. (Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-
2021)
3-17-11: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prohibit or make unlawful the
following activities or forms of gambling: the keeping, possession, ownership,
use or playing of a video gaming terminal in a licensed establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or licensed veterans
establishment, which is licensed by the Board to conduct or allow such specific
activities under the VGA, 230 ILCS 40/1, et seq. (Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021)
3-17-12: LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS:
Any business, liquor or food licensee within the corporate limits of the
Village that allows gambling to occur on premises in violation of this Section
shall be subject to having his/her/its license immediately revoked for a period
of sixty (60) days. Any business, liquor or food licensee within the corporate
limits of the Village that allows gambling to occur on premises in violation of
this Article a second time shall have his/her/its license permanently revoked
and, thereafter, barred from obtaining any business, liquor or food license
within the Village. (Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021)
3-17-13: PRIVILEGE GRANTED BY LICENSE; TRANSFERABILITY:
A license granted under this chapter shall be purely a personal privilege, good
for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as provided in
this chapter, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the cessation of business or
death of the licensee. (Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021)
3-17-14: LICENSES SUBJECT TO AMENDMENTS:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to any and all
changes or amendments that may be hereafter made to the provisions of this
chapter or to any rules or changes in rules adopted by the Liquor Commissioner.
No licensee shall have any vested right to the continuation of any provision of
this chapter. (Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021)
3-17-15: SEIZURE OF UNAUTHORIZED GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS:
Any gambling device which is not authorized by this Article shall be subject to
immediate seizure and confiscation by the Village. Any money or other thing of
value intrinsically related to acts of gambling not authorized by this Article
shall be seized and forfeited as contraband. Disposition of such gambling
devices and funds seized or confiscated shall be made in accordance with the
law. (Ord. 21-O-026, 12-21-2021)
CHAPTER 18
AMUSEMENT TAX
SECTION:
3-18-1: Purpose
3-18-2: Definitions
3-18-3: License Required
3-18-4: Amusement Tax Imposed
3-18-5: Tax Collection
3-18-6: Penalties
3-18-7: License Suspension Or Revocation
3-18-8: Rules, Regulations, Procedures Authorized
3-18-9: Refund Or Credit
3-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the establishment of a tax on
amusements operated for gain within the corporate boundaries of the Village.
(Ord. 25-O-002, 2-18-2025)
3-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall
have the meanings given to them in this Section.
AMUSEMENT: Any entertainment or recreational activity offered for public
participation at amusement facilities, including amusement parks, amusement
arcades, and other amusement and recreation industries as defined in the North
American Industry Classification System 2007 (“NAICS”) Classification codes
713110 and 713990.
PATRON:
   1.   Any person admitted to any amusement in the Village for which an
admission fee or charge is imposed.
   2.   Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires a ticket or pass of any
kind from a place other than the location where such ticket or pass is
purchased or acquired for admission to any amusement within the Village.
GROSS RECEIPTS: All fees or charges received or collected in the form of
admission fees or other charges for the admission to and/or for the use or
rental of any Amusement for the purpose of witnessing, participating in, or
utilizing any Amusement, regardless of whether such fees or charges are
characterized as admission fees, fees for participation, membership fees, use
charges, rental or service charges. Gross receipts shall be exclusive of any
tax imposed by the United States government, the State of Illinois, or any
other governmental unit. (Ord. 25-O-002, 2-18-2025; amd. Ord. 25-O-011, 7-15-
2025)
3-18-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Requirement: No person or business entity shall establish, operate,
conduct, host, or hold, directly or indirectly, an Amusement within the Village
unless a valid Amusement License has been issued for the business or event.
   B.   Application for License: Any person or business entity desiring to
secure an Amusement License from the Village shall complete and file with the
Village Treasurer an application for an Amusement License on such forms as
prescribed by the Village Treasurer. The Village Treasurer is hereby authorized
and directed to issue such Amusement Licenses in accordance with this Chapter,
and to collect the annual Amusement License Fee imposed herein.
   C.   License Fee: An annual license fee of $100.00 is hereby imposed and
shall be paid by the applicant to the Village Treasurer upon filing of the
Amusement License Application.
   D.   Term of License: Each Amusement License issued under the provisions of
this Chapter shall be valid for a period of up to one (1) year, provided
however, that each Amusement License shall terminate on the thirty-first day of
January next following its issuance, unless sooner revoked.
   E.   Continuing Obligation to Supply Information: If any supplied
information or statements to receive an Amusement License becomes invalid, it
is the duty of the holder of the Amusement License to provide updated
information to the Village Treasurer.
   F.   Renewal: Any license may be renewed at the expiration thereof provided
the licensee is qualified to receive an Amusement License. The renewal
privilege provided herein shall not be construed as a vested property right and
can be denied for failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
   G.   Non-Transferability: Amusement Licenses are not transferable.
   H.   License to be Posted: Every holder of an Amusement License under the
provisions of this Chapter shall cause the Amusement License to be hung in
plain view in a conspicuous place at or near where the Amusement is held. (Ord.
25-O-002, 2-18-2025)
3-18-4: AMUSEMENT TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the gross
receipts collected on the admission fee or charge imposed upon every amusement
patron for the privilege of admission to any amusement in the Village. (Ord.
25-O-002, 2-18-2025)
3-18-5: TAX COLLECTION:
   A.   The tax shall be collected by any person or business entity conducting
an amusement at the time the taxable fees are paid from those persons who
attend, witness, or participate in such amusement.
   B.   The tax so collected shall be due and payable on the 15th day of each
month for the preceding calendar month, in which the taxes were collected. The
tax shall be paid to and collected by the Village Treasurer.
   C.   The licensee for the amusement shall keep complete and accurate
records, books and accounts in detail of all gross receipts for such amusements
and such receipts shall be kept and made available at the place of amusement or
such other place in the Village as may be designated in writing by the person
liable for the tax. The Village Treasurer or designee shall have the right at
all reasonable times to check the books and records of any person, or business
entity that operates an amusement for the purpose of auditing the collection of
such tax. Every person required to collect a tax pursuant to this Chapter shall
be considered a tax collector for the Village. All amusement taxes collected
shall be held by such tax collector as trustee for and on behalf of the
Village. The failure of the tax collector to collect the tax shall not exclude
or release the obligation to pay the tax.
   D.   On or before the 15th day of each calendar month, each person or
business entity responsible for collection of the tax provided for in this
Chapter shall make a report in writing and file it with the Village Treasurer
stating the total number of paid admissions, if applicable, the gross receipts
for paid admissions for the amusement and the total tax collected for such
period. (Ord. 25-O-002, 2-18-2025)
3-18-6: PENALTIES:
Any person or business entity failing to pay the tax provided, or failing to
file the report of fees and charges required by this Chapter, or willfully and
knowingly making a false report, or violating any of the terms of this Chapter,
may be fined a penalty in the sum of not more than $750.00 per offense after a
hearing conducted pursuant to the administrative hearing procedures as set
forth in the Village Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs. The Village Treasurer or designee is
authorized to institute administrative proceedings, or use other methods to
enforce this Chapter, including relief in the Circuit Court for the Nineteenth
Judicial Circuit, Lake County, Illinois. An additional penalty of 5% shall be
added for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction of thirty (30) days for
which the failure to file a return or make full payment continues. The penalty
for any single violation under this section shall not exceed 25% in the
aggregate for each return that is not filed or paid in full. The penalty
imposed herein shall be in addition to the tax and any other penalties as set
forth in this Chapter. In addition, failure to collect, remit, report or pay
any Amusement Tax shall be grounds for the suspension, revocation and/or non-
renewal of an Amusement License. (Ord. 25-O-002, 2-18-2025)
3-18-7: LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The Village President may suspend or revoke any license issued to a person or
business entity responsible for collecting the tax provided for in this Chapter
for failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter. A revocation or
suspension shall take place only after a hearing conducted by the Village
President pursuant to the administrative hearing procedures as set forth in the
Village Code. (Ord. 25-O-002, 2-18-2025)
3-18-8: RULES, REGULATIONS, PROCEDURES AUTHORIZED:
The Village Treasurer is authorized to adopt promulgate and enforce reasonable
rules, regulations, procedures, including the required use of forms to report
and collect the tax imposed by the provision of this Chapter. (Ord. 25-O-002,
2-18-2025)
3-18-9: REFUND OR CREDIT:
In order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the Village, no
person shall be entitled to a refund of or credit for any tax imposed under
this Chapter unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one
year of the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the Village. (Ord.
25-O-002, 2-18-2025)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION, GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Title
4-1-2: Application Of Provisions
4-1-3: Building Commissioner
4-1-4: Deputy Building Commissioner (Rep. by Ord. 97-O-739, 1-4-1997)
4-1-5: Rules Adopted By Reference
4-1-6: Interpretation
4-1-7: Nonconforming Building Or Structure
4-1-8: Hazardous Building Or Construction Condition
4-1-9: Violation
4-1-10: Separability
4-1-11: Penalty
4-1-12: Variations By The Board Of Trustees
4-1-1: TITLE:
This title, including the rules and regulations it adopts by reference, is
entitled the BUILDING ORDINANCE. The "number" designations used to set off or
identify its various parts refer to sections, subsections, paragraphs, rules,
regulations or other divisions as the text or arrangement may indicate.
Reference to any one of these parts may be by such a designation alone. (Ord.
71-O-168, 4-1-1971)
4-1-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the administration and
enforcement of the building ordinance, other pertinent ordinances and laws
applicable to any regulated building, structure, part or appurtenance thereof,
and/or connection to village infrastructure. In addition:
   A.   No building or structure, or parts or appurtenances thereof, such as
water supply, sewage disposal, plumbing installation, and electrical
installation, located in the village shall be erected, installed, altered,
converted, remodeled, structurally repaired, moved, demolished or changed
except in conformity with the regulations and requirements established in this
building ordinance and all other ordinances relating to building or zoning or
other infrastructure including, but not limited to, sewage disposal. No
connections shall be made to village infrastructure located outside the village
except in conformity with said village ordinances. (Ord. 01-O-822, 1-17-2001)
   B.   All buildings and structures, and parts and appurtenances thereof, both
existing and hereafter erected or installed, shall be so maintained that the
occupants and users thereof and others are reasonably safe from the hazards of
fire, explosion, collapse, contagion and spread of infectious disease. If found
by the building commissioner not so maintained, he may order necessary
corrective work, repair, replacement or removal.
   C.   These rules and regulations set forth requirements which are considered
reasonable and are held in every instance to be the minimum for the promotion
of public health, safety and the general welfare. (Ord. 71-O-168, 4-1-1971)
4-1-3: BUILDING COMMISSIONER:
   A.   Creation And Appointment: There is hereby created the position of
building commissioner, who shall be appointed by the village president and
board of trustees upon recommendation by the village administrator. The
building commissioner shall be a certified enforcement official for applicable
codes and plan review. The village administrator may, upon recommendation of
the building commissioner, employ and/or contract with such additional licensed
inspectors as may be required by state or federal regulations. (Ord. 05-O-928,
2-1-2005)
   B.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the building commissioner to see to the
enforcement of all the provisions of this code and all other ordinances
relating to building or zoning 1  and to inspect all buildings and structures
and parts and appurtenances thereof regulated by this code being erected,
installed or altered as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance
with the village ordinances.
Among such duties and authority shall include the administration of this code
and other applicable ordinances and state laws, and the building commissioner
shall:
      1.   Keep careful, systematic records of the business and work of his
office, including permit applications, survey plats and building plot plans,
all construction plans and specifications, copies of permits and certificates
issued, affidavits and certificates received, a record of inspections, copies
of notices and orders issued, reports of tests made.
      2.   Cause to be destroyed, after twenty (20) years, plans and
specifications of houses and accessories, except survey plats and building plot
plans. Those parts of plans for other buildings which may be useful for future
periodic inspections shall be kept.
      3.   Make inspections, and for that purpose may enter buildings,
structures and premises.
      4.   Stop, by written order, work being done contrary to the building
permit issued pursuant to this building code.
      5.   Revoke, by writing, a permit or approval issued contrary to this
building code based upon a false statement or misrepresentation in the
application.
   C.   Powers: The building commissioner shall have the power to order all
work stopped on construction, installation, alteration or repair of buildings
and structures, and parts and appurtenances thereof regulated by this building
code when such work is being done in violation of any provisions of any village
ordinance relating thereto, or in violation of the zoning regulations of the
village. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such an order except
on the written permission of the commissioner; provided, that if the stop order
is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within two (2)
hours. Such written stop order may be served by any policeman.
   D.   Inspections: The building commission shall have the power to make or
cause to be made an entry into any building or premises where the work of
altering, installing, repairing or constructing any building and structure and
parts and appurtenances thereof regulated by this building code is going on for
the purpose of making inspections at any reasonable hour. (Ord. 71-O-168, 4-1-
1971)
   E.   Fine: Any person who shall continue work in violation of a stop order
of the building commissioner shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each day on which any work in violation of such stop
order is done. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
   F.   Compensation: The compensation to be paid for permit review, permit
processing, inspections, and administration shall be as determined by the
village board and amended from time to time. The current fee structure is on
file with the village office. (Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5 of this code.
4-1-4: DEPUTY BUILDING COMMISSIONER:
(Rep. by Ord. 97-O-739, 1-4-1997)
4-1-5: RULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The published books or pamphlets described and referred to in this title and
the regulations and standards contained therein or in the described portions
thereof, modified in some cases as noted herein, are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this title. In the event of a conflict between
this title, or any part thereof, and such regulations and standards adopted by
reference, the provisions of this title shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 71-O-
168, 4-1-1971)
4-1-6: INTERPRETATION:
Whenever in the regulations contained in this title, including the regulations
adopted by reference, it is provided that anything must be done to the approval
of or subject to the direction of the building commissioner or any officer of
the village, this shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion
of determining whether the rules and standards established by ordinance have
been complied with and no such provision shall be construed as giving any
officer discretionary powers as to what such regulations or standards shall be
or power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinance or to enforce
ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. (Ord. 71-O-168,
4-1-1971)
4-1-7: NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE:
   A.   Definition: "Nonconforming building or structure" is an existing
building or structure or part or appurtenance thereof not in conformance with
this title.
   B.   Repair Work: Repair work requires an approved building permit. Work is
limited to necessary repairs only unless building or part is made to conform
with the requirements of this title.
   C.   Altering Or Enlarging: Altering or enlarging shall be done in a manner
conforming with this title. (Ord. 71-O-168, 4-1-1971)
4-1-8: HAZARDOUS BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION CONDITION:
A building or structure or part or appurtenance thereof or a construction
condition found to be hazardous to life, limb or health, upon order of the
building commissioner or enacting authority, shall be corrected, repaired,
replaced, vacated, demolished or removed and the premises or work restored to
or put in a safe condition within thirty (30) days after such a finding has
been made in writing, written notice of the finding and order has been given to
the owner or his agent or the contractor, and except in emergencies, a hearing
on the order has been held before the building commissioner. (Ord. 71-O-168, 4-
1-1971)
4-1-9: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, cause to be violated, disobey,
omit, neglect or refuse to comply with or to resist the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this title, including provisions adopted by reference, or to
use or occupy any building or premises not in compliance with said provisions.
(Ord. 71-O-168, 4-1-1971)
4-1-10: SEPARABILITY:
It is the intention of the board of trustees that this title, and every
provision hereof, shall be considered operable; and the invalidity of any
section, clause, provision or part or portion of any action, clause or
provision of this title shall not affect the validity of any other portion of
this title. (Ord. 71-O-168, 4-1-1971)
4-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title, shall be fined as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code, for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
81-O-337, 12-7-1981; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
4-1-12: VARIATIONS BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
Whenever the corporate authorities determine that the public interest will be
subserved by varying the building regulations of this title, and where such
building regulations to be varied are more restrictive than those of the codes
referenced herein, they may vary such regulations by an ordinance. Such
ordinance shall be passed by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3)
of the trustees then holding office. In making such a determination, the
village board shall solicit the professional assistance of an independent
certified building official. (Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Permits, Applications
4-2-2: Permit Fees
4-2-3: Deposits And Costs
4-2-4: Building Permit Conditions
4-2-5: Recommendations As To Plans By The Architecture Committee And
Architectural Building Controls
4-2-6: Examination Of Application And Plans
4-2-7: Action On Permit After Filing And Examination Of Application
4-2-8: Load And Capacity Placard (Rep. by Ord. 98-O-778, 8-3-1998)
4-2-9: Variations
4-2-10: Enforcement Of Provisions
4-2-11: Duration Of Building Permit
4-2-12: Building Permit Deposit
4-2-13: Building Permit Contribution Requirements (Rep. by Ord. 96-O-715, 3-4-
1996)
4-2-14: Occupancy Permits
4-2-14-1: Certificate Required
4-2-14-2: Filing Of Certificate Required (Rep. by Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005)
4-2-14-3: Temporary Occupancy Certificate
4-2-15: As Built Surveys
4-2-1: PERMITS, APPLICATIONS:
No building or structure, or parts or appurtenances thereof, such as water
supply, sewage disposal, plumbing installation, electrical installation, and
HVAC in the Village shall be erected, installed, altered, converted, remodeled,
structurally repaired, moved, demolished or changed, without a permit having
first been secured from the Building Commissioner, unless the Building
Commissioner determines, based on health, safety and welfare considerations,
that a permit is not needed. No connection to Village infrastructure shall be
made without a permit having first been secured from the Building Commissioner.
(Ord. 01-O-822, 1-17-2001)
All applications for permits shall be made to the Building Commissioner on
forms provided by said Commissioner, and shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications in duplicate showing the work to be done. (Ord. 98-O-778, 8-3-
1998)
   A.   Notarized Signature: (Rep. by Ord. 98-O-778, 8-3-1998)
   B.   Required Information: The following information shall accompany and be
a part of the application. The building permit policy and procedure pamphlet
should be consulted for more detailed information.
      1.   a. Descriptive material, in drawn and written form, as to location
and design of buildings, structures, water supply systems, sewage disposal
system, plumbing and electrical installations, as required by the Building
Commissioner to assure compliance with the rules and regulations.
         b.   Show specific quantity in number of trees and general location of
all existing trees six inches (6") in diameter or larger, measured twelve
inches (12") above the ground, all natural features, all existing and proposed
public rights-of- way and easements. Such plan shall also indicate those trees
that are proposed to be removed, and method of protecting trees which are to
remain.
         c.   Show all proposed grading as reasonably possible including final
grades from the site plan submissions and landscaping, prepared at one inch
equals twenty feet (1" = 20').
         d.   Show location, size, and grade of all improvements including:
buildings, sidewalks, driveways, culverts, storm structures, and drainage
swales.
      2.   Three (3) copies of the plat of a building plot, unless shown on the
construction plans, showing existing and proposed building, structures and
underground facilities.
      3.   For construction, alterations, and other work, the following shall
be required: three (3) copies of construction plans (more if required by the
Building Commissioner), specifications (if needed), tests (if needed), to show
compliance with regulations. The scale of plans not less than one-fourth inch
to the foot (1/4" = 1'), and the size of plans shall not exceed twenty four
inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). Plans may be waived for minor
alterations not involving structural changes and for residential accessory
buildings not over one thousand (1,000) cubic feet in area, if sufficiently
described in the application.
   C.   Architectural Plans: Plans shall be prepared by or under the direction
and supervision of a person registered to practice architecture in the state,
under the provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 305/1 et seq., of the
Illinois architecture practice act, as enacted or as hereinafter amended, and
shall bear the stamp of the official seal of such registered architect and
certification to the effect that such plans were prepared by him or under his
direction and supervision, in conformance with the statutes and village code
provisions pertaining thereto. The scale of plans not less than one-fourth inch
to the foot (1/4" = 1'), and the size of plans shall not exceed twenty four
inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). (Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005)
   D.   Approval Of Sewage Facilities And Water Supply Facilities: All
applications for building permits which involve the construction or repair of
any new or existing sewage disposal or treatment facilities or water supply
facilities, including all wells, sewers, and septic systems, shall be
accompanied by a certificate or permit of approval of design of said facilities
from Lake County. Said certificate or permit of approval shall indicate that
the applicant has conformed to all requirements of Lake County which pertain to
such facilities. (Ord. 15-O-022, 12-15-2015)
4-2-2: PERMIT FEES:
The fees for all permits as may be required by this title are hereby
established as follows:
PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
Volume computation: Volume shall be computed on the exterior dimensions of the
building, and shall include all space above the lowest level of the foundation
wall and below the ceiling of the uppermost floor.
Additions and incidental or accessory    
buildings:
$35.00 per 1,000 cubic feet, minimum    $200.00
fee
Air conditioning:                        
Commercial or industrial, $125.00 per
3,000 square feet or major fraction     $125.00
thereof, with minimum of
Single-family residential, per unit     $75.00
Alterations/remodeling:                  
On which the cubic feet basis of
measurement is not practicable $12.00   $100.00
per $1,000.00 of estimated cost of
construction, minimum fee
Certificate of occupancy:                
Single-family residential, per unit     $100.00
Additions, incidental or accessory      $75.00
buildings
Nonresidential $0.15 per square foot    Calculated
Miscellaneous                           $50.00
Code compliance bond:                    
50 percent of principal building permit $100.00
fees, with a minimum of
Completion bond:                         
Original                                $5,000.00
Upon first renewal of permit            Additional $5,000.00
Upon second renewal of permit           Additional $10,000.00
Contributions - residential:             
Residential subdivisions platted after
May 19, 2020 shall pay an impact fee to $5,000.00
the Village of Kildeer per lot paid at
the time of building permit issuance.
Residential subdivisions platted after
March 4, 1996: See section
6-3-13 of this code for provisions       
regarding dedication of school land or
payment of fees in lieu thereof.
Residential subdivisions platted prior
to March 4, 1996: The following amounts
are applicable per lot, paid at the
time of building permit issuance. Said
fees are to be used by the school        
districts in the same manner and for
the same purpose as set forth in
section
6-3-13 of this code.
Elementary school district              $450.00
High school district                    $250.00
Culvert and driveway:                    
Driveway                                $100.00
Per culvert                             $75.00
Decks:                                   
$0.30 per square foot, with a minimum   $200.00
fee of
Electrical work:                         
Commercial or industrial per 3,000      $125.00
square feet or major fraction
New construction, residence             $200.00
Remodeling, alteration, etc.            $100.00
Examination of plans/processing fee:     
The minimum fee for examination of
plans shall be $75.00. The fee for
plans for construction shall be
computed at the rate of 0.1 percent of
the total cost of construction. A        
processing fee for roofs, siding,
windows, doors, water heaters, furnace
replacements and A/C replacements shall
be $25.00. This fee shall not be
refundable.
Excavation:                             $200.00
Generator:                              $200.00
Heating:                                 
A/C condenser replacement               $75.00
Furnace replacement                     $75.00
Single-family residential, per unit     $125.00
Commercial or industrial (per 3,000     $125.00
square feet or a fraction thereof)
Other consultant/agency fees:            
Expenses incurred by the village for
plan review or inspections shall be
included with the permit fees as
applicable. Other consultants/agencies
include the village engineer, village   As billed
arborist, wetland consultant, fire
district, stormwater management
consultant, and any other specialized
consultants.
Patio                                   $100.00
Plumbing:                                
3 fixtures or less, minimum fee         $100.00
Each additional fixture                 $30.00
Gas line for fire pit, grill (for each  $100.00
line)
Water heater replacement                $75.00
Pool enclosures:                         
Minimum fee                             $100.00
Each linear foot over 200               $0.30
Principal building and initial build     
out of space within a shell building:
Less than 10,001 cubic feet             $500.00
More than 10,001 cubic feet - $400.00
plus $35.00 for each 1,000 cubic feet   Calculated
in excess of 10,001
Incidental and accessory buildings
erected at the same time shall be        
included in the same permit and charged
at the appropriate rate.
Reinspection fee:                        
Where a reinspection is required, or
where extra nonscheduled inspections     
are requested, per inspection:
Residential                             $100.00
Commercial                              $150.00
Renewal fee:                             
For first 6 months                      $500.00, plus an additional $5,000.00
                                        completion bond
For second 6 months                     $5,000.00, plus an additional
                                        $10,000.00 completion bond
Thereafter                              See section
                                        4-2-11 of this chapter
Repairs and alterations:                 
$12.00 per $1,000.00 of estimated costs $100.00
of construction, minimum fee
New siding, roofing, windows, doors,    $75.00
each at
Sewage disposal:                         
Sewage system repair, field only        $75.00
Sewage system repair, tanks only        $75.00
Sewer service inspection fee            $75.00
System designed for commercial or       $500.00
industrial uses, including grease trap
Sheds:                                  $150.00
Signs:                                   
Illuminated signs                       $200.00, plus $1.00 per square foot
Nonilluminated signs                    $160.00, plus $1.00 per square foot
Temporary signs                         $100.00
Permit penalty: If a person installs,
allows to be installed, or attempts to
install any sign without first securing  
a permit, the fee for the sign permit
shall be 100 percent more than
otherwise provided for by this chapter.
Renewal fees: Sign permits shall expire
June 30 of each calendar year. The
building department shall inspect
annually, or at such other times as it
deems necessary, each sign or other
advertising structure regulated by this
chapter for the purpose of ascertaining  
whether it is secure and safe, and
whether it is in need of removal or
repairs. To meet the expense of such
inspection, each permittee shall pay to
the village collector annually on or
before July 1 a renewal fee:
Illuminated sign                        $200.00
Nonilluminated sign                     $100.00
Sports courts (each court)              $400.00
Storm sewer:                             
Connection inspection                   $75.00
Swimming pools:                         $450.00
Telecommunications facilities/towers    $2.00
(per foot annually)
Water supply:                            
Drilling or digging of well             $75.00
Supply system other than residential    $100.00
use (up to 500 gallons' storage)
Supply system other than residential    $500.00
use (over 500 gallons' storage)
Wrecking (per building)                 $150.00
Note: Any construction work started
without first securing a permit shall
be subject to a penalty fee in the
amount of 150 percent of the permit fee  
in addition to the usual fee to cover
the cost of extra inspections involved,
with a minimum fee of $150.00.
It further shall be unlawful to occupy
a residence without having, prior
thereto, secured an occupancy permit     
and the penalty therefor shall be
$100.00 per day of violation.
                                        
 
(Ord. 16-O-018, 6-21-2016; amd. Ord. 20-O-011, 5-19-2020)
4-2-3: DEPOSITS AND COSTS:
Any charges, costs, fees, etc., which may be incurred by the requirements for
data to be included in applications for permits shall be paid by the applicant
and no costs shall be borne by the village.
   A.   Completion Bond: Prior to issuance of a building permit for the
construction of a single-family residence, the building permit applicant, in
consideration of the issuance of such permit by the village, shall post a five
thousand dollar ($5,000.00) cash completion bond with the village to guarantee
the construction of said residence in full and complete compliance with the
plans, including all architecture committee recommendations accepted and agreed
to by the applicant. In addition, in posting said cash completion bond, the
permit applicant acknowledges, accepts and agrees to the following conditions
attached to said completion bond:
      1.   Refund: The full amount of the completion bond shall be refunded to
the permit applicant upon the happening of the following:
         a.   Completion of construction in full and complete compliance with
the plans including the architecture committee recommendations accepted and
agreed to by applicant.
         b.   Review and recommendation by the architecture committee. (Ord.
01-O-840, 10-1-2001)
      2.   Major Change: In the event construction results in a major change
(as agreed by a majority of the architecture committee) in the overall design
intent of the approved plans, and the accepted and agreed to recommendations of
the architecture committee, and any such approved changes, the completion bond
shall be forfeited, and the village, at its sole option may deposit the
proceeds in the general fund and use the proceeds for general fund purposes, or
use the proceeds of said cash completion bond for landscaping in public areas.
      3.   Minor Change: In the event construction results in a minor change
(as agreed by a majority of the architecture committee) in the materials or
overall design intent of the approved plans, and the accepted and agreed to
recommendations of the architecture committee, and any such approved changes,
the completion bond shall be reduced by the following penalty amounts before a
refund is made to the permit applicant:
         a.   Ten percent (10%) per change of color of shutters, doors, trim,
roof, etc.
         b.   Ten percent (10%) per change in fenestration, including, but not
limited to, ornamental shape windows, mullions, doors, sidelights, shutters,
etc.
         c.   Twenty percent (20%) per change in the material selection of the
siding, brick, EIFS, stone, etc.
         d.   Twenty percent (20%) per change in roofing material, slope,
configuration, canopy placement, and related overhangs and projections;
exterior colors, or texture, etc.
         e.   Twenty percent (20%) per change in exterior ornamentation
including, but not limited to, fascias, dentils, quoins, keystones, corbels,
soldier course, etc.
The penalties shall be forfeited, and the village, at its sole option may
deposit the proceeds in the general fund and use the proceeds for general fund
purposes, or use the proceeds of said cash completion bond for landscaping in
public areas.
      4.   Project Time Limited: The construction project shall be fully
completed within eighteen (18) months of the issuance of the initial
certificate of occupancy and shall include suitable ground covering such as
grass, broadleaf coverage or wood mulch planted or applied to be adaptable to
the surrounding area. In the event the project is not fully completed and
received a final occupancy permit within said eighteen (18) month period, the
permit applicant shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of his or her
cash completion bond, and the village, at its sole option, may deposit the
proceeds in the general fund and use the proceeds for general fund purposes or
use the proceeds of said cash completion bond for landscaping in public areas.
(Ord. 08-O-1015, 4-7-2008)
      5.   Penalties: In the event that a permittee or builder has received a
reduction of a cumulative one hundred percent (100%) of the refund of prior
completion bonds, the completion bond for all future permits shall be increased
to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 05-O-931, 3-7-2005)
   B.   Code Compliance Bond: Prior to the issuance of a building permit for
the construction of all structural improvements or additions, the building
permit applicant shall post a cash code compliance bond in the amount of fifty
percent (50%) of the principal building permit fees, with a minimum bond of one
hundred dollars ($100.00). The code compliance bond will be refunded following
the issuance by the building commissioner of an occupancy/use permit. (Ord. 90-
O-522, 2-5-1990; amd. Ord. 96-O-715, 3-4-1996)
4-2-4: BUILDING PERMIT CONDITIONS:
   A.   Inspection: Following the issuance of a building permit and prior to
starting construction of a residence or a commercial structure, the building
permit applicant shall request an inspection from the building commissioner and
demonstrate to the building commissioner's satisfaction that the iron pipes
have been placed by a surveyor, registered in the state, at the perimeters of
the lot lines, which thereby depict the perimeter, or the outer configuration
of the lot within which the structure is to be located.
   B.   Spotted Survey: In addition, it shall be required that a building
permit applicant who has secured a building permit to construct a residence or
commercial structure shall provide two (2) copies of a spotted survey of the
lot after the footings for the foundation have been installed, and the spotted
survey should depict the precise location of said footings and foundation
elevation thereon. (Ord. 98-O-778, 8-3-1998)
   C.   Footings: It is hereby made specifically unlawful to commence any
further construction upon the foundation or footings unless, and until, the
spotted survey heretofore required has been submitted to and approved by the
building commissioner. (Ord. 78-O-267, 8-3-1978)
4-2-5: RECOMMENDATIONS AS TO PLANS BY THE ARCHITECTURE COMMITTEE AND
ARCHITECTURAL BUILDING CONTROLS:
Applicants for building permits are referred to, and advised to read, title 2,
chapter 7, "Architecture Committee", of this code, and chapter 9,
"Architectural Building Controls", of this title. (Ord. 97-O-739, 1-4-1997)
4-2-6: EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION AND PLANS:
Examination of the application and plans shall be made within a reasonable time
by or under the direction of the building commissioner. (Ord. 71-O-168, 4-1-
1971)
4-2-7: ACTION ON PERMIT AFTER FILING AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Permit shall be denied if plans or proposed work do not conform to
requirements of this title or other pertinent laws and ordinances of the
village. Denial with reasons shall be given in writing upon request. (Ord. 71-
O-168, 4-1-1971)
   B.   If proposed work conforms to requirements of this title and other
pertinent laws and ordinances of the village, a permit shall be issued in
writing to proceed with work, returning one set of plans and specifications,
and the building commissioner's review notes, to be kept on the job at all
times. (Ord. 98-O-778, 8-3-1998)
   C.   Permit placard is to be furnished with the permit or as the permit
itself, which is to remain conspicuously posted on the premises during the
course of work.
   D.   Permit lapses if a substantial start is not made in six (6) months, if
substantial progress is not made in a nine (9) month period, and after twelve
(12) months unless extended. (Ord. 71-O-168, 4-1-1971)
4-2-8: LOAD AND CAPACITY PLACARD:
(Rep. by Ord. 98-O-778, 8-3-1998)
4-2-9: VARIATIONS:
All construction shall be in accord with the plans and specifications reviewed
and approved by the building commissioner. If changes are desired,
architectural drawings or addendums shall be submitted for review and approval
prior to any change being made.
It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the submitted plans and
specifications unless such variations are submitted in an amended plan to the
building commissioner and approved by him, and permits may be amended during
the course of work, but alterations and additions after completion of the work
under such permit require another permit. (Ord. 98-O-778, 8-3-1998)
4-2-10: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
The building commissioner shall make or cause to be made such inspections as
are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this title, and to
make any tests or examinations of materials or methods to be used for the
purpose of seeing that they comply with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 71-
O-168, 4-1-1971)
4-2-11: DURATION OF BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   All building permits shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months
from date of issuance. After the twelve (12) months have elapsed, the building
permit shall expire and be of no further force and effect. A building permit
may be renewed upon application of the permittee and reinspection of the
premises by the building commissioner and the payment of a five hundred dollar
($500.00) renewal fee. At the time of the application for renewal, the building
commissioner shall inspect the premises and prepare a list of those items to be
completed which the permittee shall sign and acknowledge prior to the receipt
of the renewed building permit. The first renewed building permit shall be
valid for six (6) months from date of issuance and after the six (6) months
have elapsed, the renewed building permit shall expire and be of no further
force and effect. The building permit may be renewed for a second time upon
application of the permittee and reinspection of the premises by the building
commissioner and the payment of a five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) renewal fee.
At the time of the application for renewal, the building commissioner shall
inspect the premises and prepare another list of those items to be completed
which the permittee shall sign and acknowledge prior to the receipt of the
renewed building permit. The second renewal building permit shall similarly be
valid for six (6) months from date of issuance and after the six (6) months
have elapsed, the renewed building permit shall expire and be of no further
force and effect. The maximum duration of a building permit shall be twenty
four (24) months.
   B.   Provided, however, that in special factual situations the board of
trustees, in its sole discretion, may extend a building permit beyond the
twenty four (24) month maximum period for any period of time less than one
year. Whenever the board of trustees so extends a building permit, the board of
trustees may impose conditions on such an extension. All such extended building
permits shall state the extended period and conditions, if any, on the face of
the extended building permit. A reapplication fee in an amount to be determined
at discretion of the board shall be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance
of any such extended building permit. (Ord. 07-O-986, 4-5-2007)
4-2-12: BUILDING PERMIT DEPOSIT:
A building permit deposit shall be paid at the time an application is tendered
for the issuance of a building permit in accordance with the following
schedule:
Building Permit Use Deposit Required
Building Permit Use   Deposit Required
Accessory building    $ 100.00
Addition              200.00
Alteration/remodeling 150.00
Deck                  100.00
Miscellaneous         100.00
Pool                  150.00
Repairs               75.00
Residence             1,000.00
 
(Ord. 14-O-009, 3-18-2014)
In the event that the permit is issued, the deposit shall be applied toward the
total building permit fee. In the event that the village denies the issuance of
the permit, or the permit application is withdrawn, then the deposit shall not
be returned to the applicant. In the event that the applicant does not obtain a
permit within ninety (90) days after notification of permit approval, then said
approval shall be deemed null and void, the deposit shall be forfeited, and the
documentation destroyed. (Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005)
4-2-13: BUILDING PERMIT CONTRIBUTION REQUIREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-O-715, 3-4-1996)
4-2-14: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
4-2-14-1: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
No new structures shall be occupied unless and until a valid certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Village. (Ord. 90-O-526, 3-5-1990)
4-2-14-2: FILING OF CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005)
4-2-14-3: TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE:
   A.   A temporary occupancy permit may be issued for a building or portion
thereof if the Building Commissioner finds that the condition of the building
or portion thereof together with the electrical, heating, water supply, sewage
disposal and other sanitary facilities available to an occupant provide a safe
and healthful place to reside. Prior to the issuance of any temporary occupancy
certificate, the proposed occupant shall furnish the Building Commissioner with
written evidence (schedule) or assurance that all unfinished work will be
finished in a timely manner. A temporary occupancy certificate will be revoked
in the event all unfinished work is not diligently completed in accordance with
the occupant's written evidence or assurance.
   B.   If the Building Commissioner determines that a septic system does not
conform with the requirements of either the Lake County Health Department or
the Village ordinances, the Building Commissioner shall then, as a condition
precedent to the issuance of any temporary occupancy certificate, require the
posting of a cash bond in the amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%)
of the cost of repair or completion of the system. (Ord. 96-O-734, 12-2-1996)
   C.   There shall be a one hundred dollar ($100.00) reinspection fee for each
and every residential reinspection per trade and a one hundred fifty dollar
($150.00) reinspection fee for each and every commercial reinspection per trade
necessitated by the issuance of a temporary occupancy certificate, which may be
paid out of any cash bonds posted. (Ord. 14-O-010, 3-18-2014)
4-2-15: AS BUILT SURVEYS:
   A.   A final as built topographical survey of the lot grading shall be
submitted to and approved by the Building Commissioner and Village Engineer.
Said surveys shall also be prepared by a registered land surveyor.
   B.   Final as built surveys shall show the following information and meet
the following minimum requirements (additional detail may be required for each
individual property):
      1.   Said survey shall be prepared, signed, sealed and certified by a
professional land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois.
      2.   Said survey shall be titled, "Plat of Survey, Final As Built
Survey".
      3.   The minimum size sheet shall be eleven inches by seventeen inches
(11" x 17").
      4.   The legal description and street address shall be shown.
      5.   The scale shall be one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20')
(architectural scales are not acceptable).
      6.   All information shall be legible.
      7.   A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until soil erosion
methods are in place and stable (grass growing and cuttable; sod firm).
      8.   FEMA flood zone limits in accordance with the elevation certificate
instructions per FEMA national flood insurance program.
      9.   One sealed original and two (2) copies of the as built survey shall
be submitted to the Village.
      10.   Said survey shall indicate all of the following locations:
         a.   Property lines with bearings and dimensions (include arc length,
radius, PC, PT, and included angle for curves).
         b.   Lot corners (shall be monumented and indicate monument type).
         c.   Building setback lines and building lines (located with
dimensions from lot lines).
         d.   All easements (purpose shall be identified).
         e.   Impervious areas on lot, including driveways (include type of
surface), sidewalks, patios, and retaining walls (with upper and lower grades,
and material).
         f.   Topography at one foot (1') contour spacing including swales,
shoulders, roadway culverts, driveway culverts (for culverts include material,
existence of FES, size, elevation of inverts, and grades above culvert),
required for the subject property and within the entire width of any adjacent
right-of-way.
         g.   Utilities, including septic area, necessarily accessible
components of septic system, water well (with 75 foot radius), gas service,
electrical service, and private drain lines (including sump pit).
         h.   Floodplain or floodway elevations and delineation in one foot
(1') intervals (if applicable).
         i.   Wetland delineation.
      11.   The elevations shown on said survey shall include:
         a.   Bench mark description and elevation (from approved permit site
plan).
         b.   All elevations shall be to USGS datum.
         c.   Elevation of the following:
            (1)   Street centerline, shoulders, and swales at front property
corners and at minimum fifty foot (50') spacing (indicate if roadway elevations
are finish, binder, or aggregate surface).
            (2)   All lot corners and property lines at minimum fifty foot
(50') spacing.
            (3)   All building top of foundations, sill of lookouts, sill of
walkouts, garage floor, and sill of lowest opening into foundation.
            (4)   Grades adjacent to the foundation including driveway at
garage.
            (5)   Grades on and around septic area to show adequate drainage
away from area.
            (6)   Bridge ledges.
            (7)   All impervious grading features.
            (8)   All necessarily accessible components of the septic system.
            (9)   Grading of lot shall be shown as as built contours on
pervious areas. For gradients of less than two percent (2%), six inch (6")
contours shall be shown; for gradients of more than two percent (2%), one foot
(1') contours shall be shown.
            (10)   Information shall be included to indicate whether the
elevations are on finished sodded surface or on finish graded topsoil.
      12.   A final occupancy permit shall not be issued if the property is not
in compliance with the approved foundation plat of survey, the approved site
plan, the approved septic plan, and the approved final lot grading plan, the
approved final "as built" survey, and the approved final engineering for the
subdivision. (Ord. 17-O-025, 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
4-3-1: International Building Code (Nonresidential)
4-3-2: International Residential Code
4-3-3: International Mechanical Code
4-3-4: International Fuel Gas Code
4-3-5: International Fire Code
4-3-6: National Electrical Code
4-3-7: Illinois Plumbing Code
4-3-8: Illinois Accessibility Code
4-3-9: Deck Standards
4-3-10: International Energy Conservation Code
4-3-11: Drive Access Standards
4-3-1: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE (NONRESIDENTIAL):
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as the international
building code, 2021 edition, as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., shall be, and is hereby adopted as, the building code of the village for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
international building code, 2021 edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this
section.
   B.   Amendments To Code: The following sections are hereby revised as
follows:
   Section 101.1: Insert “village of Kildeer”.
   Section 101.4.3: Change “international plumbing code” to the “Illinois
plumbing code”.
   Section 105.1: Add “See section
4-2-2 of the village code”.
   Section 113: Change the second line to read: “The architecture committee
shall serve as the appeals board”.
   Section 114.4: Delete in its entirety and insert:
      “114.4 Violation Penalties: Any person convicted of a violation of any
section or provision of this code shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 4-1-11 of the village code, and each day any such violation shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.”
   Section 115.3: Delete in its entirety and insert:
      “115.3 Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall, upon conviction be subject to a penalty as provided in
section 4-1-11 of the village code, and each day and any such work shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.”
   Section 903.2.8: Except one and two family dwellings, no more than three
stories in height.
   Section 903.16: Add a new section 903.16 as follows:
      “903.16 Existing Building: When an existing building is increased in size
by more than 1,000 sq. feet, or 50%, the entire building shall comply with the
requirements of section 903.0.”
   Section 907.14: Add a new section 907.14 as follows:
      “All automatic fire alarm systems required for occupancies in use groups
A, B, E, F, H, I, M, S, R-1, R-2, and R-3, shall be supervised by directly
connecting to the main dispatch center for the fire department with NFPA 72 and
their respective listing by an approved agency.”
   Section 908.7: Add a new section 908.7 as follows:
      “908.7 Carbon Monoxide Detection: Provide carbon monoxide detectors in
all groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1. In new construction required detectors shall
receive their primary power from the building wiring where such wiring is
served from a commercial source, and shall be equipped with a battery backup.
The detectors shall be installed in locations per the manufacturer’s
installation instructions or within 15' of any bedroom door whichever is
closer”.
   Chapter 11: Delete provisions and reference to the Illinois accessibility
code.
   Chapter 13: Delete this chapter and the reference to the international
energy conservation code 2012 with Illinois amendments.
   Sections 1507.2.8.2, 1507.8.4, 1507.9.4: Delete 24 inches (610mm) and
substitute the following:
      “Thirty six inches (36") inside the exterior wall line of the building.
The underlayment shall be used in all roof valleys and roof intersections.”
   Section 1612: Delete this section and reference village code sections 4-
6 and 7-6 regarding Lake County watershed development ordinance.
   Section 1805.1: Add the following:
      “All references to wood or masonry footings and foundations shall be
deleted. All footings and foundations shall be concrete.”
   Sections 1807.1.3, 1807.1.4: Delete in their entirety.
   Section 2301.4: Add the following to section 2301:
      Open Web Wood Trusses: The use of open web wood trusses is not allowed
unless the open web wood trusses are dry walled on the bottom chord or the area
below the trusses has sprinkler protection.
   Section 2303.1.4.1: Add the following to section 2303.1.4:
      “Minimum wood structural panel thickness for sheathing at walls and roofs
shall be one-half inch (½").”
   Chapter 27: Delete and insert national electric code as amended (see section
3-1-7):
      “All AC wiring shall be installed in a conduit system within building and
exposed exterior of building to 6" below grade. Below grade schedule 80 PVC
rigid non-metallic conduit is approved.”
   Chapter 29: Delete and reference Illinois plumbing code as amended (see
section 3-1-8).
   Chapter 32: Delete in its entirety.
   Chapter 35: Delete references to international plumbing code and add
Illinois state plumbing code.
   Appendix: Delete A, B, C, E, F, G, and I.
      Delete H except for 105, 106 and 107 and reference sign provisions of
village code section 5-20.
(Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005; amd. Ord. 12-O-009, 6-19-2012, eff. 6-19-2012; Ord.
14-O-14, 4-15-2014; Ord. 22-O-017, 8-16-2022)
4-3-2: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
Office of the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International
Residential Code, 2021 edition, as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., shall be and is hereby adopted as the One- and Two-Family Dwelling and
Townhouse Code of the Village, for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the One- and Two-Family Dwelling and Townhouse Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
section, with the additions, insertions and changes, if any, prescribed in
subsection B of this section.
   B.   Amendments To Code: The following sections are hereby revised as
follows:
   Section P2904: Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems is deleted in its
entirety.
   Section R-101.1: Insert “the Village of Kildeer”.
   Section R-104.12: Add a new section R-104.12 entitled “Building Site” as
follows:
   (Ord. 18-O-012, 6-19-2018)
      “All driveway culverts shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) and shall
have flared end sections. All driveway culverts shall be 15" minimum diameter,
provided, however, if the village engineer determines that the preservation of
the ditch line and/or drainage patterns upstream and/or downstream of the
building site requires a larger or smaller driveway culvert and/or a particular
placement thereof, the village engineer shall direct such installation and/or
placement, which direction shall control. All driveway culverts shall be
installed on top of six inches (6") of compacted gravel. When any driveway
approach is paved, it shall be paved with asphalt.
      Building sites shall be graded to conform to approved subdivision design.
Required drainage swales shall be graded or maintained as detailed on the
approved subdivision plans. Detention or retention areas on private property
shall not be altered and shall be maintained as originally designed and
constructed.
      (Ord. 14-O-015, 4-15-2014)
      Woodland Protection: It is the intent of this section to establish
regulations controlling the removal and encouraging the replacement of trees
from public and private property within the village. In so doing, the village
will safeguard the ecological environment, including soil, air and water
quality, habitat, and noise mitigation, and the aesthetic environment including
economic and quality of life benefits of tree and woodland preservation. These
regulations are further intended to serve to dissuade the unnecessary clearing
and disturbing of land so as to preserve, insofar as practical, the existing
natural vegetation of the area and to replace as necessary the removed
vegetation with appropriate plant material indigenous to the region.
      1. These regulations shall apply to all new development and forestry.
Forestry would involve the clearing of woodlands*, with or without development.
(*Woodland: an area or stand of trees whose total combined canopy covers an
area of one acre or more and at least 50 percent of which is composed of
canopies of trees having a diameter at breast height (dbh) of at least 10
inches or any grove consisting of 8 or more individual trees having a dbh of at
least 12 inches whose combined canopies cover at least 50 percent of the area
encompassed by the grove. Provided, however, that no trees grown for commercial
purposes shall be considered a woodland.)
      2. A permit should be required for removal or destruction of trees
greater than six inches (6") diameter at breast height (dbh) either for new
development or for forestry with the following exceptions: a) trees requiring
immediate removal for disease and safety reasons, b) trees in nurseries,
preserves, and botanic gardens, c) trees that are invasive or exotic species,
d) removal consistent with good forestry practice and woodland management as
verified by letter of approval by a certified professional forester or
arborist.
      3. For all new development or forestry, a tree survey shall be provided
in conjunction with the tree removal permit application indicating the location
of all trees with a dbh of six inches (6") or more which may include
information on their species, health, and structure and identifying those trees
which are proposed to be destroyed, relocated or preserved.
      4. Forestry - When forestry would result in removal of more than thirty
percent (30%) of the woodland area on the applicant’s parcel, reforestation
shall be provided elsewhere on the parcel or on nearby property to restore the
woodland to at least seventy percent (70%) of its original area. The
reforestation shall comply with the regulations as per section 6-5-9 of the
village code.
      Development - In the event that the submitted plans indicate there are
existing trees that shall be removed for the development of the site, such
trees shall be replaced in accordance with the following:
 
Diameter Size Of Existing Tree (Inches) Number Replacement Trees Trunk Caliper*
30 or greater                           3                        3" to 5"
20 - 29                                 2                        3" to 5"
11 - 19                                 2                        21/2"
6 - 10                                  1                        21/2"
 
      *Trunk caliper in inches as measured diameter at breast height (dbh).
      All replacement trees shall have a minimum trunk size, as noted above,
measured diameter at breast height (dbh) upon installation. Replacement trees
shall comply with regulations as per section 6-5-9 of the village code. All
replacement trees shall be guaranteed for one full year from planting date and,
if replacement of failed trees is necessary, shall be promptly replaced with
trees of the same variety and size.
      5. The applicant is encouraged to relocate trees otherwise expected to be
destroyed.
      6. A final tree inspection approval by the village is required.
      7. Tree protection measures to be taken during construction shall be
specified in the application. (See guidelines set by International Society Of
Arboriculturists.)
      8. Enforcement
      A. The Building Commissioner shall administer the Woodlands Protections
provisions of the Village Code* (See Title 4 of the Village Code).
      B. He shall make inspections and for that purpose may enter premises.
      C. He shall stop, by written work order, work being done contrary to the
building permit or contrary to any ordinances of the Village.
      D. He shall revoke, by writing, a permit or approval issued contrary to
the building regulations of the Village or misrepresentation in the application
for permit.
      E. He shall perform any and all other duties prescribed by the Village
Board or as otherwise indicated in the ordinances of the Village.
      (Ord. 18-O-012, 6-19-2018)
      Control Of Site Sanitation: Whenever a building permit has been issued
for the construction of a new structure or for the remodeling, alteration of or
addition to an existing structure, then and in such event, the builder or
contractor shall maintain the site in a clean, healthy, safe and orderly
manner, disposing of construction debris and other debris periodically. One
dumpster and one portable toilet shall be placed at said construction site, and
maintained thereon until such time as other facilities are available on-site.
It shall be the duty of the building commissioner to enforce the provisions of
this section, and upon the failure of the builder or contractor to comply with
this section, to issue a stop work order or take such other action under this
section as is required.”
   Section R-109.1.4.1: Add the following to section R-109.1.4.1:
      “Prefabricated construction assemblies shall be limited to open- framing
only. All members, fasteners and connections shall be visible for field
inspection. No concealed members, connections, fasteners or fitting shall be
allowed.”
   Section R-202: Add the following:
      Architectural Building Controls: See “Architectural Building Controls”,
title 4, chapter 9 of the village code.
      Exterior Design: See “Architectural Building Controls”, title 4, chapter
9 of the village code.
   Section R-301.1.4: Add new section to section R-301:
      Architectural Design: See “Architectural Building Controls”, title 4,
chapter 9 of the village code, and village of Kildeer architectural review
criteria.
   Section R-301.2: Insert the following language in table R301.2(1), under the
respective table headings:
Ground Snow Load          Thirty (30)
Add Roof Live Load        Thirty (30)
Add Roof Snow Load        Thirty (30)
Wind Pressure             Twenty (20)
Seismic Design Category A Zero (0)
Subject To Damage From:    
 Weathering              Severe
 Frost Line Depth        Four feet (4')
Termite                   Moderate to heavy
Decay                     Slight to moderate
Winter Design Temp For
 Heating Facilities      Sixty-five degrees (65)
 Flood Hazard            See local flood zone
 
   Section R-303.7: Add a new section R-303.7.2 entitled “Basement Windows”, as
follows:
      “R-303.7.2 Basement Windows: Basements shall be constructed with windows
for natural light and ventilation, with a minimum window area to basement ratio
to 1 to 100.”
   Section R-305.1.1:
      “R-305.1.1 Basements: R-305.1.1 Basement ceiling heights shall be not
less than seven feet six inches (7'6") from the finished floor to the joists.”
   Section R-309:
      Add R-309.5 to section R-309:
         “R-309.5 Opening Protection: Openings from a private garage directly
into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings
between the garage and residence shall be equipped with either solid wood doors
not less than one and three-quarter inches (13/4") in thickness, 20-minute fire
rated door or equivalent, with rabbeted frame, and a self-closing device.”
      Add R-309.6 to section R-309:
         “R-309.6 Separation Required: The garage shall be completely separated
from the residence and its attic area by a means of five- eighths inch (5/8")
type “x” fire rated gypsum board, or equivalent, applied to the garage side of
walls and ceiling construction.”
   Section R-313.2: Delete in its entirety.
   Section R-315.1: Add as follows:
      Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved carbon
monoxide alarm in an operating condition within fifteen feet (15 ft.) of every
room used for sleeping purposes. Responsibility to supply and install all
required alarms lies with the owner of the structure or residence.
   Section R-401.2: Insert:
      “A continuous foundation shall be provided under all structure which
share a common roof, or have roof lines tied together, unless the building
commissioner determines that adverse grading conditions require an alternative
foundation system and approves the specific alternative foundation system
proposed for the structures. Cantilevering of bays and similar structures is
expressly prohibited.
      Foundations shall be constructed into the existing topography of the
building site so that the top of foundation walls are within one and one-half
feet (1.5') of the existing grade at all points. Deviation to this requirement
will be considered only where necessitated by drainage and or engineering.
      Concrete piers, three feet six inches (3'6") deep, eight inches (8") to
ten inches (10") diameter, placed as approved, may be used for decks, terraces,
and open porches without roof.
      Beam and post anchors are required; no concrete embedded wood is
permitted.”
   Section R-402: Add the following:
      “All references to wood or masonry footings and foundations shall be
deleted. All footings and foundations shall be concrete.”
   Section R-402.1: Delete in its entirety.
   Section R-403: Delete all references to wood foundations in their entirety.
   Section R-403.1.1: Insert:
      “Walls at eight inches (8"): Concrete footings shall be sixteen inches
(16") wide by eight inches (8") high.
      Walls at ten inches (10"): Concrete footings shall be twenty inches (20")
wide by ten inches (10") high.
      Walls at twelve inches (12"): Concrete footings shall be twenty- four
inches (24") wide by twelve inches (12") high.”
   Section R-404.1: Insert:
      “All foundation walls shall be poured in place concrete. All foundation
walls over seven feet (7') high shall be ten inches (10") thick, minimum. All
foundation walls shall be reinforced with two #5 bars at top and bottom of
wall, and two #4 reinforcing bars above and below openings in walls, extending
two feet (2') beyond such openings. Foundation walls or wing walls shall be
provided under the entrance stoop, platform or steps.”
      Delete use of masonry foundation walls.
   Section R-601: Delete all references to wall sheathing of a thickness less
than one-half inch (½") contained in all tables. Add:
      “All installations of EIFS systems when used over wood framing will
receive one half inch (½") plywood sheathing installed directly to wood studs,
below rigid foam. No direct application of rigid foam sheathing to wood studs
will be permitted.”
   Section R-602.3.2: Insert:
      “Wood stud walls shall have double top plates, with interior partition
top plates interlocked to the exterior, all intersecting partitions and walls
shall be interlocked and splices in top plates shall be offset a minimum of
four feet (4') from splices in the plate below.”
      Delete all references to single top plate.
   Section R-602.3.5: Add section R-602.3.5:
      “All wood framed walls in “walk out” basement areas or basements having
partial wood framed exterior walls supporting 2-story construction areas shall
be framed within minimum 2x6 studs at sixteen inches (16") on center and
sheathed with one-half inch (½") plywood.”
   Section R-602.3.6: Add section R-602.3.6:
      “Shimming sill plate on foundation wall shall be shimmed with decay-
resistant material, and shall be set on sill seal type insulation or grouted
tight.”
   Section R-602.4: Delete in its entirety and insert:
      “R-602.4 Interior Partitions: Interior-bearing partitions shall be
constructed, framed and firestopped as specified for exterior walls. Bearing
walls in wood frame construction shall be adequately designed to accommodate
piping and ductwork to be concealed in the wall construction. This will require
the walls incorporating piping and ductwork to be constructed of 2x6 studs or
double 2x4 walls. Interior nonbearing partitions may be constructed of 2x4
studs spaced sixteen inches (16") on center.”
   Section R-702.3: Delete all references to gypsum wallboard having a
thickness of less than one-half inch (½") appearing in table R-702.3.5 in their
entirety; delete all references to a twenty-four inch (24") maximum spacing of
frame members in the one-half inch (½") thickness rows of table 702.3.5 in
their entirety, and in lieu thereof, substitute “sixteen inches (16")”; and
delete all references to a sixteen inch (16") maximum spacing of frame members
in the five-eighths inch (5/8") thickness rows of table R-702.3.5 in their
entirety and in lieu thereof, substitute “twenty-four inches (24")”.
   Section R-703.2: Insert:
      “Water resistant membrane and sheathing paper shall be installed on the
exterior side of the wall sheathing. Water-resistant membrane may be omitted
using EIFS system”.
   Section R-703.4: Delete the following siding materials from table R703.4:
      Horizontal aluminum
      Hardboard/panel siding-vertical
      Siding vertical/hardboard/lap-siding horizontal
      Steel
      Particleboard panels
      Plywood panel/(exterior grade)
      Vinyl siding
   Section R-803.1: Insert:
      “Roof plywood shall be one-half inches (½") minimum thickness, or five-
eighths inch (5/8") plywood for twenty-four inch (24") spacing of trusses.”
   Section R-803.2: Insert:
      “Particleboard roof sheathing shall be one-half inch (½") minimum
thickness. OSB may be used and shall be one-half inch (½") minimum thickness
with sixteen foot (16') maximum spacing of framing members or five-eighths inch
(5/8") minimum thickness with twenty-four inch (24") spacing of framing
members.”
   Section R-807.1: Insert:
      “Attic access panels shall be located in walk-in type closets or rooms
for accessibility purposes, and shall provide a minimum four feet six inches
(4'6") headroom in attic directly above access location.”
      (Ord. 14-O-015, 4-15-2014)
   Section R-905.2: Insert:
      “Asphalt shingles shall be lifetime warranty, architectural shingle.”
   Section R-905.2.5: Insert:
      “Fasteners for asphalt shingles shall be galvanized steel, stainless
steel, aluminum or copper roofing nails, minimum 12 gauge (0.105 inch (3mm)]
shank with a minimum 3/8-inch (10 mm) diameter head, ASTM F 1667, of a length
to penetrate through the roofing materials and a minimum of 3/4 inch (19 mm)
into the roof sheathing. Where the roof sheathing is less than 3/4 inch (19 mm)
thick, the fasteners shall penetrate through the sheathing. Fasteners shall
comply with ASTM F 1667. Roof shingles, wood shakes and wood shingles shall be
fastened with nails.”
      (Ord. 14-O-023, 6-17-2014)
   Section R-905.2.7.1: Delete 24 inches (610 mm) insert 36 inches. Ice barrier
shall be used in all roof valleys and roof intersections. Add figure F905.2.7.1
(2) change 24" min to 36" min.
   Section R-905.4: Delete: metal roof shingles in its entirety.
   Section R-905.10: Delete: metal roof panels in its entirety except that
metal roof panels are allowed to cover areas less than five hundred (500)
square feet over porches or bay windows.
   Chapter 10: Add a new section R-1000 entitled “General”, as follows:
      “Section R-1000 - General
      R-1000.1 Chimney Construction: The provisions hereof shall control the
design and construction of all residential chimneys and flues erected or
altered in all residential buildings and structures.
      a. Definition: A “chimney” is herewith defined as a primarily vertical
masonry shaft which includes one or more flues.
      b. Construction: Chimneys, vertical flues and vertical smokestacks for
all fuel-fired equipment and appliances in residential buildings shall have a
masonry or stone exterior. In every case a chimney shall be supported on
approved foundations not designed to support any direct load other than its own
in residential buildings.”
   Chapter 11: Delete the chapter in its entirety and add the following:
      Reference to international energy conservation code 2012 with IL
amendments.
   Section M1305.1.3: Insert:
      “Furnaces and appliances installed in attics shall be enclosed in a room
with a minimum 2x4 construction, sheathed on both sides with one half inch (½")
wallboard and ceiling. Provide a condensate drain, 100v smoke detector, and
luminaire controlled by a switch at opening.”
   Section M1402.1: Add section M1402.1.1 “In General”:
      “All residences exceeding 3,200 square feet will be required to have at
least two (2) mechanical units (furnaces). Minimum efficiency of the mechanical
unit shall exceed eighty percent (80%). Mechanical contractor shall be
responsible to provide seventy (70) degree indoor temperature with an outside
air temperature ten (10) degrees with a fifteen mile per hour (15 mph) wind.
Where air conditioning is installed, mechanical contractor shall provide indoor
temperature of seventy (70) degrees with an outside temperature of ninety-five
(95) degrees.”
   Section M1601.0: Add:
      “All supply and return ductwork shall be enclosed in approved duct work.
Panned joist spaces and plenum spaces in floors, ceilings and walls shall not
be permitted.”
   Section M1602: Create M1602.0:
      “Return air inlets shall be located in all habitable rooms except:
closets, bathrooms, kitchen, garage and mechanical or furnace room.”
   Section M1800: The provisions hereof shall control the design and
construction of all residential chimneys and flues erected or altered in all
residential buildings and structures.
      a. Definition: A “chimney” is herewith defined as a primarily vertical
masonry shaft which includes one or more flues.
      b. Construction: Chimneys, vertical flues and vertical smokestacks for
all fuel-fired equipment and appliances in residential buildings shall have a
masonry or stone exterior. In every case a chimney shall be supported on
approved foundations not designed to support any direct load other than its own
in residential buildings.
   Chapter 25: Delete chapter 25 in its entirety, and insert the Illinois
plumbing code.
   Chapter 35: Delete chapter 35 in its entirety and insert national electric
code 2011.
(Ord. 14-O-015, 4-15-2014; amd. Ord. O-018, 8-16-2022; Ord. 23-O-013, 8-15-
2023)
4-3-3: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as the international
mechanical code, 2021, as published by the International Code Council, is
hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the village of Kildeer, in the county
of Lake, state of Illinois for regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, as provided herein, and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said code on file in the office of the village of Kildeer are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section.
   B.   Amendments To Code: The following sections are hereby revised as
follows:
   Section 100.1: Insert “village of Kildeer”.
   Sections 106.5.2, 106.5.3: Insert section
4-2-2 of the village code.
(Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005; amd. Ord. 14-O-005, 3-18-2014, eff. 3-18-2014; Ord.
O-019, 8-16-2022)
4-3-4: INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as the international
fuel gas code, 2009, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as the fuel gas code of the village of Kildeer, in the county of Lake,
state of Illinois for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures, as provided herein, and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code on
file in the office of the village of Kildeer are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section. (Ord. 14-O-006, 3-
18-2014, eff. 3-18-2014)
   B.   Amendments To Code: The following sections are hereby revised as
follows:
Section 101.1: Insert: "village of Kildeer".
Sections 106.5.2, 106.5.3: Insert section
4-2-2 of the village code.
(Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005)
4-3-5: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
   A.   That there is hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, a certain code known as the 2021 International Fire Code, excluding
ICC duplicate sections indicated with [B], [M], [PM], etc., and the whole
thereof, subject to the amendments in this division. Three (3) copies of the
aforementioned code have been made and are filed in the office of the Village
Clerk as prescribed by law, and the same are adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the ordinance from
which this division is derived shall take effect, the provisions thereof as
amended in this division shall be controlling within the limits of the Village
of Kildeer. If there is any conflict between the language of this division and
the language of the aforesaid code, the language of this division shall prevail
over the language of the aforementioned code. Here in after, all NFPA standards
referenced in chapter 80 shall be adopted by this code. The following I.F.C.
appendices shall be adopted: B, C, D (except Section D107.1), F, H, I & J.
      1.   The International Fire Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the
supervision of the Chiefs of the Fire Protection Districts.
      2.   The Director of Fire Prevention Bureau/Fire Inspection Specialist
shall be appointed by the Chief of the Fire Department of the village and shall
serve at his pleasure.
   B.   The International Fire Code, as adopted in Village of Kildeer Code
Section 4-3-5 referred to in this section as "code," is amended as follows:
   Sec. 101.1 Title. Substitute "[Name of Jurisdiction] with "Village of
Kildeer."
   Sec. 102.3 Change of use or occupancy. - Delete the exception.
   Sec. 104 General Authority and responsibility. Add the following:
   Sec. 104.6.5 Records. All records are to be obtained by following the
Village of Kildeer Freedom of Information Act Policy.
   Sec. 104.8.1 Material and Equipment Reuse. Add to the end of the paragraph;
Proper documentation of repairs/reconditioning of the equipment shall be given
to the Fire Protection Districts upon request.
   Sec. 104.12.4 Reporting Hazardous Locations. Any person discovering the
evidence of spontaneous heating or other abnormal heating of any kind in any
building, marine vessel, appliance, apparatus, tank, or open stack or pile, or
any person upon discovering or being apprised of an uncontrolled hazardous gas
leak or hazardous material or flammable and/or combustible liquid spill, shall
immediately notify the proper Fire Protection District.
   Sec. 105 Permits. Add the following:
   Sec. 105.1.2.1 Required Construction Permits and Required Operational
Permits (R.O.P.) When a R.O.P. is required by this jurisdiction for performance
of activities related to fire safety, the Director of the Fire Prevention
Bureau shall be responsible for its issuance.
      (a)   All applications for a R.O.P. shall be filed with the Fire
Prevention Bureau on forms provided by that office.
      (b)   Every person applying for a R.O.P. shall furnish satisfactory proof
to the Director of Fire Prevention that he/she is familiar with the materials,
formulas, tools, techniques, standards, laws, ordinances, recognized good
practices, safety precautions, and manufacturers recommendations pertaining to
the particular system, materials, devices, or operations he/she will be
involved with, and for which the R.O.P. is issued. They shall further prove
that their company is professionally competent to perform any and all actions
necessary and incidental to the operation for which the R.O.P. is issued, and
shall provide insurance and any applicable license.
      (c)   The Director of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall investigate every
application for a R.O.P. The investigation shall include an examination of the
applicant as to his experience and training in the field of the R.O.P. for
which he has applied. When the Director of Fire Prevention determines that the
applicant for the R.O.P. conforms to all of the requirements of this Code, he
shall issue the R.O.P.
      (d)   When the Director of Fire Prevention determines that an applicant
is not fit to receive the R.O.P. because of his/her inability to comply with
the provisions of this Code. They shall refuse to issue the Certificate of
Fitness.
      (e)   When the Director of the Fire Prevention Bureau determines that an
individual is not fit to hold a R.O.P. because of his inability to comply with
the provisions of the Code, he shall inform that individual of his/her right to
a hearing prior to the revocation of his/her R.O.P. If the R.O.P. holder
desires a hearing, he/she shall notify the Chief of the Fire Department in
writing within ten (10) working days of his/her receipt of the revocation
notice from the Chief. The Hearing Board shall issue a written recommendation
to the Chief regarding its findings within fifteen (15) days of the hearing,
and the Chief shall issue his decision within a reasonable time thereafter, and
the said decision shall be final. Failure to show just cause shall result in
the revocation of the R.O.P. by the Chief of the Fire Department. The Hearing
Board shall be comprised of the Fire Chief, and the Director of the Fire
Prevention Bureau.
      (f)   R.O.P. shall not be transferable.
      (g)   R.O.P. shall be issued for the period of time shown on the face of
the R.O.P. as determined by the Director of Fire Prevention, but such period of
time shall not exceed two (2) years.
      (h)   Applications for renewal of a R.O.P. shall be filed in the same
manner as an application for an original Certificate. Each such application
shall be accompanied by applicable fees. The granting of a renewal of a R.O.P.
shall be accomplished in the same manner as for an original R.O.P.
      (i)   The Director of Fire Prevention is authorized upon application
therefore, to issue R.O.P. that is restricted to one or more activities,
systems, items, devices or to a particular premise.
      (j)   Each person holding a R.O.P. shall notify the Director of Fire
Prevention in writing of any change in his/her business, residential, or other
notification address within ten (10) days after such change. Failure on the
part of a person to give such notification shall constitute grounds for
revocation of said R.O.P.
      (k)   R.O.P. issued by the Director of Fire Prevention shall be in the
form of a certificate that can be framed. Said certificate shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Any person to whom a R.O.P. has been granted in conformance with
this Code shall upon request, produce and show proper identification and his/
her R.O.P. to anyone for whom he/she seeks to render his/her services or to the
Director of Fire Prevention.
      (2)   The purpose for which the R.O.P. has been issued.
      (3)   The date the R.O.P. is issued and the date of expiration.
      (4)   Other information as may be necessary to properly identify the
person to whom the R.O.P. is issued.
      (5)   The name and signature of the Director of the Fire Prevention who
issued the R.O.P., or his designees name and rank or title.
      (6)   Printed thereon, in bold type, shall be the following: THIS R.O.P.
DOES NOT RECOMMEND THE BEARER FOR EMPLOYMENT NOR ASSUME RESPONSIBILITY OR
LIABILITY FOR THE BEARER'S PERFORMANCE.
      (l)   A R.O.P. or permit shall not be issued until the designated fees
have been paid.
   Sec. 105.1.2.3 R.O.P. Fees. R.O.P. fees are as follows:
 
The use of any explosive material                                      $200.00
Installation, removal, or repair of aboveground or underground storage $200.00
tanks
Fire alarm or fire communications systems                              No Fee
Fire pumps                                                             $200.00
Fixed fire suppression systems/ hood and duct systems                  $200.00
Portable fire extinguishers                                            $200.00
Hazardous materials storage or use                                     $200.00
 
   Sec.105.3.9 Temporary Permits. When a temporary hazardous situation is
anticipated or discovered for conditions not otherwise regulated by this Code,
the Fire Code Official is authorized based on applicable data, to issue a
temporary permit with appropriate conditions deemed necessary for the safety,
health, and welfare of the public.
   Sec.105.3.10 Permits. Any permits issued under this Code, shall not take the
place of any other license or permit required by the Code laws or permit
required by the Code laws of the jurisdiction.
   Sec. 105.4.7 Plan Review and Inspection Services. A fee of 10 cents ($0.10)
per square foot shall be charged for reviewing all plans pertaining to tanks,
fire alarms, fixed fire suppression systems, and hood and duct fire suppression
systems. The minimum fee shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00). All 13D
residential systems shall be charged $200.00 for all single family structures.
Approved plans will not be returned until the fee is paid. All blueprints or
plans of any aforementioned systems that are required by the applicable County
or local Municipal Fire Code and its amendments, current Building, Plumbing,
and/or Mechanical Codes, shall be submitted to the Fire Prevention Bureau for
review and approval. Each applicant shall pay the following plan review fees
for re-review and site inspection by the Fire Protection District. Plan review
fees shall include re-reviews along with the preliminary site visits.
 
Site Plan - New Development                           $175.00
Life Safety Review -                                   
New Construction and/or Large Scale Remodel - greater $200.00
than 15,000 sq. ft.
Small Scale Tenant Finish or Remodel - less than      $150.00
15,000 sq. ft.
Quick Turn Around Review                              2 X's original Review Fee
NOTE: In addition to the review fees listed, the applicant shall pay the actual
costs and expenses incurred by the Fire Protection District's Fire Prevention
Bureau for expenses due to fees charged by consultants or outside contractors.
 
   Sec. 107 Fees. Add the following:
   Sec. 107.2 Inspection and Test Fees. Fees for occupancy inspections and
tests of new fire alarm, fire suppression, and/or tank installations shall be
conducted when the system is completed. No charge shall be imposed for
inspections and tests conducted on the first visit. Visits for any required
inspections or tests which cannot be conducted due to the failure of the owner
or installing contractor to properly and fully install the system to an
inspection ready state, shall be subject to the following charges:
 
First visit  No fee
Second visit $100.00
Third visit  $150.00
 
   Sec. 111 Board of Appeals. Remove the section in the Code book and replace
with the following:
   Sec. 111.1 Board of Appeals Established. In order to hear and decide appeals
of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Fire Code Official relative
to the application and interpretation of this Code, there shall be a board of
appeals consisting of members who are qualified by experience and training to
pass on matters pertaining to this Code. The Board shall consist of the
following members:
      (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner of Kildeer.
      (3)   The Director of the Fire Prevention Bureau.
   The Board shall adopt rules of procedures for conducting its business, and
shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a
duplicate copy to the Code Official.
   Sec. 202 General Definitions. Remove the definition of the Fire Code
Official in the code book and add the following:
   Municipality or (name of jurisdiction) shall be held to mean the Village of
Kildeer.
   Corporation counsel shall be held to mean the Attorney for the Village of
Kildeer.
   Fire Code official or authority having jurisdiction shall be held to mean
the Fire Chief or the Director of the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Fire
Protection District.
   Sec. 301 General. Add the following:
   Sec. 301.3 Items Not Specifically Covered. Whenever or wherever a condition
is found in any building, lot, or premises, that in the opinion of the Director
of Fire Prevention is not specifically covered by the provisions of this
Chapter, but that requires correction or removal for the protection of the
occupants or the public, the Director of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall order
such conditions be corrected or removed and the owner or occupant of such
buildings, lots, or premises shall comply with such orders.
   Sec. 304 Combustible Waste Materials. Add the following:
   Sec. 304.1.4 Sweeping Compounds. Only approved water solutions or detergent
floor sweeping compounds, and grease absorbents shall be used for cleaning
floors. The use of sawdust or similar combustible or flammable liquids spilled
from machinery or processed on any floor is prohibited.
   Sec. 305 Ignition Sources. Add the following:
   Sec. 305. 6 Portable Heaters. Portable heaters shall be designed and located
so that they cannot be easily overturned. The Director of the Fire Prevention
Bureau may prohibit the use of portable heaters in occupancies or situations in
which such use or operation would present an undue danger to the life or
property of others.
   Sec. 305. 7 Heating and Lighting Apparatus. Proper clearance (a minimum of
36 inches) shall be maintained between lighting and heat producing equipment
and combustibles so that continuous operation at full capacity will not
increase the temperature of the surrounding combustibles to their flash point
or ignition temperature.
   Sec. 307 Open Burning, Recreational Fires, and Portable Outdoor Fireplaces.
Add the following: See Village of Kildeer Open Burning Policies.
   Sec. 307.1.1 Prohibited Open Burning. Add a second exception to read as
follows:
   Exception 2.   When sustained winds are between 5-15 mph as indicated at the
website www.weather.com for current weather conditions in the 60047 location
code. Other considerations include but are not limited to wind gust speed,
outdoor relative humidity and vegetation moisture status.
   Sec. 307.2.1 Authorization. Add the following to the paragraph "A copy of
the State of Illinois EPA permit and map of the prescribed burn area shall be
presented when applying for an open burn permit."
   Sec. 307.4 Location. Add the following to the end of Exception 1: Approved
portable fire pits/places or fire pits built into the ground shall be
considered as approved containers.
   Sec. 307.6 Spread of Fire. No person shall knowingly permit any fire to
spread so as to endanger the life or property of another or use or operate any
device which may be a source of ignition, unless proper removal of flammable
material surrounding the operation is accomplished, or such other reasonable
precautions are taken to ensure against the starting or spreading of unfriendly
fires.
   Sec. 308.3 Group A Occupancies. In the first sentence of Exception 1, add
the following after the word "occupants", "the precautions shall be submitted
in writing to the Fire Code Official for approval prior to the event."
   Sec. 315 Miscellaneous Combustible General Storage. Revise the following:
   Sec. 315.3 Storage in Buildings. Add at the end of the paragraph the
following: "Minimum clearance from heaters or heating devices shall be thirty-
six (36) inches."
   Sec. 315.3.3 Electrical Equipment Rooms. No storage of any type, except that
related to the operation of the fire equipment, shall be permitted in the fire
command center or rooms containing fire equipment.
   Sec. 315.4 Outside Storage. Add to the end of the paragraph: Nor shall
outdoor storage be closer than fifteen (15) feet to any structure.
   Sec. 319.4.1 Fire protection for cooking equipment. Add to the end of the
paragraph: "All automatic fire extinguishing systems shall have been tested and
have a current service tag attached to the equipment."
   Sec. 319.4.2 Fire Extinguisher. Add to the end of the paragraph: "Fire
extinguishers shall have a current service tag attached to the extinguisher."
   Sec. 401.2 Pre-Plan Drawings. To assist the Fire Department develop pre-
plans for fire emergencies, all new development, except single-family detached
dwelling, is required to present as-built drawings prior to occupancy
certification. Drawings shall indicate a full site plan and a complete interior
floor plan. Where practical, the drawings shall be in an electronic computer
aided drawing format, but in all cases in an approved format.
   Sec. 503.2.1 Dimensions. In the first sentence change "20 feet" to "24 feet"
   Sec. 503.2.3 Surface. At the end of the paragraph add the following: "The
minimum weight the road shall support is 80,000 lbs."
   Sec. 503.2.4 Turning Radius. At the end of the paragraph add the following
sentence: "The minimum turning radius shall be 40' unless otherwise stated by
the Fire Code Official."
   Sec. 503.2.8 Angles of Approach and Departure. At the end of the paragraph
add the following sentence: "The angle shall not exceed five (5) degrees."
   Sec. 503.2.9 Existing Fire Lanes. Fire lanes for all existing facilities,
buildings, or portions of buildings except single-family detached dwellings
shall be maintained as originally approved and shall be considered compliant
with this code. Exception: At any time that the surface area of an existing
fire lane or parking area is removed or replaced, the fire lanes within the
parking area only shall be designed to meet this code. Any required change made
to the design of an existing parking area to meet this code shall not require
any increase or alteration of the boundaries or limits of the existing area as
defined by curbs, buildings, portions of buildings, and edge of pavement, but
shall be applicable only to marking and signage as may be required by this
code.
   Sec. 506.1 Where Required (Key Boxes). Add the following to the end of the
paragraph:
      (1)   Approval: The proper Fire Protection District, Fire Prevention
Bureau shall approve all lock boxes and box sizes. A Knox vault box (4400
Series) may be required if there are more than 3 keys for the building.
      (2)   Where Required: All occupancies having automatic fire alarm systems
shall have a Knox key lock box installed in a location approved by the Fire
Protection District, Fire Prevention Bureau. All occupancies with locked gates
shall have a box or a Knox key system for the gate. Due to the building size or
configuration, more than one box may be required.
      (3)   Supervision: Where required by the Fire Protection District, the
key lock box shall be electronically supervised and connected to the fire alarm
system. The box shall transmit a non-latching trouble signal when open.
      (4)   Contents: The key lock box shall contain all keys for the locked
areas of the building as required by the Fire Protection Districts. Said keys
shall include, but not be limited to, all areas of the building, the automatic
fire alarm system, and a manual pull box resetting tool.
      (5)   All fire alarm protected occupancies shall provide key operated
locks on the front door and rear door if present.
   Sec. 507.1 Rural Water Supply Requirements (Dry Hydrants). Add to end of
paragraph. In any subdivision/development, where an adequate water distribution
system is not provided, the Fire Code Official shall require the sub-divider,
developer, builder and/or the owner to modify storm water control devices, to
provide a pond within a maximum distance of 2,000 feet of all buildings within
the development. It shall conform to the standard of NFPA 1142. The pond must
be a minimum depth of five (5) feet and provide a minimum supply of available
water to be determined by the Fire Code Official.
   (See Appendix B for additional rural water supply requirements). Dry hydrant
specifications shall be available from the appropriate Rural Fire Protection
District.
   Sec. 507 Fire Protection Water Supplies. Delete Section 507.5.1.1 in its
entirety and replace with the following:
   Sec. 507.5.1.1 Hydrant for Standpipe and Sprinkler Systems. Buildings
equipped with a standpipe system installed in accordance with Section 905 and/
or a sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903, shall have a
fire hydrant within 150 feet of the Fire Department connections, or a location
approved by the Fire Official.
   Sec. 509 Fire protection and utility identification and access.
   Sec. 509.1 Identification. Add the following to the end of the paragraph:
The signs shall be in contrasting color to the door and the letters shall be a
minimum of four inches (4") high and a one-half inch (½") wide. The signs shall
read "Sprinkler Riser Room" and/or F.A.C.P.
   Sec. 604 Electrical equipment, wiring and hazards.
   Sec. 604.10 Portable, electric space heaters. Add new Section 604.10.6 Add
Section 604.10.7 as follows:
   Sec. 603.9.1 Tip over protection. Add to end of sentence: "All approved
portable space heaters shall have built in tip over protection."
   Sec. 603.9.4 Prohibited heaters. Add to end of sentence: "Portable space
heaters that have exposed heating elements shall be prohibited."
   Sec. 604 Elevator Operation, Maintenance, and Fire Service Keys.
   Sec. 604.2 Emergency Telephone Lines. Add to end of sentence: "All emergency
telephone lines from the elevator to the Fire Protection District Dispatch
Center shall be transmitted over VOIP lines."
   Sec. 604.4 Elevator Car Requirements. Add paragraph to end. "Elevator cars
are to accommodate the ambulance stretcher. At least one elevator shall be of
such a size and arrangement to accommodate a 24 inch x 84 inch ambulance
stretcher in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the
international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol
shall not be less than 3 inches high and shall be placed inside of both sides
of the hoist way doorframe. The cab size is to be a minimum 5 foot x 7 foot
platform and a minimum 2500 lb. capacity with a forty-two inch (42") side slide
door."
   Sec. 606 Commercial Kitchen Hoods.
   Sec. 606.2.1 Where Required. Each existing or new required commercial or
other occupancy kitchen exhaust hood and duct system shall be protected with an
approved wet chemical fire suppression system installed and maintained per NFPA
17A, and the UL 300 Standard. Every required automatic fire suppression system,
when activated, shall transmit a fire alarm signal to the Fire Protection
Districts' Dispatch Center via an approved fire alarm system, and making use of
the Village radio system. If multiple hoods are present, then a visual device
will be mounted on each hood.
   Sec. 806 Decorative Vegetation in New and Existing Buildings. Delete the
following sections in their entirety: Sec. 806.1 through Sec.806.1.4, and
replace with the following:
   Sec. 806.1 Natural Cut Trees. Natural cut trees shall not be allowed in any
occupancy, except single family homes. Replace with above sentence.
   Secs. 806.2 through 806.4 These sections shall remain as is.
   Sec. 901. General. Add the following:
   Sec. 901.4.7 Fire Protection Control Rooms. Add to end of paragraph: "The
Fire Prevention Bureau shall approve the location of the sprinkler riser room
and the fire alarm control panel. The fire protection equipment room shall be
located on a street or parking lot and shall have a separate exterior entrance
door to the room facing the front. All related fire protection equipment shall
be located within this room, unless otherwise approved by the Fire Code
Official. The walls within the room shall be waterproof."
   Sec. 901.6.3.2 Record Maintenance. Any company performing system
inspections, testing or maintenance on required or non-required fire protection
systems shall submit the report of said inspection, testing or maintenance to
the Fire Protection District.
   Sec. 903. Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Revise the following:
   Sec. 903.1 General. Add the following to the paragraph: "The Village of
Kildeer Sprinkler Ordinance shall supersede any conflicting area of Section
903."
   Sec. 903.2 Delete this section and insert the following:
   Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall
be provided in all Use Groups described in this Code. Automatic sprinkler
systems must be installed in accordance with applicable NFPA standards,
manufacturer's recommendations, UL listings, and good fire safety procedures
throughout the entire building. Automatic sprinkler systems must be maintained
in full operating condition at all times. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be
provided in all new town homes/multi-family dwellings which are adopted by this
Code. All new town homes shall have automatic fire sprinklers installed
throughout per NFPA 13D and Illinois requirements. All new attached garages
shall have automatic sprinklers installed. Dry sidewall sprinklers should be
used. There shall be an exterior A/V device mounted in an approved location.
   Sec. 903.2.6 Group I. Delete exception 2.
   Sec. 903.2.9.2 Bulk Storage of Tires. In the first sentence, after "20,000
cubic feet (566 m³)" add the following phrase: "or where the Fire Code Official
deems necessary,"
   Sec. 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt Locations. Delete item numbers 3 and 4 from this
section.
   Sec. 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections. Add the following to the
paragraph: The Fire Department Connection (F.D.C.) shall be a five inch (5")
storz with a thirty degree (30?) degree bend.
   Sec. 903.4.2.1 Notification Devices. Each sprinkler or standpipe riser shall
be equipped with a 24-volt dc (V.D.C.) white strobe light powered from the fire
alarm system batteries and shall be activated by the flow switch. Each riser
room shall have a 24 V.D.C. interior water flow bell and this bell shall be
activated by the water flow switch. There shall also be a 24V.D.C. white strobe
light and a 24 V.D.C. bell mounted on the exterior of the building over the
fire department connection. These shall activate only upon water flow
   Sec. 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Delete this section and replace with the
following:
   Sec. 903.4.3 Sprinkler Control Valves. Remove paragraph and replace with
this paragraph: "All new and existing sprinkler control valves shall be
equipped with electronic supervision (tamper switches) in accordance with NFPA
72. Floor control valves shall be required in buildings that have one or more
floors above or below the ground level. All supervisory signals shall be
transmitted to the Fire Protection District Communication Center."
   Sec. 903.4.4 Multiple Occupant Buildings. A building having multiple
occupancies shall have separate zoning for each occupancy space or floor.
   Each occupant or floor where practical shall have an exterior flashing
strobe light red in color in an approved location, the strobe light shall be
connected with the fire alarm system and shall be activated by a water flow or
smoke condition in the occupant space. If the building or space cannot be
separated by a flow switch, then a complete smoke detector system shall be
installed and connected to an addressable fire alarm panel. All signals shall
be transmitted to the Fire Protection District Communication Center.
   Sec. 904.14 Domestic Cooking System Alarm. Add to end of paragraph: "Any and
all domestic cooking systems, when activated shall transmit a fire alarm to the
Fire Protection District Communications Center and activate audible and visual
alarms throughout the facility."
   Sec. 905 Standpipe Systems. Revise the following:
   Sec. 905.3 Required Installations. Add the following paragraph to Section
905.3: "All required standpipe systems shall be supplied by a separate riser.
The supply riser shall be hydraulically designed to supply 2 1/2 inch hose
drops. The riser system shall be equipped with a separate control valve and
flow switch. The standpipe shall be a 2 1/2 inch gated connection with a 1 1/
2 inch reducer, and all locations shall be approved by the Fire Prevention
Bureau. All standpipe and sprinkler risers shall have separate control valves
and flow switches per floor."
   Sec. 905.3.1 Height. In the paragraph, change "Class III" to "Class I".
Revise the following: delete condition #1. Revise conditions 2 & 3 to read as
follows: "30 feet or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle
access", and "30 feet or more below the highest level of fire department
vehicle access".
   Sec. 905.3.1.2 Fire hose valves - Warehouse and/or storage fire areas. In
all warehouse storage areas exceeding 50,000 square feet, and where storage
exceeds twelve (12) feet high, provide inside 2 1/2" fire hose valves with 1 ½"
reducer to a 1 ½" connection. Locate the valves at each door entrance to the
warehouse and/or storage area. Provide additional 2 ½" fire hose valves so that
no portion of the warehouse and/or storage area is more than one hundred twenty
feet (120') maximum travel distance to a fire hose valve. Show the location of
all obstructions and/or racks on the drawings.
   Fire hose valves system piping shall be:
   1.   A separate riser piping system
   2.   The 2 ½" valves shall be supplied by a minimum of 4" with 2 ½" drops to
each valve.
   3.   Where system pressures exceed 100 psi, provide Potter reduced pressure
field adjustable type valves.
   Sec. 906 Portable Fire Extinguishers. Revise the following:
   Sec. 906.3 Size and Distribution. Add to the end of the paragraph: "The
minimum size ABC dry chemical fire extinguisher permitted shall be 10 pound
(4A:40B:C) unless approved otherwise by the Code Official. Fire extinguishers
shall have 3 dimensional signs mounted above them approximately 80 inches
A.F.F. All new and existing extinguishers shall also have current service
tags."
   Sec. 907 Fire Alarm and Detection Systems. Revise the following:
   Sec. 907.1.3 Equipment. Add the following: "All fire alarm control panels
shall be addressable and shall be capable of having the audio signal silenced
without resetting the fire alarm control panel. All fire alarm control panels
shall have an approved method of placing the system in a trouble mode at the
location of the alarm panel. All FACPs shall be capable of transmitting point
ID."
   Sec. 907.2 New and existing building and structures add the following to the
first paragraph: "All buildings that are equipped with a required alarm system
shall be provided with a manual fire alarm system, including pull stations, and
A.D.A. compliant audio visual devices. These devices shall be installed per
N.F.P.A. 72, and the State of Illinois Accessibility Code."
   Sec. 907.2.1 through 907.2.10 Delete the exceptions for Groups A, B, E, F,
I, I-1 I-2, M, R-1, R-2,
   Sec. 907.2.11 Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms. Add the following
wording after (72): "and per the current State of Illinois Smoke Detector Act."
   Sec. 907.3.1 Duct Smoke Detectors. After the end of the second sentence, add
the following: "All duct smoke detectors shall transmit a full fire alarm upon
activation. If agreed upon by the owner or rep and meets the current code
requirements, the duct detectors can be activated as a local alarm only."
   Sec. 907.6.3 Initiating Device Identification Delete the exceptions.
   Sec. 907.6.5 Fire Alarm Panel Keys. Add this section: "All fire alarm
control panels shall have their keys placed inside the buildings Knox Box. At
no time, shall the general public have access to silence or reset an activated
alarm. Panels shall remain locked at all times. This shall apply to all
existing and new fire alarm panels."
   Sec. 907.6.6 Monitoring. Delete the wording and replace with: "Where
required, all fire alarms shall transmit to the Fire Protection District
Communication Center and all signals shall be transmitted via the approved
wireless radio system."
   Sec. 907.8 False Alarms. No person shall deliberately or maliciously turn in
an alarm of fire when in fact that person knows that no fire exists. No person
shall activate any installed fire warning system or any fixed fire
extinguishing system for purposes other than emergency, maintenance, drills, or
prescribed testing.
   Sec. 912 Fire Department connections. Add the following Section:
   Sec. 912.1 All Fire Department Connections shall be a five inch (5") stortz
connection with a thirty degree (30?) bend.
   Sec. 912.2.3 Newly Constructed Buildings. FDC signs may also be required by
the code official on newly constructed buildings. The signs shall read "FDC"
and have letters that are at least 6" high and words with letters at least 2"
high or an arrow to indicate the location. Signs shall be subject to approval
by the code official.
   Sec. 913 Fire Pumps.
   Sec. 913.4 Valve Supervision. Delete methods 1 through 4, and replace with
the following: "Valve supervision shall transmit a supervisory alarm to the
Fire Protection District Communication Center by an electronic tamper switch."
   Sec. 914 Fire protection based on special detailed requirements of use and
occupancy. Revise the subsections as follows:
   Sec. 914.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. In the exception, at the end of the
paragraph add the following: "temporary shall be 180 days or less. Reference
section 3103 of the IBC." Delete the exception in this section.
   Sec. 916 Gas Detection Systems.
   Sect. 916.9 Signage. Add at the end of the paragraph: "Upon direction of the
Fire Code Official, an approved NFPA 704 placard shall be placed on the
building. The placard shall identify all hazards associated with the gas(es)
within the building. The placard shall be placed in a location approved by the
Fire Code Official."
   Sec. 1008.3 Emergency Power for Illumination:
   Sec. 1008.3.3 Rooms and Spaces. Add the following to the list of areas: "All
conference rooms, all public restrooms, all spaces used for public gatherings/
meetings with the exception of private offices."
   Sec. 1010 Doors, Gates, Turnstiles
   Sec. 1103 Fire safety requirements for existing buildings. Revise
subsections as follows:
   Sec. 1103.7.1 Group E. Delete the exceptions.
   Sec. 1103.7.2 Group I-1. Delete the exceptions.
   Sec. 1103.7.5.1 Group R-1 hotel and motel manual fire alarm system. Delete
all of the exceptions in their entirety.
   Sec. 1103.7.5.2 Group R-1 boarding and rooming houses manual fire alarm
system. Delete the exception in its entirety.
   Sec. 1103.7.6 Group R-2 Delete exception 3.
   Sec. 1205 Solar Photovoltaic Power Systems Revise the following:
   Sec. 1205.4 Rapid Shutdown Switch At the end of the paragraph add the
following: "The rapid shutdown switch shall be one approved by the Fire Code
Official. The switch shall either be a shunt trip style type switch or other
approved type."
   Sec. 1207 Electrical Energy Storage Systems. Revise the following:
   Sec. 1207.2.11.1 Fire Extinguishing Systems. Delete the exception.
   Sec. 2108 Fire Protection. Revise subsection as follows:
   Sec. 2108.2 Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Delete the exceptions in their
entirety.
   Sec. 2804 Fire Protection. Revise the following:
   Sec. 2804.2.1 Manual Fire Alarms. Delete the exception.
   Sec. 3103.2 Approval Required. Add to the end of the paragraph: "Approval
must be obtained from the fire code official a minimum of five (5) working days
prior to the event."
   Sec. 3103.5 Use Period. Add the following: for the purpose of this code, the
12 month period will be a calendar year.
   Sec. 3103.8.2 Location. In the first sentence of Exception 2 and after the
word "tents", add "when not used for cooking" and after the word "buildings",
add "lot lines, and parked vehicles or internal combustion engines."
   Sec. 5601 New. All shows shall follow the following state laws (425ILCS35)
(225ILCS22)
   Sec. 5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale,
advertisement, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited.
   Exceptions:
   1.   The use of fireworks for display as permitted in Section 5608.
   2.   The retail sale of approved consumer novelties shall be permitted, but
only to persons 18 years of age or older. Such sales shall be permitted only in
buildings equipped with approved automatic sprinkler systems. The display of
consumer novelties in a building shall be separated from all exit doors by a
minimum distance of 20 feet or as approved in advance in writing by the fire
code official. The sale of consumer novelties shall not be permitted at any
building or on any property where flammable or combustible liquids or gases are
sold or dispensed.
   Sec. 5601.9 Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Storage of
Explosives and Blasting Agents Is to Be Prohibited. The limits referred to in
this section of the International Fire Code 2021 edition in which storage of
explosive materials is prohibited are hereby established as follows:
   All commercial zones, business zones, and residential zoned property in the
Village of Kildeer and Lake Zurich Fire Protection District.
   Sec. 5602 Definitions
   Sec. 5602.1 Consumer Novelties. Consumer novelties shall mean: (i0 snakes,
glow worm pellets, smoke devices, trick noisemakers (known as party poppers),
toy booby traps, snappers, trick matches, cigarette loads, auto burglar alarms,
toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns and other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive compound are used, provided
they are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when
in place for the explosion, and (ii) toy pistol paper or plastic caps which
contain less than 0.25 grains of explosive mixture.
   Delete the definition of "Fireworks, 1.4G" and replace with the following:
   Fireworks, 1.4G. (Formerly Known as Class C, Common Fireworks.) Small
fireworks devices, including handheld wire sparklers, containing restricted
amounts of pyrotechnic composition designed primarily to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion. Such 1.4G fireworks that comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the DOT for
fireworks, UN 0336, and the U.S. consumer product safety commission as set for
the in CPSC 16 CFR: parts 1500 and 1507 are not explosive materials for the
purpose of this code.
   Sec. 5608 Fireworks Displays. Add the following section:
   Sec. 5608.1 Indoor Displays Prohibited. Add to paragraph: "The use of any
type of fireworks, novelties, or display or pyrotechnic special effects in
theatrical or group entertainment shall be prohibited within a structure of any
use group."
   Amend subsection 5608.2.1 to read as follows:
   Sec. 5608.2.1 Outdoor Displays. Delete and replace paragraph with below: "In
addition to the requirements of Section 403, permit applications for outdoor
fireworks displays using division 1.3G fireworks shall include a diagram of the
location at which the display will be conducted, including the site from which
fireworks will be discharged; the location of buildings, highways, overhead
obstructions, and utilities; and the lines behind which the audience will be
restrained. All outdoor firework displays shall be electronically fired from an
approved electronic firing unit."
   Sec. 5601.2.2 Display and Sale Forbidden. Add to end of paragraph: "It shall
be unlawful to display, sell, store or advertise for sale any division 1.4G or
1.3G fireworks within the village."
   Sec. 5610 Add the following section:
   DIVISION 3. AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
   Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Alternative fire protection means the use of either or both (i) fire
resistive construction and (ii) fire alarm, fire detecting, or fire
extinguishing equipment (other than an automatic fire sprinkler system) to
reduce the risk of personal injury and property damage from fire and the spread
of fire.
   Automatic fire sprinkler system means an automatic fire sprinkler system
meeting the applicable National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") standard
or standards set forth in section 6 403.
   Building, for purposes of this Division, shall be as defined in the
International Building Code (IBC) as adopted by the village in section 6-161.
For purposes of this Division, a building shall further be defined as a
structure which is situated entirely within a Lot of Record (as defined by the
Village of Kildeer Zoning Code) or which traverses one or more Lots of Record
under a single ownership.
   Building code means the International Building Code, as adopted by the
village or any subsequent edition adopted by the village in the future.
   Cosmetic improvement means any alterations to an existing building that
affects only such existing building's appearance. Interior cosmetic
improvements shall include, but not be limited to, painting, wallpapering,
floor coverings, and nonbearing movable wall partitions. Exterior cosmetic
improvements shall include, but not be limited to, new signs, painting,
architectural trim, and repair or replacement of facades, windows, doors and
roofs coverings. The addition of a rain roof to the structure is not included
in the cosmetic improvement and will be treated as an addition to the building.
   Fire area means the floor area enclosed and bounded by fire walls, fire
barriers, or exterior walls of a building to restrict the spread of fire. Fire
walls which divide a building (as defined by this Division) shall not be
considered as interrupting the square foot measurement of the entire building
when calculating the square foot area necessary to require sprinklers.
   Work area shall be as defined in the International Existing Building Code
(IEBC) Sec.202.   
   Cross reference(s) Definitions and rules of construction generally.
   Conflicts.
   To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this division shall be
construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of
any other law or ordinance, including the provisions of the Building Code, to
the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application.
However, in case of any conflict between this division and the provisions of
the Building Code, the provisions of this division shall control.
   NFPA standards.
   All automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be designed, installed and
maintained in compliance with the following referenced standards as determined
by the Director of the Fire Prevention Bureau to be applicable:
   NFPA 13. The 2019 edition of the National Fire Protection Association's
(NFPA) Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems.
   NFPA 13D. The 2019 edition of the National Fire Protection Association's
(NFPA) Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One and Two Family
Dwellings and Manufactured Homes.
   NFPA 13R. The 2019 edition of the National Fire Protection Association's
(NFPA) Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler systems in Residential
Occupancies up to and including Four Stories in Height.
   NFPA 14. The 2019 edition of the National Fire Protection Association's
(NFPA) Standard for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems.
   NFPA 20. The 2019 edition of the National Fire Protection Association's
(NFPA) Standard for the Installation of Centrifugal Fire Pumps.
   NFPA 25. The 2020 edition of the National Fire Protection Association's
(NFPA) Standard for the Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water Based Fire
Protection Systems.
   NFPA 72. The 2019 edition of the National Fire Protection Association's
(NFPA) Standard for the Installation of Fire Systems' National Fire Alarm Code.
   New buildings.
      (a)   When and where required. For all new buildings an automatic fire
sprinkler system shall be required throughout all areas
      New townhomes shall be designed per the NFPA 13D, standard and local
amendments. Single-family homes are exempt from this ordinance.
      (b)   Alternative fire protection for new buildings. When the Fire Chief,
Director of the Fire Prevention Bureau and Building Commissioner makes a
unanimous written determination, based on factors such as building, size,
building construction type, location of the building on the property, and the
availability or appropriateness of water as an extinguishing agent, that the
public health, safety, welfare, and the lives and property of individuals will
be adequately safeguarded by alternative fire protection to be provided
pursuant to specific plans approved and incorporated as part of such written
determination, then, on condition that such alternative fire protection is
provided, an automatic fire sprinkler system shall not be required pursuant to
this section 6 404.
      (c)   Exception. Neither an automatic fire sprinkler system nor
alternative fire protection shall be required for any detached accessory
structure that is one thousand (1,000) square feet or less in building area and
only one story in height and without a basement.
   Existing buildings.
      (a)   Increases in fire areas of existing buildings.
      (1)   Currently sprinklered buildings. When any existing building that is
classified in a use group that would, if newly constructed, be required to have
an automatic fire sprinkler system and is protected by an automatic fire
sprinkler system, is added to, remodeled, or altered in any manner that
increases the fire areas of the building, regardless of the cost or amount of
increase in fire areas, the additional fire areas shall also be protected by an
automatic fire sprinkler system.
      (2)   Currently non-sprinklered buildings. When any existing building
that is not protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system; and that is not
regulated by the International Residential Code (IRC) as adopted and that
would, if newly constructed, be required to have an automatic fire sprinkler
system is added to, remodeled or altered in any manner that increases the fire
areas of the building, regardless of the cost, so that the fire areas of the
entire building, including the fire areas of the building that were added,
remodeled, or altered, then the fire areas of the entire building, including
the fire areas of the building that were added, remodeled, or altered, shall be
protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system.
      (b)   Remodeling or alterations to existing buildings. When any existing
building that is not regulated by the International Residential Code (IRC) and
that would, if newly constructed, be required to have an automatic fire
sprinkler system is remodeled or altered during any 30 month period when i) the
work area exceeds fifty (50) percent of the aggregate area of the building,
then the fire areas of the entire building shall be protected with an automatic
fire sprinkler system, regardless of whether such remodeling or alteration
results in an increase in the fire areas of the building.
      (c)   Changes in use group. If the use of any building is changed such
that it is classified in a use group requiring sprinklers, such building shall
comply with the provisions as if it were a newly constructed building.
      (d)   Alternative fire protection for existing buildings. When the Fire
Chief, Director of the Fire Prevention Bureau and Building Commissioner makes a
unanimous written determination, based on factors such as building size,
building construction type, location of the building on the property, the
availability or appropriateness of water as an extinguishing agent, the size of
a new addition, percentage of remodeling or alterations, and the change in use
group classification, that the public health, safety and welfare and the lives
and property of individuals will be adequately safeguarded by alternative fire
protection to be provided pursuant to specific plans approved and incorporated
as part of such written determination, then, on condition that such alternative
fire protection is provided, an automatic fire sprinkler system shall not be
required.
      (e)   Alternative timing for installation of automatic sprinkler system
in existing multi-tenant/condominium buildings. Whenever the provisions of this
section require the installation of an automatic fire-sprinkler system
throughout an existing multi-tenant or condominium building, then each
currently existing and occupied tenant space or condominium unit within said
building and outside of the work area of the related building permit may remain
unsprinklered for a period not to exceed five (5) years following the issuance
of the current permit, subject to the following restrictions and conditions:
      1)    Upon the vacation of an occupied tenant space or condominium unit
the vacated space or unit must be sprinklered prior to any further occupancy;
and
      2)   When any future remodeling or alteration takes place within any
currently unsprinklered tenant space or condominium unit involving a work area
which exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the aggregate area of such space or unit,
the tenant space or condominium unit must be sprinklered simultaneously with
the completion of the future work; and
      3)   At the time of the issuance of the current permit the water service
and sprinkler system shall be designed for the entire building; and
      4)   The building water service and sprinkler system shall be installed
in the building permit work area(s) and all common areas; and
      5)   At the time of issuance of the current permit a signed statement
must be received from the property owner indicating his/her understanding of
and guarantee that the entire building will be sprinkled as required above and
no later than 5 years from the date of the issuance of the current permit.
   Public utility electrical rooms, buildings and vaults.
   Any new electrical equipment room, building or vault that is installed,
serviced, secured and maintained by a public utility company that is regulated
by the Illinois Commerce Commission and that complies with all of the
conditions of paragraphs (1) through (6) of this section shall not be required
to install an automatic fire sprinkler system pursuant to this division.
      (1)    An alternative fire suppression system approved by the Director of
the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be installed in the electrical equipment room,
building or vault.
      (2)    An automatic fire detection system approved by the Director of the
Fire Prevention Bureau that meets the requirements of NFPA 72 shall be
installed in the electrical equipment room, building or vault; provided,
however, that the fire and trouble alarm signal shall be transmitted to the
fire alarm control panel.
      (3)   The electrical equipment room, building or vault shall be
constructed with walls, floors and ceilings that have a minimum of a one hour
fire resistive rating.
      (4)   All doors to or within the electrical equipment room, building or
vault shall have a minimum of a one hour fire rated door assembly with self
closing devices, and any other openings or penetrations into this room,
building, or vault shall be protected with a minimum of a one hour fire rated
assembly.
      (5)   A portable fire extinguisher, with a minimum rating of 2A40BC,
shall be installed inside the electrical room, building, or vault within ten
(10) feet of each exit and one shall also be provided on the exterior of the
room or vault at the entrance door.
   Supervision of systems.
   Every automatic fire sprinkler system, except single family residential
systems regulated by the International Residential Code (IRC) installed within
the Village, whether or not such system is required by this division, shall be
electronically supervised by an approved addressable fire alarm system located
in the riser room. If such area is not accessible from the exterior of the
building, the fire alarm control panel shall be located in a location approved
by the Director of the Fire Prevention Bureau. Every automatic fire sprinkler
system installed within the village, whether or not such system is required by
this division, shall have a direct connection to the fire department dispatch
center meeting the requirements of NFPA 72 for remote stations and shall be
transmitted via the Village radio system. A sprinkler system for only local
protection and one which does not have electronic supervision, will not be
required to transmit a signal to the dispatch center. Notwithstanding the
requirements of this section, when the fire marshal makes a written
determination that the public health, safety and welfare and the lives and
property of individuals will be adequately safeguarded, based on factors such
as number of sprinkler heads or size of the protected area, if no
electronically supervised fire alarm control panel system is installed, then no
such system shall be required.
   Maintenance.
   Every automatic fire sprinkler system installed within the village, whether
or not such system is required by this division, shall be maintained according
to the requirements of NFPA 25.
   Sprinkler Control Rooms. In all new construction, and in all existing
buildings where in the opinion of the Director of Fire Prevention states it may
be installed, a sprinkler control room with an exterior entrance shall be
installed. The control room shall contain the fire sprinkler risers, and the
fire alarm control panel. The room shall face either the main parking lot or
shall face the front street and shall have a hard surface to the entrance door.
The Knox key box shall also be located at the door to the fire sprinkler
control room. If the location of the riser and alarm panel shall be in a
different location due to a remodel, then this shall be approved by the
Director of Fire Prevention.
   Sec. 6-410. Residential Sprinkler System.
      (1)   Where Required. Sprinkler protection will be provided within the
garage where the garage is attached to the structure and in all bathrooms.
      (2)   Monitoring. A horn/strobe or a bell/strobe will be required on the
exterior of the structure at the garage. This will be activated by the
sprinkler flow switch. A water flow bell(s) mounted on the return air duct(s),
and/or horn/strobe(s) located on a floor approved by the Fire Code Official
shall provide notification for the occupants inside the residence. These
devices shall also be activated.
(Ord. 17-O-001, 2-21-2017, eff. 2-21-2017; amd. Ord. 23-O-001, 1-17-2023; Ord.
24-O-003, 2-20-2024)
4-3-6: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as the national
electrical code, 2017, as published by the National Fire Protection Association
be and the same is hereby adopted as provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the national
electrical code, 2017, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Amendments To Code: The following sections are hereby revised as
follows:
   1)   All wiring shall be in a metallic conduit system, within building, and
exposed exterior of building to 6" below grade.
   Below grade schedule 80 PVC rigid nonmetallic conduit is approved.
   2)   Min 200 amp service for all residences.
(Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005; amd. Ord. 12-O-010, 6-19-2012, eff. 6-19-2012; Ord.
14-O-017, 4-15-2014; Ord. 22-O-020; 8-16-2022)
4-3-7: ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as the Illinois
plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890, as published by the state
of Illinois, department of public health, division of sanitary engineering, be
and the same is hereby adopted as provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Illinois
plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection
B of this section.
   B.   Amendments To Code: The following sections are hereby revised as
follows:
1) Water lines within buildings shall be type K copper below grade and type L
copper or galvanized steel above grade.
2) In buildings connected to septic systems, copper waste and vent lines are
prohibited.
3) Sanitary waste and vent lines within the buildings, below grade shall be
cast iron.
4) Storm sewer lines within buildings, below grade shall be cast iron.
5) Sanitary and storm sewer lines through foundation walls to a point ten feet
(10') outside the building shall be ductile iron pursuant to an agreement with
the Lake County department of public works.
6) Floor drain traps and drains installed below a basement floor or underground
shall be no less than three inches (3") in diameter.
7) Each plumbing fixture trap shall be protected by its own continuous vent.
8) Each individual bath and shower valves shall be provided with a shut off
valve.
9) Hangers and supports shall be clevis, bracket, strap, ring and bolt, or
other pre-fabricated type. Hangers shall not be of a makeshift variety.
10) In residential construction, plumbing vents shall terminate at the rear of
the roof ridge.
11) Footing tile discharge piping must not discharge to village rights-of-way,
ditches, or adjoining properties. Discharge piping shall terminate on the
owner's property in a drywell, to drainage swales or other locations as
approved by the village engineer. If the building site is served by storm
sewers or, if a detention/retention pond is located on the building site, the
village engineer shall have the authority to direct that discharge piping be
directed and/or connected to such facilities. Discharge piping shall be shown
on the approved septic system layout and shall not discharge towards the septic
system.
12) No cell core PVC allowed.
13) All mission couplings require bands.
(Ord. 16-O-001, 1-19-2016)
4-3-8: ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as the Illinois
accessibility code, latest edition, as published by the state of Illinois
capital development board be and the same is hereby adopted as provided; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
the Illinois accessibility code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this section. (Ord. 05-O-928, 2-1-2005;
amd. Ord. 22-O-021, 8-16-2022)
4-3-9: DECK STANDARDS:
   A.   Foundation: Foundation shall be concrete piers, three feet six inches
(3'6") deep, eight inches (8") to ten inches (10") diameter placed as approved.
   B.   Beam And Post Anchors: Beam and post anchors are required; no concrete
embedded wood is permitted.
   C.   Framing: Framing shall be minimum two inch by eight inch (2" x 8")
joists, sixteen inches (16") on center.
   D.   Ledger Boards: Ledger boards shall be attached with through bolts and
approved lateral fastener. No ledger board shall be attached over or through
brick, masonry or stone.
   E.   Materials: Structural elements shall be conventional lumber materials.
Nonstructural elements (i.e., decking, railing system) shall be conventional
lumber materials or manufactured/synthetic/engineered, nongloss materials,
installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's requirements.
   F.   Railing System: Railing system to meet force requirements in IRC 2009.
   G.   Risers: No open risers allowed. (Ord. 14-O-011, 3-18-2014)
4-3-10: INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the international
energy conservation code, 2018, as published by the International Code Council,
is hereby adopted as the energy conservation code of the Village of Kildeer, in
the county of Lake, State of Illinois for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, as
provided herein, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code on file in the office of the Village of
Kildeer are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this section.
   B.   Amendments To Code: The following sections are hereby revised as
follows:
   Section 101.1: Insert: "Village of Kildeer".
(Ord. 16-O-014, 5-17-2016; amd. Ord. 20-O-004, 2-18-2020)
4-3-11: DRIVE ACCESS STANDARDS:
   A.   Drive Access: Every lot shall be permitted one driveway access. Lots of
a minimum one hundred fifty foot (150') width at the front lot line may have
two (2) drive accesses, subject to approval of the village engineer.
   B.   Location: A drive access shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') from the
side lot line, or as required by the village engineer. A drive access shall be
no closer than fifty feet (50') from an adjacent intersection.
   C.   Materials: A drive access shall have:
      1.   A minimum six inches (6") of CA-6 crushed limestone, a two inch (2")
asphalt surface, or
      2.   A minimum four inches (4") of CA-6 crushed limestone, and six inches
(6") portland cement concrete (PCC), or
      3.   Other block material as approved by the village engineer.
Concrete, paving bricks, or other block materials are not allowed within the
right of way without a letter from the homeowner accepting responsibility for
any future maintenance or replacement that may be associated with adjacent
street maintenance, which letter shall be recorded with the Lake County
recorder of deeds.
   D.   Culverts: Where culverts are required, said culverts shall be fifteen
inch (15") reinforced concrete pipe (RCP CL IV) or as required by the village
engineer.
   E.   Size:
      Minimum width: Twelve feet (12').
      Maximum width at right of way: Eighteen feet (18').
      Maximum width at intersection with street: Twenty eight feet (28').
   A drive access may not be enlarged to accommodate parking spaces in the
front yard setback. (Ord. 05-O-945, 9-6-2005)
CHAPTER 4
FENCES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Fence Regulations
4-4-2: Existing Nonconforming Fences
4-4-3: Penalty
4-4-4: Pool Enclosure
4-4-1: FENCE REGULATIONS:
No fences except pool enclosures are to be constructed or erected within the
village except for pool enclosures, hereinafter defined. (Ord. 10-O-009, 5-4-
2010)
4-4-2: EXISTING NONCONFORMING FENCES:
Any fence existing on the effective date hereof need not be rendered in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter; provided that any existing
fence may only be repaired and not be extended or altered. Normal maintenance
shall be allowed on nonconforming fences. However, fences in substantial
disrepair may not be restored or improved and shall be removed within thirty
(30) days of the effective date hereof, in the event that the fence is
nonconforming under this chapter. (Ord. 10-O-009, 5-4-2010)
4-4-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the terms of this chapter shall have ten (10) days from
the date of written notification by the building commissioner to remedy such
violation. At the expiration of said ten (10) day period, any person who
continues to violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as
set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
10-O-009, 5-4-2010)
4-4-4: POOL ENCLOSURE:
Applicants for a permit for a swimming pool shall simultaneously apply for a
permit for a pool enclosure. Residents with unenclosed pools may also apply for
a permit for a pool enclosure. Pool enclosure permits require approval of the
architecture committee regarding height, style, materials and possible
screening. The total area enclosed shall be the minimum required to enclose the
pool and surrounding deck areas. Pool enclosures to be constructed or erected
within the village shall conform to the following guidelines:
   A.   The materials utilized for the pool enclosure shall be wood, stone, or
masonry. "Open" type enclosures shall be allowed.
   B.   The maximum height of the enclosure shall be six feet (6'). (Ord. 10-O-
009, 5-4-2010)
CHAPTER 5
SIGNS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 90-O-522, 10-1-1990)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5, chapter 20 of this code.
CHAPTER 6
WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
4-6-1: Adopted
4-6-1: ADOPTED:
See Title 7, Chapter 6 of this Code. (Ord. 98-O-778, 8-3-1998)
CHAPTER 7
SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE CONTROL
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose
4-7-2: Responsibility For Administration
4-7-3: Definitions
4-7-4: When Permit Required
4-7-5: Ultimate Responsibility
4-7-6: Discharge Prohibitions
4-7-6-1: Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges
4-7-6-2: Prohibition Of Illicit Connections
4-7-7: Watercourse Protection
4-7-8: Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges
4-7-8-1: Submission Of NOI To Village Of Kildeer
4-7-8-2: Compliance Monitoring
4-7-8-3: Search Warrants
4-7-9: Requirement To Prevent, Control, And Reduce Stormwater Pollutants By The
Use Of Best Management Practices
4-7-10: Notification Of Spills
4-7-11: Violations, Enforcement, And Penalties
4-7-11-1: Violations
4-7-11-2: Warning Notice
4-7-11-3: Notice Of Violation
4-7-11-4: Compensatory Action
4-7-11-5: Suspension Of MS4 Access
4-7-12: Civil Penalties
4-7-13: Criminal Prosecution
4-7-14: Appeal Of Notice Of Violation
4-7-15: Enforcement Measures After Appeal
4-7-16: Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation
4-7-17: Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
4-7-18: Remedies Not Exclusive
4-7-19: Permit Application
4-7-20: Review; Issuance Or Denial
4-7-21: Rights Of Way
4-7-22: Drain Tile; Relocation, Replacement
4-7-23: Permit Fee
4-7-24: Waiving Requirements
4-7-25: Violations, Penalty
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is as follows:
   A.   To ensure that any changes in topography on all land situated within
the village are adequately engineered, designed and installed to properly
handle surface water drainage and runoff.
   B.   To provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
of the village of Kildeer through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to
the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by
federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the
introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are:
      1.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater
discharges by any user.
      2.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
      3.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The village of Kildeer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the village of
Kildeer may be delegated in writing by the director of the village of Kildeer
to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
the agency. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the village
administrator designated to enforce this chapter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These
include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or
more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm
drain system, except as specifically exempted in this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not
limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or
   B.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial stormwater permits
as defined in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and
operated by the village of Kildeer and designed or used for collecting or
conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group, or general areawide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: A document which describes the best management
practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify
sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or
reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/
or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-4: WHEN PERMIT REQUIRED:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated
on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the
village of Kildeer.
A surface water drainage control permit shall be required in the following
situations:
   A.   Construction and/or alteration of any buildings, structures or any
parts or appurtenances thereto.
   B.   Grading and/or draining of any lot or other parcel of land. (This shall
not include the depositing of topsoil or seeding.)
   C.   All paving for driveways and parking facilities.
   D.   Construction of terraces.
   E.   Construction of retaining walls.
   F.   The installation of culverts and other piping including foundation
drainage which affects the movement of surface water.
   G.   Any other type of construction which directly affects surface water
drainage within the immediate vicinity of the construction site. (Ord. 09-O-
1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-6: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
4-7-6-1: PROHIBITION OF ILLEGAL DISCHARGES:
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others
under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm
drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
   A.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing, landscape irrigation,
diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water
infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water
sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water,
springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering,
individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water.
   B.   Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specified in
writing by the village of Kildeer as being necessary to protect public health
and safety.
   C.   Discharges associated with dye testing, however, this activity requires
a verbal notification to the village of Kildeer prior to the time of the test.
   D.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the United States
environmental protection agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-6-2: PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS:
   A.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
   B.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
   C.   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue.
   D.   Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected
and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on site wastewater management
system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the village of Kildeer.
   E.   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be
located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written
notice of violation from the village of Kildeer requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the
location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or
conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the
outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary
sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these
investigations are to be documented and provided to the village of Kildeer.
(Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-7: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
4-7-8-1: SUBMISSION OF NOI TO VILLAGE OF KILDEER:
   A.   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the village of Kildeer prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
   B.   The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to
have an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the village of
Kildeer at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to
the EPA as applicable.
   C.   The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the village of
Kildeer either in person or by mailing it to:
      Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater
      Village of Kildeer
      21911 Quentin Road
      Kildeer, IL 60047
   D.   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is
discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the village of Kildeer.
(Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-8-2: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
   A.   Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling: The village of Kildeer shall
be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
      1.   If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger
shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the
village of Kildeer.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the village of Kildeer ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional
duties as defined by state and federal law.
      3.   The village of Kildeer shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the village
of Kildeer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater
discharge.
      4.   The village of Kildeer has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the village of Kildeer and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the village of Kildeer access to a
permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this
chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if
the person denies the village of Kildeer reasonable access to the permitted
facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this chapter. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-8-3: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the village of Kildeer has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there
is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the village of Kildeer may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-9: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY THE
USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The village of Kildeer will adopt requirements identifying best management
practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system,
or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of such activity,
operation, or facility shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these
structural and nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises that is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. These BMPs shall be part of a
stormwater management plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements
of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-10: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials, which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or
pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of
the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a
release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency
response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the
event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the
village of Kildeer in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the village of Kildeer within seven (7) business
days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates
from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least five (5) years. Failure to provide notification of a release as
provided above is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-11: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES:
4-7-11-1: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter may be subject to the
enforcement actions outlined in this chapter or may be restrained by injunction
or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In the event the violation
constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the village
of Kildeer is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without
giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. The village of Kildeer is authorized to
seek costs of the abatement as outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-
2009)
4-7-11-2: WARNING NOTICE:
When the village of Kildeer finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the
village of Kildeer may serve upon that person a written warning notice,
specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting
the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution
whereby any offending discharge will cease.
Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice
in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this
section shall limit the authority of the village of Kildeer to take any action,
including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first
issuing a warning notice. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-11-3: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   Whenever the village of Kildeer finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the village of
Kildeer may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. The notice of violation shall contain:
      1.   The name and address of the alleged violator;
      2.   The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
      3.   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
      4.   A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore
compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such
remedial action;
      5.   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
      6.   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the village of Kildeer by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10)
days of service of notice of violation; and
      7.   A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore
compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
   B.   Such notice may require, without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. (Ord. 09-O-
1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-11-4: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this
chapter, the village of Kildeer may impose upon a violator alternative
compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance
workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-11-5: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
   A.   Emergency Cease And Desist Order: When the village of Kildeer finds
that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations
are likely to recur, and that the person's violation(s) has (have) caused or
contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the
United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the
village of Kildeer may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately
to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
      1.   Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
      2.   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly
address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Any person notified of an
emergency order directed to it under this subsection shall immediately comply
and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the village
of Kildeer may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm
to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to
the environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply,
sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The village of Kildeer
may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the village of Kildeer that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the
discharger under this chapter. A person that is responsible, in whole or in
part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a
detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the village of Kildeer
within seven (7) days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an
emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the violator.
   B.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The
village of Kildeer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of
the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the village of Kildeer may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United
States, or to minimize danger to persons.
   C.   Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
village of Kildeer will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
MS4 access. The violator may petition the village of Kildeer for a
reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this chapter, without the prior approval of the village
of Kildeer. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-12: CIVIL PENALTIES:
In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth
in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described
therein within fourteen (14) days, or such greater period as the village of
Kildeer shall deem appropriate, after the village of Kildeer has taken one or
more of the actions described above, the village of Kildeer may impose a
penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) (depending on the severity
of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt
of the notice of violation. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-13: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be
subject to a criminal penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation
per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed seven (7) days.
Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
village of Kildeer. The notice of appeal must be received within ten (10) days
from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the
appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within thirty (30)
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the
municipal authority or their designee shall be final. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-
2009)
4-7-15: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within seven (7)
days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
village of Kildeer, then representatives of the village of Kildeer shall enter
upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall
be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to
enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-
2009)
4-7-16: COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
Within seven (7) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of
the assessment within seven (7) days. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by
the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become
a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable
to the village of Kildeer by reason of such violation. The liability shall be
paid in not more than twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of ten
percent (10%) per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the
thirtieth day following discovery of the violation. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-17: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-18: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the village of Kildeer to seek cumulative remedies.
The village of Kildeer may recover all attorney fees, court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-19: PERMIT APPLICATION:
The applicant for a surface water drainage control permit shall submit to the
building commissioner the following documentation and data:
   A.   An engineering drawing showing the proposed improvement which includes
a topographic survey of the premises and location of any existing surface water
drainage channels.
   B.   Proposed changes in elevation using USGS sea level datum for any
proposal. Pertinent elevations of contiguous properties shall also be clearly
shown as well as any possible alterations of surface water or subterranean
flood patterns. The engineering drawing and accompanying drawing of elevations
shall each bear the stamp of a registered professional engineer of the state.
   C.   The applicant shall further comply with chapter 6 of this title. (Ord.
09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-20: REVIEW; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
   A.   The building commissioner, upon receipt of an application for a surface
water control permit together with all required data, shall submit the same to
the village engineer for his review and recommendation. The applicant shall
have the burden of complying with all of the requirements of this chapter and
all necessary documentation and data to the building commissioner and village
engineer.
   B.   The village engineer shall review the data, consider the type of
construction, the necessity and provisions for surface water detention, the
effect of filling or altering the topography, and shall further consider any
potential hazards to life or property which may result from the construction of
the proposed improvements. He shall compare the data submitted with any other
data of the village which pertains to the location in general. He shall further
compare the proposed alterations and topography with any and all engineering
plans and specifications which are on file with the village when applicable.
   C.   The village engineer shall not approve a permit unless he is satisfied
that the proposed improvements will not adversely affect surface water drainage
within the immediate area and is otherwise in conformity with established
engineering standards within Lake County, Illinois. The village engineer, in
lieu of recommending denial of the permit, may make recommended changes in the
plans for the improvements. In the event that the applicant so agrees, the
permit can then be processed and approved by the building commissioner.
   D.   The building commissioner, upon receipt of a positive recommendation
from the village engineer and upon further determining that all applicable
ordinances have been complied with, shall issue the permit. In the event that
the village engineer does not recommend the issuance of the permit and/or the
applicant has not otherwise complied with village ordinances, the permit shall
be then denied by the building commissioner. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-21: RIGHTS OF WAY:
No person shall construct or install any improvements including fences, shrubs
and culverts within the village right of way without the express written
consent of the village through the building commissioner. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-
2009)
4-7-22: DRAIN TILE; RELOCATION, REPLACEMENT:
If it is determined during the construction of any improvements described in
section
4-7-4 of this chapter that a drain tile will be affected, the permit recipient
shall relocate or replace the tile to ensure:
   A.   There is no obstruction of the tile line.
   B.   The tile line will carry stormwater for the purpose for which it was
intended. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-23: PERMIT FEE:
The permit fee for a surface water drainage control permit shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00), provided that the fee shall be waived for any construction
described in section
4-7-4 of this chapter which also requires a building permit fee. The fee is due
and payable at time of application and shall be refunded if the permit is
denied. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-24: WAIVING REQUIREMENTS:
The building commissioner is hereby granted the authority and discretion to
waive the requirements of this chapter in whole or in part in the event that he
determines that the proposed construction or improvement or grading or any
other activity normally covered by the terms of this chapter will not have any
adverse effect on surface water drainage, nor have any other adverse effect on
any property within the immediate vicinity of the construction. The building
commissioner is further authorized in his discretion to reduce the requirements
contained in this chapter and partially waive any of the requirements herein if
he determines that the proposed construction or other activity covered by the
terms of this chapter, as modified, will not have any adverse impact on surface
water drainage or any other adverse impact on any property within the immediate
vicinity. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
4-7-25: VIOLATIONS, PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined a
sum as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code per occurrence. A separate offense shall be deemed to have
been committed on each and every day upon which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 09-O-1042, 6-2-2009)
CHAPTER 8
PLAYGROUND EQUIPMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 04-O-911, 8-2-2004)
CHAPTER 9
ARCHITECTURAL BUILDING CONTROLS
SECTION:
4-9-1: Policy
4-9-2: Application Of Provisions And Standards
4-9-1: POLICY:
The policy is to promote and maintain the character of the village, to preserve
and protect the public welfare by enhancing the value of real estate within the
village and by maintaining and protecting real estate within the village from
impairment or depreciation of value. (Ord. 97-O-738, 1-4-1997)
4-9-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS AND STANDARDS:
No single-family residence ("subject residence") shall be built in the village
which is of the same or similar design as the single-family residences located
on the same side of the street on the first or second platted lots on both
sides of the subject residence (regardless of intervening streets), directly
across the street from the subject residence or immediately to the rear of the
subject residence fronting on the first street to the rear of the subject
residence. The words "directly across the street" include any lot (covered lot)
or portion thereof that falls within the lot lines, as extended, of the subject
residence and the first or second lots on both sides of the covered lot. The
words "immediately to the rear" include any lot (covered lot) or portion
thereof that falls within the lot lines, as extended, of the subject residence
and the first or second lots on both sides of the covered lot.
Any elevation of the subject residence shall be deemed to be of the same or
similar design to a residence to which it is compared (the "compared
residence") unless the subject residence has at least four (4) of the following
features different from the compared residence:
   A.   Basic arrangement of the building and its front elevation elements,
such as right or left hand orientation (garage, entry, bays, etc.).
   B.   Arrangement and design of windows, shutters, doors, entryway and
porches.
   C.   Predominant building color. (Ord. 99-O-792, 6-7-1999)
   D.   Major exterior building materials, such as vertical or horizontal cedar
siding, brick/masonry, stone, exterior insulated finishing system (EIFS), or
fiber cement board. (Ord. 08-O-1026, 10-6-2008)
   E.   Roof style (hip, gable, mansard, etc.).
   F.   Roofing materials such as wood shingles/shakes, asphalt and terra
cotta.
   G.   Site orientation (different elevation facing the street).
   H.   Type of housing (ranch, raised ranch, split-level, two- story).
The building commissioner of the village shall not issue building permit
approval unless the plans submitted for approval comply with this chapter.
Plans for the subject residence may be resubmitted after they have been
modified to meet or exceed the standards for dissimilar design. Appeals from
decisions of the building commissioner in regard to this paragraph may be taken
by aggrieved persons to the village board of trustees. (Ord. 99-O-792, 6-7-
1999)
TITLE 5
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Title
5-1-2: Intent and Purpose
5-1-3: Interpretation
5-1-4: Separability
5-1-5: Rules of Word Construction
5-1-6: Definitions
5-1-7: Official Comprehensive Plan Adopted
5-1-8: Property Governed By Inter-Governmental Boundary Agreements
5-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Kildeer Zoning
Ordinance".
5-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This Title is adopted for the following purposes:
   A.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and
general welfare of the people.
   B.   To divide the Village into zones or districts restricting and
regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business or
other specified uses.
   C.   To protect the character and the stability of the residential, planned
business and planned industrial areas within the Village and to promote the
orderly and beneficial development of such areas.
   D.   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property.
   E.   To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the
area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light
and air, and to protect the public health.
   F.   To establish building lines and the locations of buildings designed for
residential, planned business and other uses within such areas.
   G.   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform therein.
   H.   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character or development or intended uses within specified zoning districts.
   I.   To prevent additions to or alterations or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder.
   J.   To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for off-street
parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles.
   K.   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in
the interest of public health, safety, comfort and general welfare.
   L.   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by
regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding
them.
   M.   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
Village.
   N.   To provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land,
buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value
of desirable development in each district.
   O.   To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein.
   P.   To protect the air water and land resources of the Village from the
hazards of pollution.
   Q.   To protect land and buildings and the lawful uses of land and buildings
from natural hazards including flooding and erosion.
   R.   To prescribe penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
Title, or any amendment hereto.
5-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The provisions herein shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, morals and welfare.
   B.   Relationship With Other Laws: Where the conditions imposed by any
provision herein upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of
buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision herein or any other law, ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive (than such easements, covenants or other private agreements), the
requirements herein shall govern.
   C.   Effect Of Existing Agreements: This Title is not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant or any other private agreement, the requirements herein
shall govern.
Nothing contained in this Title shall be deemed to be a consent, license or
permit to use any property or to locate, construct or maintain any building,
structure or facility, or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation or
activity.
   D.   Lawful Buildings, Structure Or Use: No building, structure or use not
lawfully existing at the time of the effective date hereof shall become or be
made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of these regulations, and to the
extent that, and in any manner that said unlawful building, structure or use is
in conflict with the requirements. Said building, structure or use remains
unlawful hereunder. (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-76)
5-1-4: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village Board that the several
provisions of this Title are separable in accordance with the following:
   A.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this Title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions
not specifically included in said judgment; and
   B.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this Title to a particular property, building
or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said
provisions to any other property, building or structure not specifically
included in said judgment. (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-76)
5-1-5: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this Title, the rules and definitions contained in this
Chapter shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future;
   B.   Words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in
the plural number include the singular number;
   C.   The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for",
"designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
   D.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
   E.   The word "may" is permissive.
   F.   All measured distances, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest
integral foot. If a fraction is one-half (1/2) or more, the integral foot next
above shall be taken. (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-76)
5-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE:
   A.    An "accessory building or use" is one which:
      1.   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
      2.   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building
or principal use served;
      3.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of
the principal building or principal use served; and
      4.   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
principal use served with the single exception of such accessory off-street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the building or use served.
   B.   An "accessory use" includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.    A children's playhouse, garden house and private greenhouse;
      2.   A shed, garage or building for domestic storage;
      3.   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot
with any retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations;
      4.   A nonpaying guesthouse or rooms for guests within an "accessory
building", provided such facilities are used for the occasional housing of
guests of the occupants of the principal building and not for permanent
occupancy by others as housekeeping units;
      5.   Servant's quarters comprising part of an accessory garage and solely
for occupancy by a servant or household employee (and his or her family) of the
occupants of the principal dwelling;
      6.   Swimming pool, private, covered or uncovered, for the use by the
occupant and his guests;
      7.   Off-street automobile parking areas, loading and unloading
facilities;
      8.   Signs (other than advertising signs) as permitted and regulated in
each district incorporated herein;
      9.   Carports.
ACRE: An acre shall consist of forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560)
square feet.
ACREAGE: Any tract or parcel of land having an area of one acre or more which
has not heretofore been subdivided or platted.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having, as a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, periodicals or films
for rent, sale or for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or
by coin- operated means, which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities, or specified anatomical areas; or an establishment with a
substantial or significant segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage,
advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin-operated
booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other
factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such
materials.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which:
   A.   Features topless dancers, strippers, or male or female impersonators;
or
   B.   Not infrequently features entertainers who display specified anatomical
areas; or
   C.   Features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct
perform in a manner prurient interest of the patron; or
   D.   Features entertainers who engage in or are engaged in explicit
simulation of specified sexual activities.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons herein.
ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing,
"novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on or use for "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas", or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor
of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises, or any other factors
showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment
cabarets, adult novelty stores, and other similar uses.
AGRICULTURE: All the processes of planting, growing, harvesting of crops in the
open, truck gardens, flower gardens, apiaries, nurseries and greenhouses.
ALTERATION: Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a
building or structure.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL: Any change which would tend to prolong the life of the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams or girders.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care,
observation or treatment of domestic animals. Boarding of animals is not
permitted except for extended medical treatment.
AUTO BODY REPAIR SHOP: Any building, premises, or land where a business is
conducted, which provides collision repair services, including body frame or
fender straightening or repair, and overall painting of double axle, validly
licensed motor vehicles. These services shall not include mechanical repair,
maintenance, restoration, or reconstruction, nor the sale, rental, or storage
of automobiles, trucks, trailers, or any other type of vehicle.
AUTOMOBILE GAS STATION: Any premises used for retail sale of gasoline, stored
only in underground tanks, retail sale of lubricating oil or grease for the
operation of automobiles, including sales of minor accessories, and also
including a convenience food center/minimart as an incidental use. Automobile
gas station shall not include the servicing of motor vehicles, nor the sale or
storage of motor vehicles or trailers.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline, stored only in underground
tanks, lubricating oil or grease for operation of automobiles are offered for
sale directly to the public, on the premises, and including minor accessories
and the servicing of automobiles, but not including major automobile repairs;
and including the washing of automobiles where no chain conveyor, blower or
steam cleaning device is employed. Automobile service stations shall not
include sale, rent or storage of automobiles or trailers (new or used).
AWNING: A rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of
a building or overhangs the public way.
BANKS and FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS: Commercial banks, currency exchanges, savings
and loan associations, brokerage offices and other similar financial
institutions, but not including loan offices, finance companies and pawn shops.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half (1/2)
of its height is above the established curb level or above the average level of
the adjoining ground where the curb level has not been established, a basement
shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.
BEACH: That portion of the shoreline of a lake or pond both above and below the
high water line which is sanded, pebbled or graveled, and used for activities
normally associated with shore front properties.
BEDROOM: Any room other than a living room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom,
utility room or family room for the purpose of this Title, shall be considered
a bedroom.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or in lieu of a street or streets,
by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or
shorelines of waterways or corporate boundary lines of municipalities.
BOATHOUSE: Any structure designed for the purpose of protecting or storing of
boats used in conjunction with a residence for noncommercial purposes, and
located on the same lot as the principal building and not for human habitation.
BORROW PIT: Any place or premises where dirt, soil, gravel or other material is
removed by excavation or otherwise below the grade of surrounding land for any
purpose other than that necessary and incidental to grading or to building
construction or operation on the premises.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open
space requirements have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the
land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or
by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings, and
which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals or chattels.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space or from other buildings or other structures by a permanent
roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal
entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same zoning lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from sidewalk level, or from
its equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the
building, to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, or to the deck line
for mansard roofs, or to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable,
hip, and gambrel roofs, or to the highest point of a structure without a roof.
When a building is set back from the street line, then the height of the
building may be measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade
at the front of that building. When a parapet wall, a penthouse, or any similar
structure is located on the roof of a building, the building height shall be
measured to the highest point of said structure if any part of its extends
above the height as measured pursuant to the first sentence of this definition.
Chimneys shall not be considered in determining the height of a building.
BUILDING LINE: The line nearest the front of and across a zoning lot,
establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front line of a
building or structure and the street right-of-way line.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: Any building which does not conform to the regulations
herein prescribing the required yards, coverage, height and setbacks, minimum
required spacing between buildings on a single lot, and minimum required usable
open space for the district in which the building is located.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit by the Building Commissioner of the Village for the
construction, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or structure
within the Village.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the principal use of the
zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street line at a distance from
it, regulated by the front yard requirements set up herein.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located in the
place where it is or where it is intended to be placed or affixed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and location of same with respect to one another and includes the
following:
   A.   Size and height of buildings;
   B.   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
street or other buildings;
   C.   All open spaces allocated to the building;
   D.   Amount of lot area per dwelling unit;
   E.   Required parking areas.
BUSINESS and PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: The office of an engineer, doctor, dentist,
attorney, real estate broker, insurance broker, architect or other similar
professional person, and any office used primarily for accounting,
correspondence, research, editing or administration.
CAR WASH: A building containing facilities for washing motor vehicles using
production line methods with mechanical devices, and excluding self-service
mechanical devices, and excluding self-service car washes.
CARPORT: A roofed-over area attached and/or detached to the principal building
for vehicle storage, which may be open on three (3) sides if attached or four
(4) sides if detached.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below the curb
level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.
CLINIC or MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER: An establishment where three (3) or more
licensed doctors of medicine engage in the practice of medicine, operating on a
group or individual basis, with pooled facilities such as coordinated
laboratory, x-ray and allied departments, for the diagnosis and treatment of
humans, which need not but may include a drug prescription counter (not a drug
store) for the dispensing of drugs and pharmaceutical products to the patients
of the said organization. In addition to the above, the medical center or
medical clinic may include the space for the practice of dentistry.
CLUB or LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases land, a building or
portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their
guests.
COMMONS: Land areas in a planned development, unoccupied by any structure,
other than those used for recreation or park purposes and incidental purposes;
permanently devoted to park, recreation or open space use by covenants running
with the common land, including citizens of the Village or a property owners'
association comprised of citizens of the Village as beneficiaries of such
covenants, or dedicated for such purposes to a Municipal corporation with
authority to so use such land; and, not used or computed under this Code as a
building lot, a street or travel way or for parking.
CONFORMING BUILDING or STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which: a) complies
with all the regulations of this Title or of any amendment hereof governing
bulk of the district in which said building or structure is located; or b) is
designed or intended for a permitted use or conditional permitted use, as
herein allowed in the district in which it is located.
COURT, OUTER: An open unoccupied space opening onto a street, alley or yard.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured
at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one street,
the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center
of the front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been established, the
level of the street center line shall be considered the "curb level".
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound
level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are
calibrated in "decibels".
DISTRICT: The area into which the Village has been divided for which uniform
regulations governing the use, size and intensity of land and buildings and
open space about buildings is established.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, but not including house trailer or
mobile home designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including
single-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multiple-family
dwelling units, but not including hotels, motels, boarding or lodging houses.
DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling unit consists of one or more rooms which are
arranged, designed or used as living quarters for single-family only.
Individual bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed,
shall always be included with each dwelling unit.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space and
is not connected to any other dwelling unit by roof, walls or porches on the
same lot.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED: A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a party
wall or vertical cavity wall, and above ground physically unifying horizontal
structural elements.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling unit designed exclusively for use and
occupancy by one family.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group
of not more than four (4) persons (excluding servants) who need not be related
by blood, marriage or adoption, living together and maintaining a common
household but not including sororities, fraternities or other similar
organizations.
FLOOD PLAIN: See Chapter 11 of this Title.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: For the purpose of determining requirements for off-street
parking and off-street loading, the floor area shall mean the sum of the gross
horizontal area of the several floors of the building or portion thereof
devoted to such use, including accessory storage areas located within selling
or working space, such as counters, rack or closets and any basement floor area
devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or
to business or professional offices.
However, floor area, for the purposes of measurement for off-street parking
spaces, shall not include floor area devoted primarily for storage purposes.
The following areas shall not be included for the purpose of measurement of
off-street parking spaces.
   A.   Floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities,
including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space;
   B.   Basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing or service
activities or the production or processing of goods or to business or
professional offices.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE: Habitable floor area is comprised of all that area that
is heated living area:
   A.   Within the outside perimeter of all walls above grade, excluding the
garage; or
   B.   Within the inside perimeter where basement walls are fifty percent
(50%) or more in vertical height above grade; or
   C.   Within the inside perimeter of a basement where a minimum of twenty
five percent (25%) of that perimeter is at or above grade and has an entry/exit
on that wall. This area shall be calculated in determining required habitable
area only to that percent that the perimeter is at or above grade (e.g., 75
percent of basement walls at or above grade shall constitute 75 percent of
required habitable floor area).
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The floor area of all buildings and structures on a lot
divided by the area of the lot on which they are located. The LC Limited
Commercial District (Title 5, Chapter 10A) defines "floor area" and "lot area"
for use within that zoning district. For the purposes of determining floor area
ratio in residential districts, "floor area" is defined in subsection
5-2-2C, Use And Bulk Regulations, Floor Area Ratio, incorporated herein, and
"lot area" is defined in this Section
5-1-6, Definitions.
FREEWAY: A major highway having no intersections at grade and having fully
controlled access, hence "free" from conflicts and interruptions.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave measuring the
pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of a street between the two (2)
nearest intersecting streets measured along the line of the street or if dead
ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting
street and the dead end of the street or the property on one side of a street
between an intersecting street and a right of way, waterway or other similar
barrier.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: Any accessory building or an accessory portion of the
principal building which is intended for and used to store the private
passenger vehicles of the family or families residing on the premises, and in
which no business, service or industry connected, directly or indirectly, with
the automobile vehicles is carried on. Such a garage shall not be used for more
than two (2) commercial vehicles and the load capacity of such vehicle shall
not exceed two and one-half (21/2) tons.
GOLF COURSE: Public, semi-public or private grounds over which the game of golf
is played, including accessory buildings and land uses incidental thereto, and
consisting of at least fifty (50) acres for each standard nine (9) hole course
and twenty five (25) acres for each nine (9) hole "par 3" course.
GRADE, STREET: The elevation of the established street in front of the building
measured at the center of such front and at the center line of the street.
Where no street grade has been established, the Village Engineer shall
establish such street grade or its equivalent for the purposes of this Section.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by the principal building measured at
grade from the exterior faces of exterior walls but excluding open porches or
terraces, garages or carports.
GROSS DENSITY: The ratio between total number of dwelling units on a lot and
total lot area in acres.
GUEST HOUSE: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on
the same premises with the principal building for use by temporary guests of
the occupants of the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities
nor be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
HOME OCCUPATION: See Section
5-2-4 of this Title.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than
three (3) dogs are kept over four (4) months of age, or where more than four
(4) cats or other domestic animals are kept, or where any dog or other domestic
animals are boarded for compensation or kept for sale.
LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing
and analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products is not included
within this definition.
LOADING and UNLOADING SPACE or BERTH OFF-STREET: An open, hard-surfaced area of
land other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for the
standing, loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to
avoid undue interference with public streets or alleys. Such space shall not be
less than ten feet in width, fifty feet in length and fourteen feet in height
(10' x 50' x 14'), exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.
LOT: A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land
of record.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by vertical planes containing
the front, side and rear lot lines but excluding any street, easement for
street purposes or right of way.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
single street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirty five degrees
(135) or less.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines of
a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public
street; for a corner lot the owner may elect either street line as the front
lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends to the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The front property line of a zoning lot.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A side lot line common with another lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and most
remote from the front lot lines.
LOT LINES, SIDE: Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines are side lot
lines.
LOT OF RECORD: A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Lake County,
Illinois.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both street
lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
within the boundaries or the minimum distances between the side lot lines
within the buildable area.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects
from the wall of a building and may overhang the public way and is designed and
intended to protect pedestrians from adverse weather conditions.
NAME PLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of
an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
NET SITE AREA: The area of a zoning lot, parcel or tract, excluding boundary
rights of way.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which:
   A.   Does not comply with all the regulations of this title or of any
amendments hereto governing bulk of the zoning district in which such building
or structure is located; or
   B.   Is designed for or intended to be used in a nonconforming manner.
NONCONFORMING USE: The use of land, buildings or structures which does not
comply with all the regulations of this title or of any amendments hereto
governing the use of the zoning district in which such use is located.
NOXIOUS MATTER: Material, gas or vapor which is capable of causing injury to
living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental
effect upon the psychological, social or economic well being of human beings.
NURSERY/GARDEN CENTER: An outdoor business involved primarily in the sale of
plants, flowers, shrubbery, and other vegetation, which may include the
periodic and seasonal planting and replanting of these types of vegetation
pending sale.
OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE: A certificate issued by the building commissioner
stating that the occupancy and use of land or a building or structure referred
to therein complies with the provisions of this title.
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in
order to classify sound according to pitch.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer, designed according to
standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in
conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurement in specific octave
intervals (American standard for sound level meters, ASA 244, 3-1944).
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of private
passenger automobiles only of occupants of the building or buildings for which
the parking area is developed and is accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, intended to be used for the parking or storage of passenger
automobiles and commercial vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons'
capacity, and available to the public, whether for compensation, free or as an
accommodation to clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a public or private parking area of not
less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet (9' by 20'), exclusive of access
drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas, for the storage of
one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one-half (11/2)
tons' capacity.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material which is suspended in or discharged into the
atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or solid at atmospheric pressure
and temperature.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or
noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PLAN COMMISSION/BOARD OF APPEALS: The plan commission/board of appeals of the
village, as provided for in title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: See chapter 14 of this title.
PORCH: A roofed over structure, projecting out from the wall or walls of a main
structure and commonly open to the weather in part.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
PRIVATE SEWER: A sewer privately owned and not directly controlled by public
authority.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Any publicly owned open area including, but not limited to,
the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, beaches, waterways,
parkways and streets.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation or municipal department duly
authorized to furnish under public regulation to the public electricity, gas,
steam, telephone, transportation or water.
PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, street, highway or other public thoroughfare.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof where meals are provided for
compensation including a cafe, coffee shop, tearoom, and dining room, and
including the serving of alcoholic beverages when served with and incidental to
the serving of meals.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area on the Ringelmann chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density of smoke emission.
SANITARY LAND FILL: A method of disposing of solid fill by spreading and
covering with earth to a depth of two feet (2') on the top surface and one foot
(1') on the sides of the bank.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a right of way line and the
nearest wall in a building or side of a structure facing such a street line or
edge of the area of operation of a principal use when no building or structure
is involved.
SIGN: See Title 5, Chapter 20 of this Code.
SMOKE UNITS: The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringlemann
numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this chart,
Ringlemann density reading is made at least once every minute during the period
of observation; each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during
which it is observed; and the various products are added together to give the
total number of "smoke units" observed during the total period under
observation.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards
Association for measurement of intensity of sound.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: For the purpose of defining adult uses, specified
anatomical areas means:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and/or
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: For the purpose of defining adult uses, specified
sexual activities means:
   A.   Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
   B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and/or
   C.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breasts.
STABLE: A building where horses are raised or kept for hire or boarded for
remuneration.
STACKING REQUIREMENTS: For the purposes herein, stacking requirements are the
number of cars that must be accommodated in a reservoir space while awaiting
ingress or egress to specified business or service establishments.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor above it or if there is no floor above, then the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story
exceeding fourteen feet (14') in height shall be considered as an additional
story for each fourteen feet (14') or fraction thereof.
STORY, HALF: That portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the
wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more
than four and one-half feet (41/2') above the finished floor of each story. In
the case of the single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-
family dwellings less than three (3) stories in height, a half-story in a
sloping room shall not be counted as a story.
STREET (Avenue, Place, Road, Lane Or Highway): A public way which affords a
primary means of access to abutting property.
STREET, FRONTAGE: All of the property fronting on one side of a street between
two (2) intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead-end street, all of the
property along one side of the street between an intersecting street and the
end of such dead-end street.
STREET LINE: A line separating a lot, piece or parcel of land from a street
right of way.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on or in the
ground or is attached to something having location on or in the ground,
including a fence or freestanding wall. A sign, billboard or other advertising
medium, detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a structure.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: See definition of Alteration, Structural.
SWIMMING CLUB, PRIVATE (Commercial): A private club operated for profit,
maintaining and operating a swimming pool apparatus and equipment pertaining to
the swimming pool, with specified limitations upon the number of members for
the exclusive use of members and their guests.
SWIMMING CLUB, PRIVATE (Nonprofit): A private club incorporated as a nonprofit
club or organization, maintaining and operating a swimming pool, with specified
limitations upon the number of members limited to residents of a block,
subdivision, neighborhood, community or other specified area of residence, for
the exclusive use of members and their guests.
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment
pertaining to the swimming pool, operated for profit, open to the public upon
payment of an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, annual or other fee.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment
pertaining to the swimming pool located on a lot as an accessory use to a
residence and maintained by an individual for the sole use of his household and
guests, without charge for admission, and not for the purpose of profit or in
connection with any business operated for profit.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment
pertaining to the swimming pool, maintained and operated by a municipality or
other units of government for the general public whether or not an admission is
charged.
TAVERN OR LOUNGE: A building where liquors are sold to be consumed on the
premises but not including restaurants where the principal business is serving
food.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property including, but
not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, towers, antennas,
electronics, and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive,
distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TERRACE OR PATIO: An open paved area designed as access to a building entrance
or an open outdoor living space. Such construction may be level with the
surrounding grade or not more than three feet (3') above such grade.
TOXIC MATERIALS: A substance (liquid, solid or gaseous) which, by reason of an
inherent deleterious property, tends to destroy life or impair health.
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or buildings thereon are designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all the requirements and
regulations of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory uses.
USE, SPECIAL PERMITTED: A use that has operational, physical and other
characteristics that may be different from those of the predominant permitted
uses in a district, but which is a use that complements or is otherwise
compatible with intended overall developments within a district. Compliance
with special standards not necessarily applicable to other permitted or special
permitted uses in the district shall be required for a special permitted use,
as herein regulated in this Title.
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the terms of this zoning title where such variance
will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the results of the actions of the applicant, a
literal enforcement of these regulations would result in unnecessary and undue
hardship. As used in this title, a variance is authorized only for height, area
and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or
expansion of a use, otherwise prohibited, shall not be allowed by variance nor
shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the
zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
VILLAGE: The village of Kildeer, Lake County, Illinois.
YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group
of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward
to the sky, except as otherwise permitted herein and which extends along a lot
line and to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the zoning
district in which the zoning lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line
between side lot lines.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between
side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the
rear yard.
YARD, SIDE CORNER: A side yard which adjoins a public street.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The zoning administrator appointed by the village
president and board of trustees and such deputies or assistants as have been or
shall be duly appointed. That officer is hereby authorized and it is his duty
to administer and enforce the provisions of this title, making such
determinations, interpretations and orders as are necessary thereof and
requiring such plats, plans and other descriptive material in connection with
applications for permits as are necessary for him to judge compliance with this
title.
ZONING BOARD: See definition of Plan Commission/Board Of Appeals.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area or areas within the village for which the regulations
and requirements governing use, lot and bulk of buildings and premises are
uniform.
ZONING LOT: A single tract of land within a single block which (at the time of
filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a
tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or
control. Therefore, a zoning lot may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
ZONING MAP: The map incorporated herein as a part hereof, designating zoning
districts. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 82-O-339, 2-1-1982; Ord. 84-O-
385, 5-4-1984; Ord. 90-O-541, 6-5-1990; Ord. 90-O-544, 8-6-1990; Ord. 90-O-560,
12-3-1990; Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991; Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993; Ord. 95-O-681, 1-
4-1995; Ord. 95-O-701, 8-7-1995; Ord. 97-O-742, 3-6-1997; Ord. 97-O-754, 9-2-
1997; Ord. 02-O-855, 10-7-2002; Ord. 04-O-894, 3-1-2004; Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-
2005)
5-1-7: OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED:
The comprehensive plan dated November 5, 1990, as revised through July 2, 2001,
expressly incorporated herein by reference is hereby adopted as the official
comprehensive plan for the village. (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991; amd. Ord. 01-O-
835, 7-2-2001)
5-1-8: PROPERTY GOVERNED BY INTER-GOVERNMENTAL BOUNDARY AGREEMENTS:
In the event that the Village has entered into an inter-governmental boundary
agreement or other similar agreement with another governmental body that
provides that another municipality has land use approval and authority over
property within the Village of Kildeer, the Village will accept the land use
approvals of that Village. The property owner or other municipality will submit
to the Village evidence of such approvals and the Village will take any
necessary actions, if any, on an expedited basis to implement those through
this Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 22-O-031, 12-20-2022)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Scope Of Regulations
5-2-2: Use And Bulk Regulations
5-2-3: Lot Coverage
5-2-4: Home Occupations
5-2-5: Lot Area And Dimension
5-2-6: Access To Public Streets
5-2-7: Number Of Buildings On A Zoning Lot
5-2-8: Rezoning Of Public And Semi-Public Areas
5-2-9: Accessory Buildings And Uses
5-2-10: Temporary Buildings
5-2-11: Performance Standards
5-2-12: Existing Special Uses
5-2-13: Uses Not Specifically Permitted In District
5-2-14: Special Provisions; Equine Animals
5-2-15: Special Provisions; Swimming Pools
5-2-16: Watershed Development
5-2-17: Natural Area Management
5-2-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   Change In Structures Or Use: Except as may otherwise be provided, all
buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings and structures
established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing
buildings and structures occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or
additions to existing uses occurring hereafter, shall be subject to all
regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning district in which such
buildings, uses or land shall be located.
   B.   Nonconforming Buildings, Structures And Uses: Any lawful building,
structure or use existing at the time of the effective date hereof may be
continued, even though such building, structure or use does not conform to the
provisions herein for the district in which it is located, and whenever a
district shall be changed hereafter, the then existing lawful use may be
continued, subject to the provisions in Chapter 16 of this Title.
   C.   Building Permits: Where a building permit for a building or structure
has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date hereof, and
provided that construction has begun within ninety (90) days of such effective
date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the
building permit was issued, and further may, upon completion, be occupied under
a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject
thereafter to the provisions of Chapter 16 of this Title. (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-
76)
5-2-2: USE AND BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Use: No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied
and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, raised,
moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in conformity with
the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
   B.   Bulk: All new buildings and structures shall conform to the building
regulations established herein for the district in which each building shall be
located, except that parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, fire towers, stacks and necessary mechanical appurtenances shall be
permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when erected in accordance
with all other ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-76)
   C.   Floor Area Ratio: The following shall be included in the calculation of
floor area for the purposes of determining floor area ratio in residential
zoning districts:
      1.   All gross square footage of each floor above grade. A maximum of
sixty four (64) total square feet shall be excluded from this computation for
balconies or similar projections that are four feet (4') deep or less.
      2.   All gross square footage of attached garages.
      3.   That gross square footage of detached garages exceeding four hundred
forty (440) square feet. This shall include that portion of unfinished or
finished garage attics with a clearance of seven feet (7') or more in height.
      4.   Roofed porches, including areas with open roof trellises.
      5.   Open porches, across all or part of the elevation of a house facing
a street, that are greater than eight feet (8') deep.
      6.   Sheds and gazebos, whether permanently fixed to the ground or
freestanding.
      7.   That gross square footage of a basement with a ceiling in excess of
three feet six inches (3'6") above grade.
      8.   Those portions of house attics, finished or unfinished, that have a
clearance equal to or greater than seven feet (7') in height, even if the space
is interrupted with crossties or has a truss design.
      9.   Open wood decks if the floor is more than three feet six inches
(3'6") above grade.
      10.   Sun or other decks with rails higher than three feet six inches
(3'6") on any floor of the house.
      11.   Balconies, chimneys, bay windows, etc., and portions of a second
floor that cantilever over open walled first floor yards shall be counted as
two (2) stories (see subsection C1 of this section).
      12.   Open courtyards surrounded by eighty five percent (85%) or more by
perimeter walls.
      13.   The square footage of interior stairwells for each floor within
which they are located.
      14.   Those portions of cathedral ceilings that are fourteen feet (14')
or more in height shall be counted as two (2) stories. (Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-
1995)
   D.   Floor Area Ratio Guidelines And Intent:
      1.   Background: Effective December 5, 1994, by action of the village
board, the zoning regulations of this code were amended to include FAR
restrictions in residential zoning districts. Prior to this action by the
village board, this subject was discussed by the plan commission/board of
appeals at several public meetings and at a public hearing, held on October 19,
1994. The village instituted FAR regulations for the primary goal of ensuring
the size and scale of buildings and structures relate harmoniously to the size
of the lot on which they are located, as well as to the surrounding
neighborhood. (Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      2.   Regulated Development: All buildings and structures developed within
R-1 and R-2 single-family residence districts, excluding cluster and townhome
planned developments, are required to comply with the FAR restrictions as
provided for in this title. In each case, the maximum FAR allowed is 0.30. The
following guidelines were prepared to ensure compliance with these regulations
and to provide additional information on the calculation of floor area ratio.
      3.   Review And Approval:
         a.   A completed floor area ratio worksheet (see below) is required
for each lot on which a new building or structure is proposed or on which
modifications are proposed to an existing building or structure (i.e.,
additions) that would increase the floor area from that which presently exists.
         b.   Copies of plats of survey, building plans, and other drawings as
necessary to demonstrate the basis of computations, must accompany the
completed floor area ratio worksheet. Additional support documentation shall be
submitted as required by the village to complete the review.
         c.   Worksheets prepared in conjunction with the construction of a new
residential home or shed/gazebo, etc., must be certified by an engineer or
architect. Worksheets prepared in conjunction with an addition to an existing
building/structure do not require certification. All other applications require
certification by an engineer or architect as determined necessary by the
building commissioner.
         d.   All completed worksheets and support documentation must be
submitted to the village with a building permit application.
         e.   Upon receiving a completed worksheet with all necessary support
documentation, the building commissioner, or appointed designee, shall within
two (2) weeks determine whether the proposed improvements comply with the
applicable FAR requirements.
   Floor Area Ratio Worksheet
Property Location:
Address:    
Block:                     Lot:                         
Proposed Improvements:
New home construction: Shed\Gazebo, etc.:
Building addition: Other:
Description:    
Calculations (see definition of floor area)
Calculations (see definition of floor area)
1. Lot Area                           square feet
2. Basement Floor Area                square feet
3. First Floor Area                   square feet
4. Second Floor Area                  square feet
5. Floor Area Above Second Story      square feet
6. Attic Floor Area                   square feet
7. Detached Garage (s.f. over 440)    square feet
8. Other Floor Area (please specify)  square feet
9. Total Floor Area                   square feet
10. Proposed Floor Area Ratio (#9/#1)  
11. Maximum Allowed Floor Area Ratio  0.30
 
Prepared by:         Date:      
Title:         Phone:      
Reviewed by:         Date:      
Title:         Date Received:      
 
Reviewer's
Comments:
 
(Ord. 95-0-681, 1-4-95)
5-2-3: LOT COVERAGE:
   A.   Maintenance Of Yards, Courts And Other Open Spaces: The maintenance of
yards, courts and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a
building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of
the property on which it is located, as long as the building is in existence.
Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open space or minimum
lot area allocated to any building, shall by virtue of change of ownership or
for any reason be used to satisfy yard, court or other open space, or minimum
lot area requirements for any other building.
   B.   Division Of Zoning Lots: No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be
divided into two (2) or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning lots
resulting from each such division shall conform with all the applicable bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
   C.   Location Of Required Open Space: All yards, courts and other open
spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same
zoning lot as such building or dwelling group.
   D.   Required Yards For Existing Buildings: No yards now or hereafter
provided for a building existing on the effective date hereof shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced below, if already lower than
the minimum yard requirements of this Title for equivalent new construction.
   E.   Permitted Obstructions: The following shall be considered, except in
the LC Limited Commercial District, permitted obstructions in required yards as
follows:
NOTE:
 
F Denotes permitted obstruction in front yards and side yards adjoining
  streets.
S Denotes permitted obstruction in interior side yards.
R Denotes permitted obstruction in rear yards.
C Denotes permitted obstruction in open courts.
 
Awning and canopies but not projecting more than 10 feet and at least 7 F S R C
feet above the average level of the adjoining ground
Arbors, trellises, flag poles, fountains, sculptures, plant boxes and   F S R C
other similar ornamental objects
Air conditioning equipment, window units may project not more than 18
inches, central air conditioning units may project into a required yard F  R C
by not more than 4 feet, provided the unit is adequately screened
Architectural entrance structures on a lot not less than 1 acre in area
or at entrance roadways into subdivisions or planned developments       F S R  
containing 50 or more lots
Chimneys, attached, projecting more than 18 inches into a yard or court F S R C
Open entrances, stoops, porches, terraces, decks, when not covered, may F S R  
project not more than 10 feet
Open off-street parking spaces, see Chapter 13 of this Title             S R  
Ornamental light standards                                              F S R C
Sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features of the principal  F S R C
building, projecting not more than 18 inches into a yard or court
Steps, 4 feet or less above grade, which are necessary for access to a  F S R C
permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street
 
   F.   Vision Clearance, Corner Lots: No building or structure hereafter
erected and no planting or other obstruction to the vision of drivers of motor
vehicles shall be located:
In any residential district exceeding a height of three feet (3') above the
street grade within twenty five feet (25') of the intersecting street lines
bordering corner lots. (Ord. 95-0-681, 1-4-95)
5-2-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a dwelling
not involving the conduct of a retail business, manufacturing business, or a
repair shop of any kind on the premises, and not including any occupation
conducted in any building on the premises excepting the building which is used
by the occupant as his private dwelling.
Home occupations further shall not include the employment of more than one
person in the performance of such services.
There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign except as allowed in the
sign regulations for the district in which such home occupation is located, and
there shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the home
occupation.
Home occupation includes but is not limited to the following: art studio,
dressmaking, professional office of a clergyman, lawyer, physician, dentist,
architect, engineer or accountant, when located in a dwelling unit occupied by
the same.
However, home occupation shall not be construed to include the following:
clinic or hospital, barber shop, beauty parlor, commercial stable or kennel,
tourist home, real estate office or restaurant. (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-76)
5-2-5: LOT AREA AND DIMENSION:
   A.   Contiguous Parcels: When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which
lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the
requirements of the use district in which they are located are contiguous and
are held in one ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
   B.   Lots Or Parcels Of Land Of Record: Any single lot or parcel of land,
held in one ownership, which was of record at the time of the effective date
hereof that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot width and area may
be utilized for a permitted use; provided, that yards, courts or usable open
spaces are not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the minimum required
dimension of areas. (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-76)
5-2-6: ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS:
Except as otherwise provided for herein, every building shall be constructed or
erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a public street, unless a
permanent easement of access to a public street was of record prior to the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-76)
5-2-7: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT:
Except in the case of planned development, not more than one principal detached
residential building shall be located on a residential lot, nor shall a
principal detached residential building be located on the same zoning lot with
any other principal building. (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-76)
5-2-8: REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC AREAS:
An area indicated on the Zoning Map as a public park, recreation area, public
school site, cemetery or other similar open space shall not be used for any
other purpose than that designated, and when the use of the area is
discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned to the most restricted adjoining
district until appropriate zoning is authorized by the Village Board of
Trustees within three (3) months after the day of application filed for
rezoning. (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-76)
5-2-9: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES:
   A.   Location: All accessory buildings and uses shall comply with the
following yard requirements, except as allowed by subsection
5-2-3E herein, Permitted Obstructions. When a front yard setback is required,
no part of an accessory building or accessory use shall be located closer than
seventy five feet (75') to the front lot line. When a side yard setback is
required, no part of an accessory building or accessory use shall be located
closer than thirty five feet (35') to the side lot line along such side yard
setback. When a rear yard setback is required, no part of an accessory building
or accessory use shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35') to the
rear lot line or to those portions of the side lot line abutting such required
rear yard setback. In a residential district, no detached accessory building
shall be closer than ten feet (10') to the principal building. No accessory
building or accessory use shall be located in a required yard or required
setback in the LC Limited Commercial District.
   B.   Time Of Construction: No accessory building or structure or accessory
use shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the
principal building to which it is accessory.
   C.   Height Of Accessory Buildings And Uses: No accessory building or
portion thereof or accessory use shall exceed the height of the principal
building. However, in no case shall the height exceed fifteen feet (15').
   D.   Floor Area: The aggregate floor area of all accessory buildings or
accessory uses shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the floor area of the
principal building. (Ord. 95-0-681, 1-4-95)
5-2-10: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
   A.   A temporary real estate office may be operated in a permanent structure
such as a model home, as long as the structure otherwise fully conforms with
all applicable ordinances, to be utilized in conjunction with a new housing
development, limited to the selling or renting of new units in such
development, but in no case to be in operation for more than one year following
completion of construction of said housing development.
A temporary real estate office may be operated in a nonpermanent structure such
as a mobile home or sales trailer provided that a permit shall be secured
therefor prior to the structure being situated or utilized as a real estate
office and provided that all of the following criteria are satisfied:
      1.   Permits shall issue for a period of one year. A permit may be
renewed yearly by the Village Board upon reasonable cause shown.
      2.   The hours of operation of the real estate office shall be limited to
between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Monday through
Saturday and from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on
Sunday.
      3.   The location of the structure must fully comply with the setback
requirements for accessory buildings as set forth in subsection
5-2-9A.
      4.   If the road or roads which provide access to the structure have been
accepted by the Village, then adequate off-street parking of not less than four
(4) vehicle spaces shall be provided.
      5.   Sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in full
conformity with Lake County health department standards.
      6.   The use of generators is prohibited.
      7.   Sufficient landscaping, subject to approval by the architecture
committee, shall be provided to screen the structure from view from residential
structures not within the development.
      8.   The size, location, elevation and appearance shall be subject to the
review and approval of the architecture committee prior to the issuance of a
permit. The architecture committee shall ensure that the structure shall not
adversely impact on residential homes not within the development.
      9.   In the event that subsequent to issuance of a permit, any of the
foregoing criteria are not satisfied or the permittee violates any of said
criteria, then the village board may, at its election, revoke the permit. (Ord.
83-O-368, 7-12-1983)
      10.   Annual fee for temporary real estate office is five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Per board policy motion 3-3-86)
   B.   Buildings For Construction Purposes: Subsequent to the issuance of a
building permit, temporary buildings for construction purposes may be allowed
in any district for a period not to exceed the completion date of such
construction. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
   C.   Sidewalk Sales: Sidewalk sales will be permitted in any business or
limited commercial district when organized as an area wide sidewalk sale with
merchants in the same area. No more than two (2) such sales shall be permitted
in a calendar year, and no such sale shall be permitted for a period in excess
of three (3) successive days. The application for such a sale shall be cosigned
by the property owner/manager. Said permit will include one temporary sign for
the commercial district; said sign shall be displayed only during the duration
of the sale. (Ord. 08-O-1001, 2-4-2008)
5-2-11: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The performance standards shall also apply to all residential or planned
development districts. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-2-12: EXISTING SPECIAL USES:
Where a use is classified as a special use and exists as a permitted use at the
effective date hereof, it shall be considered a legal special use, without
further action of the village board of trustees, the zoning administrator, or
the plan commission/board of appeals. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 05-
O-942, 11-7-2005)
5-2-13: USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICT:
When a use is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to permitted
uses, it shall be assumed that such uses are hereby expressly prohibited unless
by a written decision of the plan commission/board of appeals it is determined
that said use is similar to and not more objectionable than uses listed. Such
uses may then be permitted. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-
7-2005)
5-2-14: SPECIAL PROVISIONS; EQUINE ANIMALS:
   A.   Application: No equine animal shall be kept or boarded and no accessory
building used for the keeping, training or the like of an equine animal shall
be hereafter erected or altered within any residential zoning district, except
in conformity with the regulations established and set forth in this section.
   B.   Minimum Lot Area, Limitation On Number Of Equine Animals:
      1.   No equine animal shall be housed or kept overnight (sunset to
sunrise) on a lot less than four hundred thirty-five thousand six hundred
(435,600) square feet in area.
      2.   Not more than four (4) equine animals shall be housed or kept
overnight (sunset to sunrise) on a lot of four hundred thirty-five thousand six
hundred (435,600) square feet in area or more.
      3.   All definitions of lot sizes shall be exclusive of road easements.
   C.   Limitation Of Keeping Equine Animal And Exercise: No equine animal and
no corral, ring or enclosure for the containing of an equine animal shall be
kept, located or maintained closer than fifty feet (50') from any lot line.
   D.   Accessory Buildings And Exercise Area:
      1.   No accessory building used for the housing, training or keeping of
an equine animal shall be located:
         a.   Closer than one hundred feet (100') from any lot line.
         b.   Closer than ten feet (10') to the nearest septic field or drain
field tile line.
      2.   No equine animal exercise ring, corral, pasture or other open area
for training or keeping of equine animals shall be located over any septic tank
or drain field tile line. All such areas shall be suitably fenced so as to
contain the equine animal in such a manner as to protect adjoining properties
from trespass by the equine animal and to provide protection without danger or
injury to the animal itself. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 82-O-338, 1-
4-1982; Ord. 20-O-010, 5-19-2020)
5-2-15: SPECIAL PROVISIONS; SWIMMING POOLS:
   A.   Definition Of Aboveground Pool: An "aboveground pool" is a swimming
pool other than a pool which has been constructed of concrete, is completely
subsurface and is permanent in nature.
   B.   Area Restricted: It shall be unlawful to erect, construct or maintain
an aboveground pool as an accessory use within the village in any area zoned R-
1, R-2, PD-1, PD-2 or PD-3.
   C.   Removal, Time: Since it has been determined by the village board that
the average useful life of aboveground pools is not in excess of seven (7)
years, present existing aboveground pools which have been fully installed
before the effective date hereof shall be dismantled and completely removed on
or before seven (7) years from the effective date hereof.
The village board may, upon written application of an owner of an aboveground
pool which was fully installed prior to the effective date hereof who is
alleging substantial hardship, allow said applicant such additional time as the
board, in its discretion, deems provident; providing, that the board takes into
consideration the dangers and health risks involved in extending the period of
time for the utilization of such nonconforming use beyond the seven (7) year
period.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 78-O-259, 4-
6-1978)
5-2-16: WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT 1 :
The watershed development ordinance heretofore adopted on September 14, 1994,
applies to all matters coming within the terms of this title, except as may be
expressly delimited by that ordinance. (Ord. 94-O-669, 9-14-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7, chapter 6 of this code.
5-2-17: NATURAL AREA MANAGEMENT:
The Kildeer natural area management ordinance, title 7, chapter 8 of this code,
heretofore adopted on January 4, 1995, applies to all applications governed by
this title which involve natural areas. (Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
5-3-1: Districts Established
5-3-2: Zoning Maps
5-3-3: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
5-3-4: Zoning Of Public Ways
5-3-5: Zoning Of Unclassified And Annexed Land
5-3-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to accomplish the purpose of this title as stated in section
5-1-2 of this title, the village is hereby divided into the following
districts:
R-1  Single-family residence district
R-2  Single-family residence district
PD-1 District
PD-2 District
PD-3 District
PD-4 District
B    Business district
LC   Limited commercial district
O&R  Office and research district
 
(Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 91-O-597, 11-4-1991; Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-
1993; Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-3-2: ZONING MAPS:
The boundaries of the zoning districts are established as shown on the map
entitled "official zoning map of Kildeer, Illinois", which map is made a part
hereof, and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map, together
with all notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully
set forth and described herein. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-3-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts
as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   District boundary lines are either the centerlines of railroads,
highways, streets, alleys or easements, or the boundary lines of sections,
quarter sections, divisions of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines extended
unless otherwise indicated.
   B.   In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is
indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth
of such strips shall be in accordance with the dimension shown on the map
measured at right angles from the centerline of the street or highway, and the
length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the map from
section, quarter section or division lines, or centerlines of streets, highways
or railroad rights of way unless otherwise indicated.
   C.   Where a lot held in one ownership and of record on the effective date
hereof is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be
construed to be within the less restricted district; provided, that the
construction shall not apply if it increases the less restricted frontage of
the lot by more than twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-3-4: ZONING OF PUBLIC WAYS:
All streets, public ways and waterways, if not otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately
abutting on such streets, public ways and waterways. Where the centerline of a
street, public way, waterway serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such
areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same
as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-
1976)
5-3-5: ZONING OF UNCLASSIFIED AND ANNEXED LAND:
Any land whose classification is not shown on the zoning district map and land
hereafter annexed to the village shall be automatically classified as in the R-
1 single-family residence district until differently classified by amendment.
(Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
CHAPTER 4
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-4-1: Purpose
5-4-2: Permitted Uses
5-4-3: Special Uses
5-4-4: Off Street Parking Or Storage Of Vehicles
5-4-5: Minimum Lot Size
5-4-6: Yard Areas
5-4-7: Maximum Lot Coverage
5-4-8: Maximum Floor Area Ratio
5-4-9: Building Height
5-4-10: Ground Floor Area
5-4-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1 district is established to encourage the orderly transition of land
from agricultural to low density residential use; to provide areas well suited
as to location and topography; to meet the market demands for large lots; and
to prohibit any uses which are incompatible. The principal use of land is for
single-family dwellings on large lots where minimum community services may be
appropriate. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-4-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted:
Accessory uses, including off street parking facilities in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 13 of this title.
Agricultural, except that the keeping of equine animals shall be subject to the
provisions of section
5-2-14 of this title.
Parks, when publicly owned and operated.
Signs (see subsection
5-20-19A of this title).
Single-family detached dwellings and permitted accessory uses. (Ord. 76-O-227,
12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991)
5-4-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 17 of this title:
Church.
Municipal building.
Planned development in accordance with chapter 14 of this title.
Swimming and tennis clubs, private (nonprofit). (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991)
5-4-4: OFF STREET PARKING OR STORAGE OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Commercial Motor Vehicles:
      1.   The parking or storing on public or private property of commercial
motor vehicles other than in a garage is hereby prohibited.
      2.   "Commercial motor vehicle" or "CMV" means a motor vehicle used in
commerce, designed to transport passengers or property if:
         a.   The vehicle has a GVWR of twenty six thousand one (26,001) pounds
or more or such a lesser GVWR as subsequently determined by federal regulations
or the secretary of state; or any combination of vehicles with a GCWR of twenty
six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more, provided the GVWR of any vehicle or
vehicles being towed is ten thousand one (10,001) pounds or more; or
         b.   The vehicle is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more
persons; or
         c.   The vehicle is transporting hazardous materials and is required
to be placarded in accordance with 49 CFR part 172, subpart F.
      d.   The vehicle contains commercial graphics that cover at least twenty
percent (20%) of the vehicle's surface.
(Ord. 08-O-1024, 10-6-2008; amd. Ord. 23-O-012, 8-15-2023)
5-4-5: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
   A.   Every single-family dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a
lot having an area of not less than one acre, and a width at the established
building line of not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') and a minimum lot
depth of one hundred seventy five feet (175'). Private septic systems are
prohibited for any lot less than one acre.
   B.   All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted herein
shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than one acre
with a minimum width of one hundred fifty feet (150') at the building line.
   C.   Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions
stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case shall
any such lot have an area of less than one acre and a width at the established
building line of one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-4-6: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building structures or
enlargement:
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard of not less than seventy five feet (75').
   B.   Side Yards: There shall be two (2) side yards, each of which shall be
not less than thirty five feet (35') wide and a side yard adjoining a street
shall not be less than seventy five feet (75') wide.
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 76-O-
227, 12-2-1976)
5-4-7: MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area may be occupied by
principal buildings and structures, including accessory buildings. (Ord. 95-O-
681, 1-4-1995)
5-4-8: MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO:
Maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.30. See section
5-1-6, "Definitions", of this title, for information regarding calculation of
floor area ratio. (Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995)
5-4-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or any other structure shall exceed a height of thirty five feet
(35') or two and one-half (21/2) stories, whichever is lower. (Ord. 95-O-681,
1-4-1995)
5-4-10: GROUND FLOOR AREA:
Dwellings (single-family) shall have a minimum habitable floor area of not less
than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Dwellings of more than one
story shall have a minimum ground floor habitable area of not less than one
thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. (Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995)
CHAPTER 5
R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-5-1: Purpose
5-5-2: Permitted Uses
5-5-3: Special Uses
5-5-4: Off Street Parking Or Storage Of Vehicles
5-5-5: Minimum Lot Size
5-5-6: Yard Areas
5-5-7: Maximum Lot Coverage
5-5-8: Maximum Floor Area Ratio
5-5-9: Building Height
5-5-10: Ground Floor Area
5-5-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2 district is established to encourage the orderly transition of land
from agricultural to low density residential use; to provide areas well suited
as to location and topography; to meet the market demands for large lots; and
to prohibit any uses which are incompatible. The principal use of land is for
single-family dwellings on large lots where minimum community services may be
appropriate. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted:
Accessory uses, including off street parking facilities in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 13 of this title.
Agriculture, except that the keeping of equine animals shall be subject to the
provisions of section
5-2-14 of this title.
Parks, when publicly owned and operated.
Signs (see subsection
5-20-19A of this title).
Single-family detached dwellings and permitted accessory uses. (Ord. 76-O-227,
12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991)
5-5-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by a special use permit in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 17 of this title:
Church.
Home occupations.
Municipal building.
Planned developments in accordance with chapter 14 of this title.
Swimming club, private (nonprofit). (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991)
5-5-4: OFF STREET PARKING OR STORAGE OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Commercial Motor Vehicles:
      1.   The parking or storing on public or private property of commercial
motor vehicles other than in a garage is hereby prohibited.
      2.   "Commercial motor vehicle" or "CMV" means a motor vehicle used in
commerce, designed to transport passengers or property if:
         a.   The vehicle has a GVWR of twenty six thousand one (26,001) pounds
or more or such a lesser GVWR as subsequently determined by federal regulations
or the secretary of state; or any combination of vehicles with a GCWR of twenty
six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more, provided the GVWR of any vehicle or
vehicles being towed is ten thousand one (10,001) pounds or more; or
         b.   The vehicle is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more
persons; or
         c.   The vehicle is transporting hazardous materials and is required
to be placarded in accordance with 49 CFR part 172, subpart F.
         d.   The vehicle contains commercial graphics that cover at least
twenty percent (20%) of the vehicle's surface.
(Ord. 08-O-1024, 10-6-2008; amd. Ord. 23-O-012, 8-15-2023)
5-5-5: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
   A.   Every single-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be
located on a lot having an area of not less than one acre in area and shall
have a width at the established building line of not less than one hundred
fifty feet (150'), and a minimum lot depth of one hundred seventy five feet
(175'). Private septic systems are prohibited for any lot less than one acre.
(Ord. 84-O-385, 5-7-1984)
   B.   All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted herein
shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than one acre
with a minimum width of one hundred fifty feet (150') at the building line.
   C.   Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions
stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case shall
any such lot have an area of less than one acre and a width at the established
building line of one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-5-6: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building structures or
enlargement:
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard of not less than seventy five feet (75').
   B.   Side Yards: There shall be two (2) side yards, each of which shall be
not less than thirty five feet (35') wide and a side yard adjoining a street
shall not be less than seventy five feet (75') wide.
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 76-O-
227, 12-2-1976)
5-5-7: MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area may be occupied by
principal buildings and structures, including accessory buildings. (Ord. 95-O-
681, 1-4-1995)
5-5-8: MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO:
Maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.30. See section
5-1-6, "Definitions", of this title, for information regarding calculation of
floor area ratio. (Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995)
5-5-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed a height of thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half
(21/2) stories, whichever is lower. (Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995)
5-5-10: GROUND FLOOR AREA:
Dwellings (single-family) shall have a minimum habitable floor area of not less
than two thousand (2,000) square feet. Dwellings of more than one story shall
have a minimum ground floor habitable area of not less than one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet. (Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995)
CHAPTER 6
PD-1 DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-6-1: Permitted Uses
5-6-2: Special Uses
5-6-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the PD-1 District:
Single-family detached dwellings, which conform to the standards of the R-
1 District.
5-6-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in the PD-1 District:
Planned large-lot residential, business, or office park developments complying
with the provisions of Title 5, Chapter 14.
Church.
Municipal Building. (Ord. 91-0-597, 11-4-91)
CHAPTER 7
PD-2 DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-7-1: Permitted Uses
5-7-2: Special Uses
5-7-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the PD-2 District:
Single-family detached dwellings, which conform to the standards of the R-
1 District.
5-7-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in the PD-2 District:
Planned large-lot residential, or cluster and townhome developments, complying
with the provisions of Title 5, Chapter 14.
Church.
Municipal Building. (Ord. 91-0-597, 11-4-91)
CHAPTER 8
PD-3 DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-8-1: Permitted Uses
5-8-2: Special Uses
5-8-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the PD-3 District:
Single-family detached dwellings, which conform to the standards of the R-
1 District.
5-8-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in the PD-3 District:
Planned large-lot residential, cluster and townhome, or office park
developments complying with the provisions of Title 5, Chapter 14.
Church.
Municipal Building. (Ord. 91-0-597, 11-4-91)
CHAPTER 9
PD-4 DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-9-1: Permitted Uses
5-9-2: Special Uses
5-9-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the PD-4 District:
None.
5-9-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in the PD-4 District:
Planned large-lot residential, cluster and townhome, business, office park, or
mixed use developments complying with the provisions of Title 5, Chapter 14.
Church.
Municipal Building. (Ord. 91-0-597, 11-4-91)
CHAPTER 10
B BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-10-1: Purpose
5-10-2: Permitted Uses
5-10-3: Special Uses
5-10-4: Conditions Of Use
5-10-5: Minimum Lot Area
5-10-6: Signs
5-10-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
5-10-8: Building Height
5-10-9: Transitional Yards
5-10-10: Yard Areas
5-10-11: Maximum Lot Coverage
5-10-12: Lighting Standards
5-10-13: Landscaping Requirements
5-10-14: Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment
5-10-15: Trash Receptacles
5-10-16: Utility Meters; Transformers
5-10-17: Rand Road
5-10-1: PURPOSE:
The B business district is established to allow commercial development at
appropriate locations within the village. The retail and service uses allowed
within this district are intended to serve area residents, and enhance the
economic base of the village. The B business district should be located along
arterial roadways where adequate access can be provided without disrupting
residential areas. The high visibility afforded to parcels along these
arterials requires site and building design that enhances the economic
viability of the business and aesthetic quality of the public right of way.
Impacts on existing and future residences, in and adjacent to the village,
should be further minimized by the provision of appropriate perimeter buffers
and by promoting design in this district which is compatible with the character
of Kildeer and viable commercial development. (Ord. 11-O-007, 3-15-2011, eff.
3-15-2011)
5-10-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses, and no others, shall be permitted as of right in the B
business district. In interpreting the use designations in this chapter,
references to the North American industry classification system, United States,
2007, where applicable, are given in parentheses following each use:
   A.   Retail Trade:
      Art dealers/galleries (453920).
      Auto supply stores (441310).
      Book, periodical and music stores (4512).
      Building materials supply stores (no outdoor storage or sales) (444190)
limited to: cabinet stores, ceiling fan stores, door stores, wood or ceramic
tile floor stores, glass stores, lighting fixtures, masonry dealers, window
stores, brick and/or stone stores.
      Clothing and clothing accessories stores (448), including: apparel
stores, maternity shops, baby and children’s clothing, apparel and clothing
accessory stores, costume jewelry stores, furnishings stores, handbag stores,
hat and cap stores, neckwear stores, wig and hairpiece stores, bridal gown
shops, coat stores, costume stores, dress shops, fur apparel stores, furriers,
hosiery stores, lingerie stores, swimwear stores, T-shirt shops (custom
printed), uniform stores, shoe stores (includes sports and orthopedic shoes),
clock shops, jewelry stores, luggage and leather goods stores.
      Electronics and appliance stores (443) including: appliance stores,
sewing machine stores, vacuum cleaner stores, audio equipment stores (except
automotive), cellular telephone stores, consumer electronics stores, radio and
television stores, computer and computer equipment stores, camera shops and
photographic equipment stores.
      Florists and flower shops (453110).
      Furniture and home furnishing stores (442) including: bed and mattress
stores, furniture stores, floor covering stores, curtain/drapery/window
treatment stores, bath shops, chinaware stores, picture frame shops, glassware
stores, home furnishings stores, houseware stores, kitchenware stores, lamp
shops, linen stores.
      Gift, novelty and souvenir stores (453220), including: balloon shops,
greeting cards, Christmas stores, collectible gift shops (i.e., crystal,
pewter, porcelain), craft (except craft supply) stores, curio shops, gift
shops, novelty (except adult use) shops, party goods, seasonal and holiday
decorations.
      Health and personal care stores (446), including: drugstores, pharmacies,
beauty supply stores, cosmetics/perfume stores, lens grinding (ophthalmic, in
retail stores), optical goods stores (except offices of optometrists), sunglass
stores, food (i.e., health) supplement stores, nutrition (i.e., food
supplement) stores, vitamin stores, convalescent supply stores, hearing aid
stores, medical equipment and supply stores, prosthetic stores, sick room
supply stores.
      Miscellaneous retailers (453998), limited to the following: art supply
stores, candle shops, closet organizer stores, collector’s items (i.e.,
autograph, card, coin, stamp), emergency preparedness supply stores, flower
shops (artificial or dried), home security equipment stores, hot tub stores,
religious good (except books), swimming pool supply, trophy/awards shops.
      Office supplies and stationery stores (453210).
      Paint and wallpaper stores (444120).
      Pet supply stores and pet feed stores (453910).
      Sporting goods, hobby, and musical instruments (except gun shops) (4511),
including: athletic equipment, bicycle (except motorized) shops, exercise
equipment, fishing supply stores, golf pro shops, saddlery stores, sporting
goods stores, tack shops, athletic uniform stores, craft supply stores, game
stores, hobby shops, magic supply stores, toy stores, fabric shops, needlecraft
sewing supply stores, piece goods stores, musical instrument stores, sheet
music stores.
      Tobacco stores (453991).
   B.   Finance And Insurance:
      Banks in shopping center storefronts without drive-through or external
ATM (522110).
      Savings institution in shopping center storefronts without drive-through
or external ATM (522120).
   C.   Real Estate, Rental And Leasing:
      Office for rental of commercial properties (for on site property)
(53112).
      Videotape and disc rental (53223).
   D.   Professional, Scientific And Technical Services:
      Photography studios, portrait (541921).
   E.   Administration And Support Services:
      Business service centers (56143).
   F.   Other Services:
      Barbershops (812111).
      Beauty shops (812112).
   G.   Arts, Entertainment and Recreation:
      Indoor Amusement and Theme Parks (713110) subject to the Village’s
Amusement Tax. (Ord. 11-O-007, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011; amd. Ord. 25-O-001,
2-18-2025)
5-10-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses, and no others, may be permitted by special use permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In interpreting the use
designations in this chapter, references to the North American Industry
Classification System, United States, 2007, where applicable, are given in
parentheses following each use: (Ord. 18-O-001, 2-20-2018)
   A.   Retail Trade:
      Department stores (452111 and 452112).
      Food specialty stores (4452), including: baked ham stores, butcher shops,
delicatessens, frozen meat stores, seafood stores, produce stores, baked goods
stores (retail only except immediate consumption), candy stores, nut stores,
coffee and tea stores, dairy product stores, gourmet food stores, packaged ice
cream stores, bottled soft drink stores, specialty food stores, spice stores,
bottled water stores.
      Gasoline stations (447), including truck stops (447190), subject to the
following conditions:
         1.   Minimum lot size shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
         2.   Minimum yard area shall be provided in accordance with section 5-
10-10 of this chapter.
         3.   If the site adjoins an R-1, R-2 or residential portion of a PD-1,
PD-2 or PD-3 district, transitional yards as required by section 5-10-9 of this
chapter shall be provided.
         4.   Landscaping within required yards shall be provided in accordance
with a plan reviewed by the plan commission/board of appeals and approved by
the village board.
         5.   Car wash shall be allowed only to the extent that it is
incidental to the principal use, and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
         6.   Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval.
         7.   All sales and displays and storage of goods shall be confined
within a permanent structure.
         8.   The operations of the business shall conform with the performance
standards for noise, odors, toxic and noxious material, storage and handling of
flammable materials and all other standards established in chapter 12 of this
title, the applicable Kildeer building codes, and all other applicable village,
county, state, or federal regulations. In the event of a conflict between any
of the foregoing standards, the more restrictive standard shall apply to these
operations.
      Grocery stores (445110), not including convenience stores.
      Hardware stores (444130): All sales and displays and storage of goods
shall be confined within a permanent structure.
      Home centers (444110), subject to the following conditions:
         1.   Minimum lot size shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
         2.   Minimum yard area shall be provided in accordance with section 5-
10-10 of this chapter.
         3.   If the site adjoins an R-1, R-2 or residential portion of a PD-1,
PD-2 or PD-3 district, transitional yards as required by section 5-10-9 of this
chapter shall be provided.
         4.   Landscaping within required yards shall be provided in accordance
with a plan reviewed by the plan commission/board of appeals and approved by
the village board.
         5.   Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval.
         6.   All sales and displays and storage of goods shall be confined
within a permanent structure.
         7.   The operations of the business shall conform with the performance
standards for noise, odors, toxic and noxious material, storage and handling of
flammable materials and all other standards established in chapter 12 of this
title, the applicable Kildeer building codes, and all other applicable village,
county, state, or federal regulations. In the event of a conflict between any
of the foregoing standards, the more restrictive standard shall apply to these
operations.
      Lawn and garden equipment stores (4442), subject to the following
conditions:
         1.   Minimum lot size shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
         2.   Minimum yard area shall be provided in accordance with section 5-
10-10 of this chapter.
         3.   If the site adjoins an R-1, R-2 or residential portion of a PD-1,
PD-2 or PD-3 district, transitional yards as required by section 5-10-9 of this
chapter shall be provided.
         4.   Landscaping within required yards shall be provided in accordance
with a plan reviewed by the plan commission/board of appeals and approved by
the village board.
         5.   Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval.
         6.   All sales and displays and storage of goods shall be confined
within a permanent structure.
         7.   The operations of the business shall conform with the performance
standards for noise, odors, toxic and noxious material, storage and handling of
flammable materials and all other standards established in chapter 12 of this
title, the applicable Kildeer building codes, and all other applicable village,
county, state, or federal regulations. In the event of a conflict between any
of the foregoing standards, the more restrictive standard shall apply to these
operations.
      Medical cannabis dispensary (466110) and cultivation center (115112),
subject to the following conditions:
         1. Definitions:
            CARDHOLDER: A qualifying patient or a designated caregiver who has
been issued and possesses a valid registry identification card by the
department of public health.
            DESIGNATED CAREGIVER: A person who: a) is at least twenty one (21)
years of age; b) has agreed to assist with a patient’s medical use of cannabis;
c) has not been convicted of an excluded offense; and d) assists no more than
one registered qualifying patient with his or her medical use of cannabis.
            ENCLOSED, LOCKED FACILITY: A room, greenhouse, building, or other
enclosed area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access
only by a cultivation center’s agents or a dispensing organization’s agent
working for the registered cultivation center or the registered dispensing
organization to cultivate, store, and distribute cannabis for registered
qualifying patients.
            MEDICAL CANNABIS CONTAINER: A sealed, traceable, food compliant,
tamper resistant, tamper evident container, or package used for the purpose of
containment of medical cannabis from a cultivation center to a dispensing
organization.
            MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION, OR DISPENSING
ORGANIZATION, OR DISPENSARY ORGANIZATION OR DISPENSARY: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is registered by the department of financial
and professional regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered
cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients.
            MEDICAL CANNABIS INFUSED PRODUCT: Food, oils, ointments, or other
products containing usable cannabis that are not smoked.
         2. Site Plan Review: All of the following shall be subject to the site
capacity calculation and site plan review procedures of this use unless
otherwise expressly exempted:
            a. Subject To Site Capacity Calculation/Site Plan Review: The use
shall be subject to the site capacity calculation/site plan review procedures.
            b. Compliance With Act: All medical cannabis dispensary
establishments shall comply with the compassionate use of medical cannabis
pilot program act (public act 098-0122) and any rules adopted in accordance
thereto.
            c. Multiple Use Property: Medical cannabis dispensaries shall not
be established in multiple use or tenant property or on a property that shares
parking with other uses.
            d. Setback: A medical cannabis dispensary shall be a minimum of
thirty feet (30') from all property lines.
            e. Parking: Client parking shall be located in an area which is
visible from a public road or a private road that is accessible to the public.
It cannot be screened from the roadway with vegetation, fencing or other
obstructions.
            f. Lighting/Video Surveillance: Parking areas shall be well lit and
monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by
dispensary staff, continually recorded and accessible to local law enforcement
officials via the internet.
            g. Buffering From Other Uses:
            (1) Other Dispensaries: A medical marijuana dispensary shall be a
minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from all other medical marijuana
dispensaries measured from the parcel boundaries.
            (2) Other Properties: No medical marijuana dispensary shall be
located, established, maintained, or operated on any lot that has a property
line within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the property line of the
following:
               (A) A church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship.
               (B) A public or private nursery, elementary, or secondary
school.
               (C) A childcare facility, licensed by the Illinois department of
children and family services.
               (D) A public park, playground, playing field, or forest
preserve.
               (E) A residential property.
            (3) Residential Properties: No medical cannabis cultivation center
shall be located, established, maintained, or operated on any lot that has a
property line within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the property
line of any residential property.
            (4) Measurement: For the purposes of this use, distances shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the
medical cannabis dispensary is located to the nearest point on a property line
of the use.
            h. Public Viewing: No medical cannabis dispensary shall be
maintained or operated in a manner that causes, creates or allows the public
viewing of medical cannabis, medical cannabis infused products or cannabis
paraphernalia from any sidewalk, public or private right of way or any property
other than the lot on which the dispensary is located. No portion of the
exterior of the dispensary shall utilize or contain any flashing lights,
searchlights or spotlights or any similar lighting system.
            i. Signage:
            (1) All signage for the medical cannabis dispensaries shall be
limited to one flat wall sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area, and
one identifying sign, which can only include the dispensary address, not to
exceed two (2) square feet in area; such signs shall not be directly
illuminated. Electronic message boards and temporary signs are not permitted in
connection with a dispensary.
            (2) Signs shall not include any realistic or stylized graphical
representation of the cannabis plant or its parts or any realistic or stylized
graphical representation of drug paraphernalia.
            (3) Signs shall not include any wording that would identify the
property as a medical marijuana dispensary or use clinical, botanical or slang
terms for cannabis, cannabis consumption, cannabis intoxication or drug
paraphernalia including, but not limited to, “cannabis”, “marijuana”, “weed”,
“pot”, “420", “joint”, “Mary Jane”, “ganja”, “hash”, “herb”, “doobie”, “bong”,
“blunt”, “bowl”, “zoned”, “sloshed”, “burnt”, “stoned”, “green day”, “reefer”,
“smoke”, “toke”, “wacky tobaccy/baccy”, “spliff”, “roach”, “skunk”, etc.
            (4) A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near all
dispensary entrances and shall include the following language: “Only
Cardholders, Designated Caregivers, And Staff May Enter These Premises. Persons
Under The Age Of 18 Are Prohibited From Entering”. The required text shall be
no larger than one inch (1") in height.
            (5) Signage on delivery trucks entering the property shall comply
with subsections A2i(2) and A2i(3) of this use.
            j. Compliance With Statute/Act: Medical cannabis dispensaries that
display or sell drug paraphernalia shall do so in compliance with the Illinois
drug paraphernalia control act1 and the compassionate use of medical cannabis
pilot program act (public act 098-0122).
            k. Packaging: Medical cannabis and cannabis infused products shall
be distributed in a sealed, tamper evident medical cannabis container. Any
additional packaging, such as bags or boxes, shall be opaque with no text or
graphics identifying the contents of packages.
            l. Age Limit: It shall be unlawful for any medical cannabis
dispensary to allow any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age
on the premises. Dispensaries shall not employ anyone under the age of eighteen
(18) years. Access shall be limited exclusively to dispensary staff,
cardholders, designated caregivers, delivery personnel, maintenance personnel
and local and State officials.
            m. Hours: Medical cannabis dispensaries shall operate between eight
o’clock (8:00) A.M. to six o’clock (6:00) P.M.
            n. Drive-Through: A medical cannabis dispensary may not have a
drive-through service.
            o. Surveillance:
            (1) The medical cannabis dispensary shall be an enclosed locked
facility and shall provide and maintain adequate security on the premises,
including lighting, video surveillance and alarms reasonably designed to ensure
the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft.
            (2) The medical cannabis dispensary parking area, client entrance,
sales area, backroom, storage areas and delivery bay and entrance shall be
monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by
dispensary staff, continually recorded and accessible to local law enforcement
officials via the internet.
            (3) A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which includes
the following language: “This Area Is Under Live/Recorded Video Surveillance To
Aid In The Prosecution Of Any Crimes Committed Against This Facility Or Its
Patrons”.
            (4) The Director shall review the adequacy of lighting, security
and video surveillance installations with assistance from appropriate local law
enforcement officials.
            (5) Deliveries shall occur within a secure enclosed delivery bay;
no delivery shall be visible from the exterior of the building.
            p. Conduct On Site:
            (1) Loitering is prohibited on the dispensary property.
            (2) It shall be prohibited to smoke cannabis or consume cannabis
infused products in the medical cannabis dispensary or anywhere on the property
occupied by the dispensary. A sign, at least 8.5 inches by eleven inches (11"),
shall be posted inside the dispensary building in a conspicuous place and
visible to a client and shall include the following language: “Smoking, Eating,
Drinking Or Other Forms Of Consumption Of Cannabis Products Is Prohibited On
Dispensary Property”.
      New car dealers (441110).
      Other retail trade uses, not otherwise classified, provided, however,
that any such use shall be: 1) compatible with and consistent with existing
retail uses in the vicinity of the proposed use, 2) consumer oriented, and 3)
retail Sales Tax generating. (Ord. 11-O-007, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011; amd.
Ord. 14-O-020, 5-20-2014)
   B.   Finance And Insurance:
      Bank in freestanding building with drive through and/or external ATM
(522110).
         1. Safety requirements for pedestrian and vehicular circulation,
including: adequate stacking, no conflicts with other vehicles entering or
leaving the site, opportunity for a person in line to safely exit the line,
minimum conflict with pedestrians, and adequate lighting.
      Freestanding drive-through automated teller machine (ATM) not accessory
to a bank or savings institution (522320).
         1. Safety requirements for pedestrian and vehicular circulation,
including: adequate stacking, no conflicts with other vehicles entering or
leaving the site, opportunity for a person in line to safely exit the line,
minimum conflict with pedestrians, and adequate lighting.
      Savings institution in freestanding building with drive through and/or
external ATM (522120).
         1.   Safety requirements for pedestrian and vehicular circulation,
including: adequate stacking, no conflicts with other vehicles entering or
leaving the site, opportunity for a person in line to safely exit the line,
minimum conflict with pedestrians, and adequate lighting. (Ord. 18-O-001, 2-20-
2018)
   C.   Real Estate, Rental And Leasing:
      Lessors of miniwarehouses and self-storage units (531130), subject to the
following conditions:
         1.   Minimum lot size shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
         2.   Minimum yard area shall be provided in accordance with section 5-
10-10 of this chapter.
         3.   If the site adjoins an R-1, R-2 or residential portion of a PD-1,
PD-2 or PD-3 District, transitional yards as required by section 5-10-9 of this
chapter shall be provided.
         4.   Landscaping within required yards shall be provided in accordance
with a plan reviewed by the Plan Commission/Board of Appeals and approved by
the Village Board.
         5.   Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval.
         6.   All sales and displays and storage of goods shall be confined
within a permanent structure.
         7.   The operations of the business shall conform with the performance
standards for noise, odors, toxic and noxious material, storage and handling of
flammable materials and all other standards established in chapter 12 of this
title, the applicable Kildeer Building Codes, and all other applicable Village,
County, State, or Federal regulations. In the event of a conflict between any
of the foregoing standards, the more restrictive standard shall apply to these
operations.
   D.   Arts, Entertainment And Recreation:
      Fitness and recreational sports centers (713940).
      Outdoor Amusement and Theme Parks (713110) subject to the Village’s
Amusement Tax.
   E.   Accommodation And Food Services:
      Catering and banquet (722300).
      Full service restaurants (722110).
      Limited service restaurants (722211).
      Snack and nonalcoholic beverage bars (722213).
   F.   Other Services:
      Dry cleaning and laundry except coin operated (812320).
   G.   Other/Miscellaneous:
      Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage for principal use listed elsewhere,
subject to the following conditions:
         1.   All outdoor storage areas shall be fenced with materials of wood,
stone or masonry. The fencing shall be no less than six feet (6'), nor greater
than eight feet (8') high and must completely screen the stored materials.
         2.   Nothing may be stored above the height of the fence.
         3.   The required fencing shall not protrude or extend into or beyond
the front building line.
         4.   The materials that are so stored shall be stored in compliance
with all local, State and Federal standards.
      Telecommunications facilities subject to the following conditions:
         1.   Minimum front yard: One hundred feet (100').
         2.   Minimum side yard: Ten feet (10'); if side yard adjoins street,
minimum one hundred feet (100').
         3.   Minimum rear yard: Twenty five feet (25').
         4.   If site adjoins an R-1, R-2, or residential portion of a PD-1,
PD-2, or PD-3 District, transitional yards shall be provided. Minimum side
yard: Thirty five feet (35'); minimum rear yard: Fifty feet (50').
         5.   Maximum height: One hundred fifty feet (150'), or as recommended
by the Plan Commission/Board of Appeals, upon presentation of supporting
documentation.
         6.   Multiple use of structure is strongly encouraged. (Ord. 11-O-007,
3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011; amd. Ord. 21-O-031, 12-21-2021; Ord. 25-O-001, 2-18-
2025)
5-10-4: CONDITIONS OF USE:
All uses permitted in this district shall be retail and service establishments
dealing directly with consumers and shall be subject to the following
conditions:
   A.   There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products
other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to the retail
business conducted on the same premises.
   B.   Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to
odor, dust, smoke, noise or vibrations or other similar causes. (Ord. 11-O-007,
3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10-5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
No lot or parcel of land used for business purposes shall be less than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in area where Municipal sewer and water utilities
are provided and not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet where such
utilities are not provided. Further, such lot or parcel of land shall have a
minimum width at the building line of sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-
1976)
5-10-6: SIGNS:
See chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991)
5-10-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
chapter 13 of this title and conforming with the following:
   A.   Off street loading shall not be located in a front or corner side yard.
   B.   Concrete curbs shall be constructed around the perimeter of all off
street parking and off street loading facilities.
   C.   Curbed, landscaped islands shall be provided in off street parking lots
containing twenty (20) or more spaces in accordance with the following:
      1.   Landscaped islands shall be a minimum of six feet (6') wide, as
measured between backs of curbs.
      2.   One island shall be installed for each fifteen (15) off street
parking spaces. Landscaped islands shall be planted with not less than one
shade tree and ground cover and/or shrubs.
      3.   Shrubs installed in islands shall be low growing, and trees shall be
high branched so as to maintain a clear line of sight for motorists that is
between three feet (3') and five feet (5') above ground. (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-
1991)
5-10-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The height of any structure shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories,
nor shall it exceed thirty five feet (35'), except as provided herein. (Ord.
76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-10-9: TRANSITIONAL YARDS:
Where a B District adjoins a residence district (R-1, R-2 and residential
portion of PD-1, PD-2, and PD-3), transitional yards shall be provided as
follows:
   A.   Where a B District fronts on a street and at least fifty percent (50%)
of the property frontage directly across the street is in a residence district,
there shall be provided a front yard setback in the B District of not less than
thirty feet (30') in depth. No off street parking spaces may be located in said
B District front yard setback.
   B.   In a B District where a side yard is adjacent to a side yard of
property in a residence district, there shall be provided a side yard setback
in the B District of not less than thirty five feet (35') in depth. No off
street parking spaces may be located in said B district side yard setback.
   C.   In a B district where a side yard is adjacent to a rear yard of
property in a residence district, there shall be provided a side yard setback
in the B district of not less than thirty five feet (35') in depth. Off street
parking spaces may be located in said B district side yard setback but shall
not be closer than fifteen feet (15') to the lot line.
   D.   In a B district where a rear yard is adjacent to a side yard or rear
yard of property in a residence district, there shall be provided a rear yard
setback in the B district of not less than fifty feet (50') in depth. Off
street parking spaces may be located in said B district rear yard setback but
shall not be closer than thirty feet (30') to the lot line.
   E.   No accessory uses or structures shall be permitted in any transitional
yard setbacks.
   F.   "Landscape buffer" is defined as combination of berm, densely planted
compact hedge and evergreen vegetation. (Ord. 87-O-459, 12-7-1987)
   G.   A landscape buffer shall be installed in all transitional yard setbacks
in accordance with a plan reviewed and approved by the plan commission/board of
appeals. (Ord. 87-O-459, 12-7-1987; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
5-10-10: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building structures or
enlargement:
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30'). Said yard
shall be entirely green space with no parking permitted.
   B.   Side Yards: There shall be two (2) side yards each of which shall be
not less than ten feet (10') wide and a side yard adjoining a street shall not
be less than thirty feet (30') wide.
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty five feet (25'). (Ord.
88-O-488, 9-12-1988)
5-10-11: MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE:
The lot coverage of structures, off street parking and off street loading shall
not exceed sixty percent (60%) of each individual lot. (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-
1991)
5-10-12: LIGHTING STANDARDS:
Whenever off street parking spaces are used at night, parking lot lighting
shall be provided as follows:
   A.   Lighting used along streets and rights of way and individual lots shall
be uniform in design.
   B.   An average of one to three (3) foot-candles shall be maintained within
the parking lot to assure safe levels of illumination.
   C.   Maximum to minimum and average to minimum uniformity ratios shall
demonstrate that an even distribution of light will be provided within the
parking lot.
   D.   Light standards and luminaires shall be so designed and placed to:
      1.   Confine light to the property. Light spillage in excess of five-
tenths (0.5) foot-candle beyond the property line shall be prohibited, except
at entrances to and from the commercial or office property.
      2.   Prevent glare visible from residential properties and street rights
of way.
   E.   Security lighting installed on commercial or office buildings shall be
shielded to fully cover lamps and to cast light downward. (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-
1991)
5-10-13: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Perimeter Yards: Shade trees, which average not less than forty feet
(40') on center, shall be installed in ten foot (10') wide perimeter yards
which abut properties planned for, or developed with, existing commercial or
office uses.
   B.   Foundation Plantings: Trees and shrubs shall be installed along the
front and side elevations of commercial or office buildings to provide
articulation, provide shade, and to enhance the pedestrian environment.
   C.   Plant Material Sizes: Trees and shrubs shall be installed at sizes not
less than the following:
Evergreen trees: Eight feet (8') to ten feet (10') in height.
Shade trees: Three inches (3") to four inches (4") in caliper, as measured six
inches (6") above grade.
Ornamental trees: Eight feet (8') to ten feet (10') in height.
Shrubs: Not less than twenty four inches (24") in height, unless used for
screening, in which cases shrubs three feet (3') to four feet (4') in height
shall be required. (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991)
5-10-14: ROOF MOUNTED MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT:
   A.   All roof mounted mechanical equipment including, but not limited to,
heating, ventilating, and air conditioning units (HVAC), shall be fully
screened from public view on all sides of the building.
   B.   Screening shall be accomplished by the roof structure or parapet walls.
The height of the parapet walls or roof structure shall equal the height of the
tallest rooftop element installed on the building. Such screening shall be
designed to blend with and complement the architecture of the building. (Ord.
91-O-596, 11-4-1991)
5-10-15: TRASH RECEPTACLES:
   A.   Trash receptacles shall be located only in a rear or interior side
yard, enclosed by a masonry wall not less than the height of the containers,
and provided with gates to contain trash.
   B.   Where visible to the public, landscaping shall be installed around the
enclosure to soften its appearance. (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991)
5-10-16: UTILITY METERS; TRANSFORMERS:
Wall mounted utility meters and ground supported transformers shall be painted
to match the building. If visible to the public, meters and transformers shall
be screened by landscaping equal in height to the tallest meter or transformer.
(Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991)
5-10-17: RAND ROAD:
All new development or redevelopment of properties adjacent to Rand Road shall
be processed as planned developments, regardless of parcel size. (Ord. 91-O-
587, 8-5-1991)
CHAPTER 10A
LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-10A-1: Purposes
5-10A-2: Permitted Uses
5-10A-3: Special Uses
5-10A-4: Conditions Of Use
5-10A-5: Plan Review And Approval
5-10A-6: Minimum Lot Area And Width
5-10A-7: Maximum Building Height
5-10A-8: Minimum Required Yards
5-10A-9: Minimum Building Setback
5-10A-10: Maximum Lot Coverage
5-10A-11: Maximum Floor Area Ratio
5-10A-12: Minimum Building Spacing
5-10A-13: Multiple Buildings Permitted
5-10A-14: Landscaping Requirements
5-10A-15: Architectural Design Review
5-10A-16: Development Prohibited In Drainageways
5-10A-17: Access Restrictions
5-10A-18: Off Street Parking And Loading
5-10A-19: Signs
5-10A-20: Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment
5-10A-21: Trash Receptacles
5-10A-22: Utility Meters; Transformers
5-10A-23: Lighting Standards
5-10A-24: Outdoor Storage Restricted
5-10A-1: PURPOSES:
Certain property within the village offers limited opportunities for larger
scale commercial development to serve Kildeer and neighboring communities. Such
property is uniquely located, however, at the gateway to the village and
neighboring villages and abutting and adjacent to established single-family
detached residential areas. Accordingly, such development must be carefully
planned and regulated to avoid the many potential adverse consequences to the
village, to neighboring villages, and to the abutting and adjacent residential
uses, which adverse consequences could result from too dense, poorly buffered,
badly designed, or otherwise ill planned use of such property. The purposes of
the LC limited commercial district are to create regulations that allow the
property zoned within the district to achieve a reasonable amount of commercial
development, to protect the stature and aesthetics of the principal gateway to
the village, to protect and preserve the quality of existing single-family
residential areas, and to protect the village from undesirable impacts of
unnecessary and unwanted intense commercial development. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-
1993)
5-10A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses, and no others, shall be permitted as of right in the LC
limited commercial district. In interpreting the use designations in this
chapter, references to the North American industry classification system,
United States, 2002, where applicable, are given in parentheses following each
use:
   A.   Retail Trade (Sector 44-45):
      Automotive parts and accessories stores and tire stores (4413).
      Clothing and clothing accessories stores:
      Children's and infant (44813).
      Family (44814).
      Men's (44811).
      Women's (44812).
      Electronic and appliance store (443).
      Floor covering stores (444120).
      Furniture and home furnishings store (442).
      Hardware stores (444130).
      Health and personal care (446).
      Jewelry, luggage, leather stores (4483).
      Miscellaneous retailers:
         Art dealers (453920).
         Automotive repair (8111), except stand alone car washes (811192).
         Barbershops (812111).
         Beauty shops (812112).
         Book, periodical and music stores (4512).
         Business service centers (56143).
         Department stores (452111).
         Dry cleaning and laundry (812320) except coin operated.
         Electronic and precision equipment repair (8112).
         Florist (453).
      Office supply and stationery and gift stores (4532).
      Other miscellaneous store retailers (45399).
      Other schools and instruction (6116).
      Personal and household goods repair (8114).
      Pet and pet supplies (45399).
      Photofinishing (81292).
      Photography studios (541921).
      Sporting goods, hobby and musical stores (except gun stores) (4511).
      Videotape and disc rental (53223).
      Shoe stores (4482).
   B.   Finance (for ATMs, drive-up/drive-through tellers and/or freestanding
financial facilities see section
5-10A-3, "Special Uses", of this chapter):
      Commercial banking with in-line building (52211).
      Savings institution with in-line building (52212). (Ord. 06-O-964, 5-1-
2006)
5-10A-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses, and no others, may be permitted by special use permit in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 17 of this title. In interpreting the
use designations in this chapter, references to the North American industry
classification system, United States, 2002, where applicable, are given in
parentheses following each use:
   A.   Retail Trade:
      Food and beverage stores.
      Specialty foods (4452).
      Gasoline stations (447).
      Gasoline filling stations, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Minimum lot size shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
      2.   Minimum yard area shall be provided in accordance with section
5-10-10 of this title.
      3.   If the site adjoins an R-1, R-2 or residential portion of a PD-1,
PD-2 or PD-3 district, transitional yards as required by section
5-10-9 of this title shall be provided.
      4.   Landscaping within required yards shall be provided in accordance
with a plan reviewed by the plan commission/board of appeals and approved by
the village board.
      5.   Car wash shall be allowed only to the extent that it is incidental
to the principal use, and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      6.   Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval.
      7.   All sales and displays and storage of goods shall be confined within
a permanent structure.
      8.   The operations of the business shall conform with the performance
standards for noise, odors, toxic and noxious material, storage and handling of
flammable materials and all other standards established in chapter 12 of this
title, the applicable Kildeer building codes, and all other applicable village,
county, state, or federal regulations. In the event of a conflict between any
of the foregoing standards, the more restrictive standard shall apply to these
operations.
      Home centers (44110).
      Home centers, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Minimum lot size shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
      2.   Minimum yard area shall be provided in accordance with section
5-10-10 of this title.
      3.   If the site adjoins an R-1, R-2 or residential portion of a PD-1,
PD-2 or PD-3 district, transitional yards as required by section
5-10-9 of this title shall be provided.
      4.   Landscaping within required yards shall be provided in accordance
with a plan reviewed by the plan commission/board of appeals and approved by
the village board.
      5.   Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval.
      6.   All sales and displays and storage of goods shall be confined within
a permanent structure.
      7.   The operations of the business shall conform with the performance
standards for noise, odors, toxic and noxious material, storage and handling of
flammable materials and all other standards established in chapter 12 of this
title, the applicable Kildeer building codes, and all other applicable village,
county, state, or federal regulations. In the event of a conflict between any
of the foregoing standards, the more restrictive standard shall apply to these
operations.
      Lawn and garden equipment stores (4442).
      Lawn and garden equipment stores, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Minimum lot size shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
      2.   Minimum yard area shall be provided in accordance with section
5-10-10 of this title.
      3.   If the site adjoins an R-1, R-2 or residential portion of a PD-1,
PD-2 or PD-3 district, transitional yards as required by section
5-10-9 of this title shall be provided.
      4.   Landscaping within required yards shall be provided in accordance
with a plan reviewed by the plan commission/board of appeals and approved by
the village board.
      5.   Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval.
      6.   All sales and displays and storage of goods shall be confined within
a permanent structure.
      7.   The operations of the business shall conform with the performance
standards for noise, odors, toxic and noxious material, storage and handling of
flammable materials and all other standards established in chapter 12 of this
title, the applicable Kildeer building codes, and all other applicable village,
county, state, or federal regulations. In the event of a conflict between any
of the foregoing standards, the more restrictive standard shall apply to these
operations.
      Lessors of miniwarehouses and self-storage units (531130).
      Lessors of miniwarehouses and self-storage units, subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   Minimum lot size shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
      2.   Minimum yard area shall be provided in accordance with section
5-10-10 of this title.
      3.   If the site adjoins an R-1, R-2 or residential portion of a PD-1,
PD-2 or PD-3 district, transitional yards as required by section
5-10-9 of this title shall be provided.
      4.   Landscaping within required yards shall be provided in accordance
with a plan reviewed by the plan commission/board of appeals and approved by
the village board.
      5.   Hours of operation shall be subject to review and approval.
      6.   All sales and displays and storage of goods shall be confined within
a permanent structure.
      7.   The operations of the business shall conform with the performance
standards for noise, odors, toxic and noxious material, storage and handling of
flammable materials and all other standards established in chapter 12 of this
title, the applicable Kildeer building codes, and all other applicable village,
county, state, or federal regulations. In the event of a conflict between any
of the foregoing standards, the more restrictive standard shall apply to these
operations.
      New car dealers (41110).
   B.   Telecommunications Facilities: Telecommunications facilities subject to
the following conditions:
      1.   Minimum front yard: One hundred feet (100').
      2.   Minimum side yard: Ten feet (10'); if side yard adjoins street,
minimum one hundred feet (100').
      3.   Minimum rear yard: Twenty five feet (25').
      4.   If site adjoins an R-1, R-2, or residential portion of a PD-l, PD-2,
or PD-3 district, transitional yards shall be provided. Minimum side yard:
Thirty five feet (35'); minimum rear yard: Fifty feet (50').
      5.   Maximum height: One hundred fifty feet (150'), or as recommended by
the plan commission/board of appeals, upon presentation of supporting
documentation.
      6.   Multiple use of structure is strongly encouraged.
   C.   Arts, Entertainment And Recreational Facilities:
      Bowling center (713950).
      Fitness and recreation (713940).
      Golf (713910).
   D.   Accommodation And Food Services:
      Food service (no drive-through).
      Full service (72211).
      Snack and nonalcoholic bars (722213).
   E.   Professional, Scientific And Technical Services Office Uses:
      Accounting services (5412).
      Advertising and related services (5418).
      Architectural and engineering services (5413).
      Computer systems design (5415).
      Finance and insurance (522113-5259).
      Legal services (5411).
      Management, scientific and consulting services (5416).
      Real estate agents and brokers (5312).
      Specialized design services (5415).
      Travel arrangements and reservation services (5615).
   F.   Finance:
      Automatic teller machines, subject to the following:
      1.   Safety requirements for pedestrian and vehicular circulation,
including: adequate stacking, no conflicts with other vehicles entering or
leaving the site, opportunity for a person in line to safely exit the line,
minimum conflict with pedestrians, and adequate lighting.
      Commercial banking with freestanding building (52211).
      Drive-up or drive-through tellers, subject to the following:
      1.   Safety requirements for pedestrian and vehicular circulation,
including: adequate stacking, no conflicts with other vehicles entering or
leaving the site, opportunity for a person in line to safely exit the line,
minimum conflict with pedestrians, and adequate lighting.
      Savings institution with freestanding building (52212).
   G.   Other/Miscellaneous:
      Adult uses: The intent of the adult use regulation is to protect the
public health, safety and welfare by limiting the deleterious effects of such
businesses on the adjacent properties. These regulations apply to bookstores,
movie theaters, entertainment cabarets, novelty stores and other similar uses.
Adult uses shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from the public way or from any
property not used for adult uses. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show window or other exterior element.
      2.   Landscaping within required yards shall be provided in accordance
with a plan reviewed by the plan commission/board of appeals, and approved by
the village board.
      3.   All adult uses shall be within fully enclosed buildings.
      4.   If the site adjoins an R-1, R-2, or residential portion of a PD-1,
PD-2 or PD-3 district, transitional yards as required by section
5-10-9 of this title shall be provided.
      5.   Hours of operation shall be subject to review by the plan
commission/board of appeals and approval by the village board.
      6.   No alcoholic beverages shall be served.
      7.   No adult use shall be located within eight hundred feet (800') of
any property used for residences, churches, schools, parks, or other adult use.
      8.   All dancing and other performances shall occur on a stage intended
for that purpose which is raised at least two feet (2') from the level of the
floor. No dancing or other performances shall occur closer than ten feet (10')
to any patron. In addition, no performer shall fondle, caress or otherwise
touch any patron, and no patron shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any
performer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer,
and no performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. Gratuities
may be indirectly given to performers by placing the gratuity on the stage.
      9.   No booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual
rooms used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment
shall have doors, curtains or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls or
partitioned portions, or a room or individual rooms so used shall have at least
one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to
persons in the adjacent public room. All such described areas shall be lighted
in such a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion pictures
or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but
such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the
motion pictures or other offered entertainment.
      10.   No adult use shall be open prior to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or
after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
      Outdoor storage: Outdoor storage for principal use listed elsewhere,
subject to the following conditions:
      1.   All outdoor storage areas shall be fenced with materials of wood,
stone or masonry. The fencing shall be no less than six feet (6'), nor greater
than eight feet (8') high and must completely screen the stored materials.
      2.   Nothing may be stored above the height of the fence.
      3.   The required fencing shall not protrude or extend into or beyond the
front building line.
      4.   The materials that are so stored shall be stored in compliance with
all local, state and federal standards. (Ord. 06-O-964, 5-1-2006)
5-10A-4: CONDITIONS OF USE:
All development in the LC limited commercial district shall comply with all
regulations of this chapter, and with all performance standards for noise,
odors, toxic and noxious material, storage and handling of flammable materials
and all other standards established in chapter 12 of this title, the applicable
Kildeer building codes, and all other applicable Kildeer, county, state of
Illinois, and federal codes, ordinances, statutes, and regulations. In the
event of a conflict among any of the foregoing standards, the most restrictive
standard shall apply in every instance. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-5: PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Required Plan Submittals: Every applicant for any development in the LC
limited commercial district shall file with the village the following
documents. For purposes of this chapter, all of the following documents, taken
together, shall be referred to as the "site plan", and the term site plan shall
mean each and every one of the following documents:
      1.   Location map; and
      2.   Boundary survey; and
      3.   Topographic survey; and
      4.   Site analysis; and
      5.   Site plan; and
      6.   Grading plan; and
      7.   Landscape plan; and
      8.   Photometric plan; and
      9.   Development schedule; and
      10.   Architectural drawings; and
      11.   Protective covenants; and
      12.   Utility plan; and
      13.   Traffic impact study; and
      14.   Written statement; and
      15.   Legal description; and
      16.   Fiscal impact analysis, including general assessment, tax impacts,
and effects on neighboring property values; and (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
      17.   Such others as required by the plan commission/board of appeals or
the board of trustees. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      Documents 1 through 15 shall include the information described for such
documents in section
5-14-4 of this title.
   B.   Site Plan Approval Required: Every development in the LC limited
commercial district shall require, in advance, site plan review and approval.
The site plan, and each element of it, shall be prepared in compliance with all
applicable village codes and ordinances and with the standards of subsection D
of this section. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
   C.   Review Procedure:
      1.   Preapplication Plan Review: Every applicant for development in the
LC limited commercial district shall submit all elements of the site plan for
review by the village's plan review committee prior to filing any other
application for approval of such development. The plan review committee shall
review the site plan and shall determine whether all elements of it are in a
form suitable for review by the plan commission/board of appeals. If any
element of the site plan is incomplete, then the plan review committee may
require the applicant to complete such element before referring the site plan
to the plan commission/board of appeals. The plan review committee shall refer
the site plan to the plan commission/board of appeals promptly after it is
properly completed.
      2.   Public Hearing: The plan commission/board of appeals shall conduct a
public hearing on the site plan. Notice of such hearing shall be published by
the village at the applicant's expense in a newspaper of general circulation in
the village not more than thirty (30) days nor fewer than fifteen (15) days
prior to the date of such hearing. Notice of such hearing also shall be mailed,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the applicant to all owners of
all property within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any part of the property
that is the subject of such hearing. Notice of such hearing also shall be
posted on said property by the applicant, in form and location approved by the
village, continuously for at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing.
      3.   Plan Commission/Board Of Appeals Findings And Recommendations: The
plan commission/board of appeals shall submit written findings and
recommendations regarding the site plan to the board of trustees. (Ord. 93-O-
648, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      4.   Board Of Trustees Review: The board of trustees shall review the
site plan at a public meeting and in accordance with the provisions of
subsection D of this section. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
   D.   Standards For Site Plan Disapproval:
      1.   Standards: The board of trustees shall not disapprove, and the plan
commission/board of appeals shall not recommend disapproval of, a site plan
submitted pursuant to this section except on the basis of specific written
findings directed to one or more of the following standards: (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-
7-1993; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         a.   The application is incomplete in specified particulars or
contains or reveals violations of this title or any other applicable
regulations that the applicant has failed or refused to supply or correct.
         b.   The application is submitted in connection with another
application, the approval of which is a condition precedent to the necessity
for site plan review, and the applicant has failed to secure approval of that
application.
         c.   The site plan fails to adequately meet specified standards
required by this title with respect to the proposed use or development,
including special use standards where applicable.
         d.   The proposed site plan interferes with easements or rights of
way.
         e.   The proposed site plan unreasonably destroys, damages,
detrimentally modifies, or interferes with the enjoyment of significant
natural, topographical, or physical features of the site.
         f.   The proposed site plan creates undue traffic congestion or
hazards in the public streets, or the circulation elements of the proposed site
plan unreasonably create hazards to safety on or off site or disjointed,
inefficient pedestrian or vehicular circulation paths on or off site.
         g.   The screening of the site does not provide adequate shielding
from or for nearby uses.
         h.   The proposed structures or landscaping are unreasonably lacking
amenities in relation to, or are incompatible with, nearby structures and uses.
         i.   The proposed site plan makes inadequate provision for the
creation or preservation of open space or for its continued maintenance.
         j.   The proposed site plan creates unreasonable drainage or erosion
problems or fails to fully and satisfactorily integrate the site into the
overall existing and planned drainage system serving the village.
         k.   The proposed site plan places unwarranted or unreasonable burdens
on specified utility systems serving the site or area or fails to fully and
satisfactorily integrate the site's utilities into the overall existing and
planned utility systems serving the village.
         l.   The proposed site plan has inappropriate adverse impacts on the
value of adjacent property or on village economics generally.
         m.   The proposed site plan otherwise adversely affects the public
health, safety, or general welfare. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
      2.   Alternative Approaches: In citing any of the foregoing standards,
other than those of subsections D1a and D1b of this section, as the basis for
disapproving a site plan, the plan commission/board of appeals or the board of
trustees shall suggest alternate approaches that could be developed to avoid
the specified deficiency or shall state the reasons why such deficiency cannot
be avoided consistent with the applicant's objectives. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-
1993; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   E.   Effect Of Site Plan Approval: Approval of a site plan shall not
authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or
structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing
of applications for any permits or approvals that may be required by the codes
and ordinances of the village including, but not limited to, a building permit.
      Every approved site plan shall be filed with the village administrator
and the development of the site shall be in substantial conformity with such
approved and filed site plan.
   F.   Limitation On Site Plan Approval: Subject to an extension of time
granted by the board of trustees, after public hearing, no site plan approval
by the board of trustees shall be valid for a period longer than two (2) years
or the time period specifically established in the site plan, whichever is
longer, unless a building permit is issued and construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   G.   Adjustments To Site Plan During Development:
      1.   Minor Adjustments: During the development of the site, the village
administrator, with the concurrence of the building and zoning committee of the
board of trustees, may authorize minor adjustments to a site plan approved by
the board of trustees when such adjustments appear necessary in light of
technical or engineering considerations first discovered during actual
development. Such minor adjustments shall be limited to the following:
         a.   Altering the location of any one structure or group of structures
by not more than twenty feet (20') or one-fourth (1/4) of the distance shown on
the approved site plan between such structure or structures and any other
structure or any vehicular circulation element of any boundary of the site
plan, whichever is less, but not affecting any required yard.
         b.   Altering the location of any circulation element by not more than
twenty feet (20') or one-fourth (1/4) of the distance shown on the approved
site plan between such circulation element and any structure, whichever is
less, but not affecting any required yard.
         c.   Altering the location of any open space by not more than fifty
feet (50'), but not affecting any required yard.
      Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of
this title and the site plan as approved, shall be the minimum necessary to
overcome the particular difficulty, and shall not be approved if they would
result in a violation of any standard or requirement of this title. (Ord. 93-O-
648, 9-7-1993)
      2.   Major Adjustments: Any adjustment to a site plan approved by the
board of trustees that is not authorized by subsection G1 of this section shall
be considered to be a major adjustment and shall be granted only after
application to and approval by the board of trustees, after public hearing by
and recommendation of the plan commission/board of trustees. Major adjustments
to a site plan shall be granted only by an ordinance duly adopted by the board
of trustees. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   H.   Amendments To Site Plan Following Completion Of Development: After a
site is developed in accordance with an approved site plan, the approved site
plan may be amended, varied, or altered in the same manner and subject to the
same limitations as provided for original approval of site plans. (Ord. 93-O-
648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-6: MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH:
No lot or parcel of land in the LC limited commercial district shall be less
than five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet in area. Every such lot or
parcel of land shall have a minimum width at the building line of four hundred
feet (400'). (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-7: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
The height of any structure shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories,
nor shall it exceed thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-8: MINIMUM REQUIRED YARDS:
   A.   Front Yard: One hundred feet (100'), except only as provided in
subsection D of this section.
   B.   Side Yard: One hundred feet (100'), except only as provided in
subsections D and E of this section.
   C.   Rear Yard: One hundred feet (100'), except only as provided in
subsections D and E of this section.
   D.   Yard Abutting State Owned Right Of Way: Fifty feet (50').
   E.   Interior Side Or Rear Yards Abutting Property Zoned In B Business
District Or LC Limited Commercial District: Twenty five feet (25').
   F.   No Obstructions; Exception: Notwithstanding any other provision of this
zoning ordinance or any other Kildeer code or ordinance, no structure,
building, or use of any kind shall be located in a required yard, except only
that driveway crossings may traverse a required yard that abuts a public street
so long as such driveway is built as nearly perpendicular as possible to the
required yard. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-9: MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACK:
All buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from every lot line, and such additional distance as may be required to
comply with applicable health and safety regulations such as installation of
fire lanes and the like. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-10: MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE:
The maximum lot coverage in the LC limited commercial district shall be sixty
percent (60%).
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them:
LOT AREA: The total land area included within lot lines, excluding, however,
water areas, land areas with natural resources restrictions on development
(such as floodplains, wetlands, and lowland (hydric) conservancy soils), and
required yards abutting lot lines in residential districts.
LOT COVERAGE: The percentage of lot area covered by any building or structure
or any impermeable surface other than public sidewalks or water bodies. (Ord.
93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-11: MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO:
The maximum floor area ratio in the LC limited commercial district shall be
0.18. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them:
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of all stories
of a building or of such area devoted to a specific use, measured from the
exterior face of exterior walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot
area of the lot on which they are located.
LOT AREA: See section
5-10A-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-12: MINIMUM BUILDING SPACING:
The minimum space between buildings in the LC limited commercial district shall
be one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-13: MULTIPLE BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this zoning ordinance or any other
Kildeer code or ordinance, more than one building and structure may be
permitted on one lot or parcel of land in the LC limited commercial district
provided that the development, taken as a whole, complies with all regulations
of this chapter and every other applicable provision of this title. (Ord. 93-O-
648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-14: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Required One Hundred Foot Yards: Each required one hundred foot (100')
wide yard shall include all of the following landscaping materials and berming
for each one hundred feet (100') of length or increment thereof:
      1.   Eight (8) three inch (3") caliper canopy trees, and
      2.   Eight (8) two inch (2") caliper understory trees, and
      3.   Sixteen (16) six foot (6') tall evergreen trees, and
      4.   Fifty (50) three foot (3') tall deciduous or evergreen shrubs, and
      5.   Minimum five foot (5') berm varying in height from five feet (5') to
ten feet (10').
   B.   Required Fifty Foot Yards: Each required fifty foot (50') wide yard
shall include all of the following landscaping materials and berming for each
fifty feet (50') of length or increment thereof:
      1.   Two (2) three inch (3") caliper canopy trees, and
      2.   Two (2) two inch (2") caliper understory trees, and
      3.   Two (2) six foot (6') tall evergreen trees, and
      4.   Twenty (20) three foot (3') tall deciduous or evergreen shrubs, and
      5.   Minimum one foot (1') to three foot (3') high undulating berm.
   C.   Foundation Plantings: Trees and shrubs shall be installed along the
front and side elevations of commercial and office buildings to provide
articulation, provide shade, and to enhance the pedestrian environment.
   D.   Definition Of "Caliper": For purposes of this chapter, the term
"caliper" shall mean the diameter of a tree trunk measured six inches (6")
above ground level for trees less than four inches (4") in diameter at ground
level and measured twelve inches (12") above ground level for all other trees.
   E.   Maintenance Of Required Landscaping: All landscaping required by this
section shall be maintained in good condition at all times. All dead, diseased,
or damaged plant material shall be removed promptly and shall be replaced
promptly with live plant material in good condition and in quantities and sizes
so that the maximum quantities and sizes established in this section are
maintained at all times. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993)
5-10A-15: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW:
Every proposed development in the LC limited commercial district shall require
architectural design review and approval. Notwithstanding any other Kildeer
code or ordinance, such architectural design review and approval shall be
conducted by the board of trustees after review at public hearing by, and a
recommendation of, the plan commission/board of appeals. No site plan shall be
approved and no building permit shall be granted for development in the LC
limited commercial district except after approval by the board of trustees of
the architectural design of the proposed development. The purpose of the design
review provided in this section is to ensure that all development in the LC
limited commercial district shall be compatible with existing development in
Kildeer and with all abutting and adjacent residential development. The plan
commission/board of appeals and the board of trustees, during their review,
shall apply these principles and shall, in addition, be guided by the following
standards and considerations: (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-
7-2005)
   A.   Quality Of Design And Site Development: New and existing buildings and
structures and appurtenances thereof which are constructed, reconstructed,
materially altered, repaired, or moved shall be evaluated under the following
quality of design and site development guidelines:
      1.   Open Spaces: The quality of open spaces between buildings and in
setback spaces between street and facade.
      2.   Materials: The quality of materials and their relationship to those
in existing adjacent structures. Every building shall be built with equal
quality materials on all sides of the building.
      3.   General Design: The quality of the design in general and its
relationship to the overall character of the neighborhood.
      4.   General Site Development: The quality of the site development in
terms of landscaping, recreation, pedestrian access, automobile access,
parking, servicing of the property, and impact on vehicular traffic patterns
and conditions on site and in the vicinity of the site, and the retention of
trees and shrubs to the maximum extent possible.
   B.   Visual Compatibility: New buildings and structures, existing buildings
and structures and appurtenances thereof which are constructed, reconstructed,
materially altered, repaired, or moved, shall be visually compatible in terms
of the following guidelines:
      1.   Height: The height of the proposed buildings and structures shall be
visually compatible with adjacent buildings.
      2.   Proportion Of Front Facade: The relationship of the width to the
height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible with buildings,
public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
      3.   Proportion Of Openings: The relationship of the width to height of
windows shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to
which the building is visually related.
      4.   Rhythm Of Solids To Voids In Front Facades: The relationship of
solids to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually compatible
with buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
      5.   Rhythm Of Spacing And Buildings On Streets: The relationship of a
building or structure to the open space between it and adjoining buildings or
structures shall be visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and
places to which it is visually related.
      6.   Rhythm Of Entrance Porch And Other Projections: The relationship of
entrances and other projections to sidewalks shall be visually compatible with
the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
      7.   Relationship Of Materials And Texture: The relationship of the
materials and texture of the facade shall be visually compatible with the
predominant materials used in the buildings and structures to which it is
visually related.
      8.   Roof Shapes: The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related.
      9.   Walls Of Continuity: Building facades and appurtenances such as
walls, fences, and landscape masses shall, when it is a characteristic of the
area, form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to ensure visual
compatibility with the buildings, public ways, and places to which such
elements are visually related.
      10.   Scale Of Building: The size and mass of buildings and structures in
relation to open spaces, windows, door openings, porches, and balconies shall
be visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which
they are visually related.
      11.   Directional Expression Of Front Elevation: A building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is
visually related in its directional character, whether this be vertical
character, horizontal character, or nondirectional character. (Ord. 93-O-648,
9-7-1993)
   C.   Special Considerations For Existing Buildings: For existing buildings,
the plan commission/board of appeals and the board of trustees shall consider
the availability of materials, technology, and craftsmanship to duplicate
existing styles, patterns, textures, and overall detailing. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-
7-1993; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
5-10A-16: DEVELOPMENT PROHIBITED IN DRAINAGEWAYS:
   A.   Determination Of Drainageway: The existence of any drainageway from
time to time shall be determined as follows:
      1.   Land Near Streams: All land, except land designated as a floodway,
on either side of and within fifty feet (50') of the centerline of any
intermittent or perennial stream shown on the U.S. geological survey's 71/
2 minute quadrangle maps of the village.
      2.   Land Near Swales: All land, except land designated as a floodway, on
either side of and within twenty five feet (25') of the centerline of any swale
identified by topographic and hydrologic analyses as serving as a principal
storm water outfall, rather than merely as a tributary for the subbasin of a
subwatershed area.
      3.   Soil Classes: All land included within the following soils classes
in the soils maps provided by the U.S. department of agriculture as published
in "Soil Survey Of Lake County, Illinois", issued September 1970, and as
recorded on the village soils maps:
Soil Symbol Soil Name
Soil Symbol Soil Name
67          Harpster silty clay loam
103         Houghton muck
W103        Houghton muck, west
107         Sawmill silty clay loam
153         Pella silty clay loam
232         Ashkum silty clay loam
330         Peotone silty clay loam
W330        Peotone silty clay loam, wet
465         Montgomery silty clay
513         Granby load fine sand
 
      4.   Updated Classification: An update to the 1970 soil survey of Lake
County on a site specific basis may be provided by an applicant to the village
for review and action for possible mapping corrections and soils
reclassification. Any such soil mapping and classification survey must be
prepared by an Illinois certified professional soil scientist/soil classifier.
The village engineer may approve minor changes from the 1970 soil survey of
Lake County of up to twenty feet (20') in soil boundary lines and up to five
percent (5%) of the area originally shown as drainageway soils. Changes greater
than those indicated above shall be considered major changes and the Village
Engineer shall so report to the Village Board, which may accept, modify, or
reject the proposed reclassification.
   B.   Development in Drainageway Prohibited: No development shall be
permitted in any drainageway; provided, however, that the crossing of a
drainageway for access or utility purposes may be authorized by issuance of a
special use permit if, but only if, such crossing is designed to minimize to
the fullest possible extent the disruption and operation of such drainageway.
(Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-93)
5-10A-17: ACCESS RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Access from Residential Districts: No access shall be permitted to any
property zoned in the LC Limited Commercial District across any property zoned
in a residential district.
   B.   Access from Streets in Other Jurisdictions: No access shall be
permitted to any property zoned in the LC Limited Commercial District from any
street or right of way under the jurisdiction of a governmental body or agency
without the written approval thereof of such governmental body or agency.
   C.   Access from Route 12: Every access to any property zoned in the LC
Limited Commercial District directly from Route 12 shall be limited to right-
in, right-out turning movements only and, in addition, shall require approval
of the Illinois Department of Transportation and any other agency with
jurisdiction in advance of any Kildeer approval.
   D.   Access from Old Rand Road: Any access to any property zoned in the LC
Limited Commercial District from Old Rand Road from Route 12 via Old Rand Road
shall require a special use permit and, in addition, shall require approval of
the Illinois Department of Transportation, the Village of Lake Zurich, and any
other agency or local government with jurisdiction in advance of any Kildeer
approval.
   E.   Access from Cuba Road: No access shall be permitted to any property
zoned in the LC Limited Commercial District from Cuba Road. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-
7-93)
5-10A-18: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
Chapter 13 of this Title and shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   No Parking or Loading in Required Yards: No off-street parking or
loading shall be located in any required yard.
   B.   Curbing: Concrete curbs shall be constructed around the perimeter of
all off-street parking and off-street loading facilities.
   C.   Islands: Curbed, landscaped islands shall be provided in all parking
lots containing twenty (20) or more spaces in accordance with the following
standards:
      1.   Width: Landscaped islands shall be a minimum of six feet (6') wide,
as measured between backs of curbs.
      2.   Number: One island shall be installed for each fifteen (15) off-
street parking spaces.
      3.   Landscaping: Landscaped islands shall be planted with not fewer than
one shade tree and with groundcover or shrubs. Shrubs shall be low growing.
Trees shall be high-branched so as to maintain a clear line of sight for
motorists that is between three feet (3') and five feet (5') above ground
level. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-93)
5-10A-19: SIGNS:
See Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-93)
5-10A-20: ROOF-MOUNTED MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Screening Required: All roof-mounted mechanical equipment, including
but not limited to heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning units, shall be
fully screened from view on all sides of the building, using the same
construction materials as used for the principal facades of the building on
which such equipment is located.
   B.   Screening Methods: Screening shall be accomplished by the principal
building roof structure, parapet walls, or a penthouse. The height of the
parapet walls or roof structure shall equal the height of the tallest rooftop
element installed on the building. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-93)
5-10A-21: TRASH RECEPTACLES:
   A.   Location; Screening: Trash receptacles shall be located behind, or
along the interior side of, the principal building or buildings they serve and
shall be completely enclosed by masonry walls and gates no less than the height
of the receptacles. Construction materials for the walls and gates shall be
compatible with the materials used to construct the nearest principal
structure.
   B.   Landscaping: When a structure that encloses trash receptacles is
visible to the public, landscaping shall be installed around the structure to
soften its appearance. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-93)
5-10A-22: UTILITY METERS; TRANSFORMERS:
Wall-mounted utility meters and ground-supported transformers shall be painted
to match the principal buildings they serve. If they are visible to the public,
then the meters and transformers shall be screened by landscaping at least
equal in height to the tallest meter or transformer. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-93)
5-10A-23: LIGHTING STANDARDS:
Whenever buildings or off-street parking spaces are used at night, lighting
shall be provided as follows:
   A.   Uniformity: Lighting used along streets and rights of way and
individual lots shall be uniform in design.
   B.   Level of Illumination: An average of one minimum to three (3) maximum
foot candles of illumination shall be maintained everywhere within the parking
lot.
   C.   Ratio Study: An applicant shall provide maximum to minimum and average
to minimum uniformity ratios demonstrating that an even distribution of light
will be provided everywhere within the parking lot.
   D.   Standards; Luminare Cutoffs: Light standards and luminaries shall be so
designed and placed to:
      1.   Confine light to the property. Light spillage in excess of 0.5 foot
candles beyond the property line shall be prohibited, except at entrances to
and from commercial or office property.
      2.   Prevent glare visible from residential properties and street rights
of way.
   E.   Security Lighting: Security lighting installed on commercial or office
buildings shall be shielded to fully cover lamps and to cast light directly
downward. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-93)
5-10A-24: OUTDOOR STORAGE RESTRICTED:
All outdoor storage of materials shall be prohibited in the LC Limited
Commercial District, except only that live plant materials may be visible from
outside of the structure in which they are located. (Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-93)
CHAPTER 10B
OFFICE AND RESEARCH DISTRICT (O&R)
SECTION:
5-10B-1: Purpose
5-10B-2: Permitted Uses
5-10B-3: Special Uses
5-10B-4: Conditions Of Use
5-10B-5: Minimum Lot Area
5-10B-6: Signs
5-10B-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
5-10B-8: Building Height
5-10B-9: Transitional Yards
5-10B-10: Yard Areas
5-10B-11: Maximum Lot Coverage
5-10B-12: Lighting Standards
5-10B-13: Landscaping Requirements
5-10B-14: Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment
5-10B-15: Trash Receptacles
5-10B-16: Utility Meters; Transformers
5-10B-17: Rand Road
5-10B-1: PURPOSE:
An office and research district (O&R) is established to allow office and
research development and accessory uses at appropriate locations within the
village. The uses allowed within this district are intended to serve area
residents, and enhance the economic base of the village. The O&R office and
research district should be located along roadways where adequate access can be
provided without disrupting residential areas. The visibility afforded to
parcels along these roadways requires site and building design that enhance the
economic viability of the business and aesthetic quality of the public right of
way. Impacts on existing and future residences, in and adjacent to the village,
should be further minimized by the provision of appropriate perimeter buffers
and by promoting design in this district which is compatible with the character
of Kildeer and viable office and research development. (Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-
2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses, and no others, shall be permitted as of right in the O&R
office and research district. In interpreting the use designations in this
chapter, references to the North American industry classification system,
United States, 2007, where applicable, are given in parentheses following each
use:
   A.   Offices:
      Offices, business and professional, not elsewhere specified.
   B.   Finance And Insurance:
      Finance and insurance (52) except see special use provisions for
freestanding commercial banking and savings institutions.
   C.   Real Estate, Rental And Leasing:
      Activities related to real estate (5313).
      Lessors of real estate (5311), except miniwarehouses and self-storage
units (53113).
      Offices of real estate agents and brokers (5312).
   D.   Professional, Scientific And Technical Services:
      Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping, and payroll services (5412).
      Advertising and related services (5418).
      Architectural, engineering, and related services (5413).
      Computer system design and related services (5415).
      Legal services (5411).
      Management of companies and enterprises (55).
      Management, scientific, and technical consulting services (5416).
      Marketing research and public opinion polling (54191).
      Photographic services (54192).
      Scientific research and development services (5417).
      Specialized design services (5414).
      Translation and interpretation services (54193).
   E.   Administration And Support Services:
      Business support services (5614).
      Employment services (5613).
      Facilities support services (5612).
      Investigation and security services (5616).
      Office administrative services (5611).
      Other support services (5619).
      Travel arrangement and reservation services (5615).
   F.   Educational Services:
      Business schools and computer and management training (6114).
      Educational support services (6117).
      Other schools and instruction (6116).
      Technical and trade schools (6115).
   G.   Healthcare And Social Assistance:
      Home healthcare services (6216).
      Individual and family services (6241).
      Medical and diagnostic laboratories (6215).
      Offices of dentists (6212).
      Offices of other health practitioners (6213).
      Offices of physicians (6211).
      Outpatient care services (6214).
      Vocational and rehabilitation services (6243).
   H.   Accessory Retail: Accessory retail uses which are incidental to the
primary O&R use and shall be for the convenience of the tenants and employees
of the building or structure in which it is located. (Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-2011,
eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses, and no others, may be permitted by special use permit in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 17 of this title. In interpreting the
use designations in this chapter, references to the North American industry
classification system, United States, 2007, where applicable, are given in
parentheses following each use:
   A.   Retail Trade:
      Retail trade uses as allowed in the B zoning district provided, however,
that any such use shall be compatible with and consistent with existing office
uses in the vicinity of the proposed use.
   B.   Finance And Insurance:
      Bank in freestanding building with drive-through and/or external ATM
(522110) with safety requirements for pedestrian and vehicular circulation,
including: adequate stacking, no conflicts with other vehicles entering or
leaving the site, opportunity for a person in line to safely exit the line,
minimum conflict with pedestrians, and adequate lighting.
      Savings institution in freestanding building with drive-through and/or
external ATM (522120) with safety requirements for pedestrian and vehicular
circulation, including: adequate stacking, no conflicts with other vehicles
entering or leaving the site, opportunity for a person in line to safely exit
the line, minimum conflict with pedestrians, and adequate lighting.
   C.   Healthcare And Social Assistance:
      Child daycare services (6244).
   D.   Arts, Entertainment And Recreation:
      Fitness and recreational sports centers (713940).
   E.   Accommodation And Food Services:
      Full service restaurants (722110).
      Hotels and motels (721110).
      Limited service restaurants (722211).
      Snack and nonalcoholic beverage bars (722213).
   F.   Other Services:
      Dry cleaning and laundry except coin operated (812320).
   G.   Planned Business Development:
      All new development or redevelopment of properties adjacent to Rand Road
shall be processed as planned developments, regardless of parcel size. (Ord.
11-O-008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-4: CONDITIONS OF USE:
All uses permitted in this district shall be subject to the following
conditions:
   A.   There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products
other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to the business
conducted on the same premises.
   B.   Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to
odor, dust, smoke, noise or vibrations or other similar causes. (Ord. 11-O-008,
3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
No lot or parcel of land used for business purposes shall be less than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in area where municipal sewer and water utilities
are provided and not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet where such
utilities are not provided. Further, such lot or parcel of land shall have a
minimum width at the building line of sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-
2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-6: SIGNS:
See chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
chapter 13 of this title and conforming to the following:
   A.   Off street loading shall not be located in a front or corner side yard.
   B.   Concrete curbs shall be constructed around the perimeter of all off
street parking and off street loading facilities.
   C.   Curbed, landscaped islands shall be provided in off street parking lots
containing twenty (20) or more spaces in accordance with the following:
      1.   Landscaped islands shall be a minimum of six feet (6') wide, as
measured between backs of curbs.
      2.   One island shall be installed for each fifteen (15) off street
parking spaces. Landscaped islands shall be planted with not less than one
shade tree and ground cover and/or shrubs.
      3.   Shrubs installed in islands shall be low growing, and trees shall be
high branched so as to maintain a clear line of sight for motorists that is
between three feet (3') and five feet (5') aboveground. (Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-
2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The height of any structure shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories,
nor shall it exceed thirty five feet (35'), except as provided herein. (Ord.
11-O-008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-9: TRANSITIONAL YARDS:
Where an O&R district adjoins a residence district (R-1, R-2 and residential
portion of PD-1, PD-2, and PD-3), transitional yards shall be provided as
follows:
   A.   Where an O&R district fronts on a street and at least fifty percent
(50%) of the property frontage directly across the street is in a residence
district, there shall be provided a front yard setback in the O&R district of
not less than thirty feet (30') in depth. No off street parking spaces may be
located in said O&R district front yard setback.
   B.   In an O&R district where a side yard is adjacent to a side yard of
property in a residence district, there shall be provided a side yard setback
in the O&R district of not less than thirty five feet (35') in depth. No off
street parking spaces may be located in said O&R district side yard setback.
   C.   In an O&R district where a side yard is adjacent to a rear yard of
property in a residence district, there shall be provided a side yard setback
in the O&R district of not less than thirty five feet (35') in depth. Off
street parking spaces may be located in said O&R district side yard setback but
shall not be closer than fifteen feet (15') to the lot line.
   D.   In an O&R district where a rear yard is adjacent to a side yard or rear
yard of property in a residence district, there shall be provided a rear yard
setback in the O&R district of not less than fifty feet (50') in depth. Off
street parking spaces may be located in said O&R district rear yard setback but
shall not be closer than thirty feet (30') to the lot line.
   E.   No accessory uses or structures shall be permitted in any transitional
yard setbacks.
   F.   "Landscape buffer" is defined as combination of berm, densely planted
compact hedge and evergreen vegetation.
   G.   A landscape buffer shall be installed in all transitional yard setbacks
in accordance with a plan reviewed and approved by the plan commission/board of
appeals. (Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-10: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building structures or
enlargement:
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30'). Said yard
shall be entirely green space with no parking permitted.
   B.   Side Yards: There shall be two (2) side yards each of which shall be
not less than ten feet (10') wide and a side yard adjoining a street shall not
be less than thirty feet (30') wide.
   C.   Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty five feet (25'). (Ord.
11-O-008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-11: MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE:
The lot coverage of structures, off street parking and off street loading shall
not exceed sixty percent (60%) of each individual lot. (Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-
2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-12: LIGHTING STANDARDS:
Whenever off street parking spaces are used at night, parking lot lighting
shall be provided as follows:
   A.   Lighting used along streets and rights of way and individual lots shall
be uniform in design.
   B.   An average of one to three (3) foot-candles shall be maintained within
the parking lot to assure safe levels of illumination.
   C.   Maximum to minimum and average to minimum uniformity ratios shall
demonstrate that an even distribution of light will be provided within the
parking lot.
   D.   Light standards and luminaires shall be so designed and placed to:
      1.   Confine light to the property. Light spillage in excess of five-
tenths (0.5) foot-candle beyond the property line shall be prohibited, except
at entrances to and from the commercial or office property.
      2.   Prevent glare visible from residential properties and street rights
of way.
   E.   Security lighting installed on commercial or office buildings shall be
shielded to fully cover lamps and to cast light downward. (Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-
2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-13: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Perimeter Yards: Shade trees, which average not less than forty feet
(40') on center, shall be installed in ten foot (10') wide perimeter yards
which abut properties planned for, or developed with, existing commercial or
office uses.
   B.   Foundation Plantings: Trees and shrubs shall be installed along the
front and side elevations of commercial or office buildings to provide
articulation, provide shade, and to enhance the pedestrian environment.
   C.   Plant Material Sizes: Trees and shrubs shall be installed at sizes not
less than the following:
      1.   Evergreen trees: Eight feet (8') to ten feet (10') in height.
      2.   Shade trees: Three inches (3") to four inches (4") in caliper, as
measured six inches (6") above grade.
      3.   Ornamental trees: Eight feet (8') to ten feet (10') in height.
      4.   Shrubs: Not less than twenty four inches (24") in height, unless
used for screening, in which cases shrubs three feet (3') to four feet (4') in
height shall be required. (Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-14: ROOF MOUNTED MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT:
   A.   All roof mounted mechanical equipment including, but not limited to,
heating, ventilating, and air conditioning units (HVAC), shall be fully
screened from public view on all sides of the building.
   B.   Screening shall be accomplished by the roof structure or parapet walls.
The height of the parapet walls or roof structure shall equal the height of the
tallest rooftop element installed on the building. Such screening shall be
designed to blend with and complement the architecture of the building. (Ord.
11-O-008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-15: TRASH RECEPTACLES:
   A.   Trash receptacles shall be located only in a rear or interior side
yard, enclosed by a masonry wall not less than the height of the containers,
and provided with gates to contain trash.
   B.   Where visible to the public, landscaping shall be installed around the
enclosure to soften its appearance. (Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-16: UTILITY METERS; TRANSFORMERS:
Wall mounted utility meters and ground supported transformers shall be painted
to match the building. If visible to the public, meters and transformers shall
be screened by landscaping equal in height to the tallest meter or transformer.
(Ord. 11-O-008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
5-10B-17: RAND ROAD:
All new development or redevelopment of properties adjacent to Rand Road shall
be processed as planned developments, regardless of parcel size. (Ord. 11-O-
008, 3-15-2011, eff. 3-15-2011)
CHAPTER 11
FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
5-11-1: Definitions
5-11-2: Permitted And Special Uses
5-11-3: Adjacent Areas
5-11-4: Procedure On Permits And Appeals
5-11-5: Municipal Liability
5-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
FLOODPLAIN: All areas with an elevation greater than the normal water level or
pool elevation, but equal to or lower than the flood base elevation, and also
shall include any land of higher elevation, having an area less than the
minimum residential lot size established for the district in which it is
located and which is surrounded by lands having an elevation equal to or less
than the flood base elevation.
FLOODPLAIN VERIFICATION: The exact limits of any area of the village shown to
be within the floodplain may be determined and verified upon presentation of
documentation by an Illinois registered land surveyor or engineer.
MAPS: Areas within the village are included in the floodplain, in accordance
with definition of "floodplain", and so designated on the federal emergency
management agency's 1980 flood insurance study and its related 1981 floodway
and rate maps, which is hereby incorporated by reference to the extent of
territory within the village covered by such maps. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976;
amd. Ord. 84-O-385, 5-7-1984)
5-11-2: PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES:
All lands deemed to be in the floodplain shall be subject to the regulations of
this section.
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted in the floodplain:
      Farming/agricultural.
      Hiking trails and bridle paths.
      Improvements or additions to buildings or structures to be located wholly
above the flood base elevation in instances where an Illinois registered land
surveyor has certified that the top of the existing foundation is above the
flood base elevation and that the property that the improvements or additions
are to be put upon shall be certified not to be in the floodplain area.
      Nurseries or orchards.
      Recreation, such as, but not limited to, arboreta, wildlife sanctuaries
or woodland area.
      Storm water detention basins.
      Utility lines (underground).
      All activities incidental to and customarily associated with any of the
foregoing. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
   B.   Special Uses: The following may be permitted in the floodplain upon
approval of the village board of trustees after the plan commission/board of
appeals has reviewed the uses or changes being considered and its
recommendations submitted thereto: improvements, structures and buildings,
provided all of the following conditions are met: (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976;
amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      1.   The proposed site of the building or structure shall be filled so
that the elevation of the top of the foundation for the building, improvement
or structure is at least one foot (1') above the flood base elevation.
      2.   Basements, cellars or crawl spaces shall be made of concrete
structurally adequate, poured in place with no openings below an elevation one
foot (1') above the flood base elevation unless surrounded by a watertight area
whose top is not lower than the aforesaid minimum elevation, all in accordance
with the existing building code of the village 1 .
      3.   When fill or structure is used to meet any elevation requirements
set forth in these regulations, any flood reservoirs or water retention basins
shall be constructed toward the source of floodwater of such dimensions as to
contain a volume of water equal to that displaced by that portion of the fill
or structure below the flood base elevation. All construction shall be in
accordance with the official village standards. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4 of this code.
5-11-3: ADJACENT AREAS:
Regulations of the areas less than one foot (1') above the flood base elevation
shall be as follows:
   A.   Conditions Of Use: All lands adjacent to the floodplain and less than
one foot (1') above the level of the flood base elevation are subject to the
regulations of section
5-11-2 of this chapter, unless said lands are filled and elevation thereof
raised to an elevation one foot (1') or more above the flood base elevation.
   B.   Construction Within Adjacent Areas: In the event said lands are filled
and elevation thereof raised to an elevation of one foot (1') or more above the
flood base elevation, or shall be less than one foot (1') above the flood base
elevation, no building or structure shall be constructed or moved within said
area unless all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The proposed site of the building or structure shall be filled so
that the elevation of the top of the foundation for the building, improvement
or structure is at least one foot (1') above the flood base elevation.
      2.   Basements, cellars or crawl spaces shall be made of concrete
structurally adequate, poured in place with no openings below an elevation one
foot (1') above the flood base elevation unless surrounded by a watertight area
whose top is not lower than the aforesaid minimum elevation, all in accordance
with the existing building code of the village.
      3.   When fill or structure is used to meet any elevation requirements
set forth in these regulations, any flood reservoirs or water retention basins
shall be constructed toward the source of floodwater of such dimensions as to
contain a volume of water equal to that displaced by that portion of the fill
or structure below the flood base elevation. All construction shall be in
accordance with the official village standards. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-11-4: PROCEDURE ON PERMITS AND APPEALS:
The procedure for issuance of building permits, special use permits, and
appeals shall be those provided for in this code. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-11-5: MUNICIPAL LIABILITY:
The granting of a zoning approval of a subdivision plan in any floodplain area
shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the
corporate authorities of the village, or by an officer or employee thereof, of
the practicability or safety of any structure, use or plan, and shall create no
liability upon, or cause of action against the village, any officer or
employee, for damage which may result therefrom. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
CHAPTER 12
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
5-12-1: Jurisdiction
5-12-2: Noise
5-12-3: Vibration
5-12-4: Smoke and Particulate Matter
5-12-5: Toxic Matter
5-12-6: Odorous Matter
5-12-7: Fire and Explosion
5-12-8: Glare
5-12-9: Radiation Hazards
5-12-10: Water Pollution
5-12-1: JURISDICTION:
Any use hereafter established in any zoning district in the Village shall be
used and maintained in such a manner as to comply with applicable performance
standards as hereinafter set forth governing noise, smoke, particulate matter,
toxic and noxious matter, odors, fire and explosive hazards, vibration,
radiation or glare or heat, for the district in which such use shall be
located; and no use already established on the effective date hereof shall be
so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with applicable
performance standards for the district in which such use is located.
5-12-2: NOISE:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include but not
be limited to the requirements as outlined in the publication entitled "State
of Illinois Noise Pollution Control Regulations", dated August 9, 1973, as
amended.
5-12-3: VIBRATION:
   A.   In any district, no activity or operation shall cause or create
earthborne vibrations in excess of the displacement values given below:
Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument or complement of
instruments capable of simultaneously measuring in three (3) mutually
perpendicular directions. The maximum vector shall be less than the vibration
displacement permitted. For the purpose of this Title, steady state vibrations
are vibrations which are continuous, or vibration in discrete impulses more
frequent than one hundred (100) per minute. Discrete impulses which do not
exceed one hundred (100) per minute shall be considered impact vibrations.
   B.   The maximum permitted displacements shall be determined in each
district by the following formula:
 
D = K
f
D = displacement in inches
K = a constant to be determined by reference to the following tables
f = the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground expressed in
    cycles per second
 
   C.   The maximum earth displacement permitted at the points described below
shall be determined by use of the formula in the preceding subsection B and the
appropriate K constant shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Values of K to be Used in Vibration Formula
Location                               
In any neighboring lot --             K
Steady state                          0.008
Impulsive                             0.015
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.037
In any residence district --           
Steady state                          0.003
Impulsive                             0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.015
 
5-12-4: SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include but not
be limited to the requirements as outlined in the publication entitled "State
of Illinois Smoke and Particulate Matter", adopted by the Illinois Air
Pollution Control Board and dated April 14, 1972.
5-12-5: TOXIC MATTER:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include but not
be limited to the requirements as outlined in the publication entitled "State
of Illinois Toxic Matter", adopted by the Illinois Air Pollution Control Board
and dated April 14, 1972.
5-12-6: ODOROUS MATTER:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include but not
be limited to the requirements as outlined in the publication entitled State of
Illinois Odorous Matter, adopted by the Illinois Air Pollution Control Board
and dated April 14, 1972.
5-12-7: FIRE AND EXPLOSION:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, State Fire Marshall, County of Lake
or any other agency.
5-12-8: GLARE:
   A.   In any district, any operation or activity producing glare at night
shall be conducted so that direct and/or indirect illumination from the source
of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half (1/2)
foot candle when measured in the residence district.
   B.   Flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled or shielded
so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines. When street lighting produces
illumination in excess of one foot candle at any point in the residence
district, the contribution by light sources from within the industrial use
measured at the same point shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the street
lighting.
5-12-9: RADIATION HAZARDS:
   A.   Release Outside Property Lines: In any district the release of radio-
active materials or the emission of ionizing radiation outside of property
lines shall be in accordance with the standards set forth from time to time by
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include but
not be limited to the requirements as outlined in the rules and regulations of
the State of Illinois "Rules and Regulations for Prevention of Radiation
Hazards", adopted April 18, 1961, amended May 15, 1967.
   B.   Unsealed Radioactive Materials: In any district, unsealed radioactive
materials shall not be manufactured, utilized or stored except when such
materials are stored in a fireproof container at or below ground level.
5-12-10: WATER POLLUTION:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include but not
be limited to the requirements as outlined in the publication entitled "Water
Pollution Regulations of Illinois", dated March 7, 1972, (Division of Water
Pollution Control). (Ord. 76-0-227, 12-2-76)
CHAPTER 13
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
5-13-1: Purpose
5-13-2: General Provisions, Parking And Loading
5-13-3: Additional Regulations, Parking
5-13-4: Location Of Accessory Off Street Parking Facilities
5-13-5: Off Street Parking Chart
5-13-6: Schedule Of Parking Requirements
5-13-7: Additional Regulations, Off Street Loading
5-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent the congestion of the
public streets, and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by
establishing minimum requirements for the off street parking and loading and
unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which property is
put. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-13-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS, PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Scope Of Regulations: The off street parking and loading provisions of
this title shall apply as follows:
      1.   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date hereof, accessory parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of the district in
which such buildings or uses are located. However, where a building permit has
been issued prior to the effective date hereof, and provided that construction
is begun within one year of such effective date, and diligently prosecuted to
completion, parking and loading facilities as required hereinafter need not be
provided.
      2.   When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises
shall be increased through gross floor area, seating capacity or other unit of
measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities,
parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for such
increase in intensity of use.
However, no building or structure lawfully erected or use lawfully established
prior to the effective date hereof shall be required to provide such additional
parking or loading facilities unless and until the aggregate increase in units
of measurement existing upon the effective date hereof, in which event parking
or loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for the total
increase.
Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed
to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for
such new use. However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to
the effective date hereof, additional parking or loading facilities are
mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would
exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to the parking and
loading provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Existing Parking And Loading Facilities: Accessory off street parking
or loading facilities which are located on the same lot as the building or use
served which were in existence on the effective date hereof or were provided
voluntarily after such effective date shall not hereafter be reduced below or
if already less than, shall not further be reduced below the requirements of
this chapter for a similar new building or use.
   C.   Permissive Parking And Loading Facilities: Nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street parking or
loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings; provided,
that all regulations herein governing the location, design, improvement and
operation of such facilities are adhered to.
   D.   Damage Or Destruction: For any conforming or legally nonconforming
building or use which is in existence on the effective date hereof, which
subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or
other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off street
parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such
damage or destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, in
no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading
facilities in excess of those required by this chapter for equivalent new uses
or construction. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
   E.   Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities: When required parking
facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building
or use served by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the
same possession or ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use
to which the parking facilities are accessory. No off site parking lot shall
change ownership from that of the zoning on which the building or use served by
such facility is located. No such off site parking facilities shall be
authorized and no occupancy permit shall be issued where the plans call for
parking facilities other than on the same zoning lot until and unless the plan
commission/board of appeals has reviewed the plans and heard the applicant and
made findings that the common ownership or possession of the zoning lot and the
site of the parking facilities are reasonably certain to continue and that the
off site parking facilities will be maintained at all times during the life of
the proposed use or building. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 05-O-942,
11-7-2005)
   F.   Submission Of Plot Plan: Any application for a building permit, or for
a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required shall include
therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any
parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-13-3: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS, PARKING:
   A.   Use Of Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities accessory to
residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter shall be used for the parking of passenger
automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such
facilities are accessory or by guests of said occupants. Under no circumstances
shall required parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used
for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants,
visitors or customers of business or manufacturing establishments.
   B.   Joint Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities for different
buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively
in any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each
constituent use would be permitted; provided, that the total number of spaces
so located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements
for each use.
   C.   Size: Required off street parking spaces shall be at least nine feet
(9') in width and eighteen feet (18') in length, exclusive of access drives or
aisles, ramps, columns or office or work areas.
      1.   The number and dimensions of parking spaces provided for the
handicapped shall be in accordance with the standards of the Illinois capital
development board, as set forth in "Accessibility Standards, Illustrated",
dated May 1, 1988, as may be amended from time to time.
      2.   All required off street parking spaces shall have a vertical
clearance of at least seven feet (7'). See section
5-13-5, "Off Street Parking Chart", of this chapter for other requirements
pertaining to parking stall and drive aisle dimensions.
   D.   Access:
      1.   Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon an
aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off street parking
facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
      2.   All areas providing for off street parking facilities shall open
directly upon an aisle or driveway not less than nine feet (9') wide for
single-family detached or attached dwellings, and twelve feet (12') wide for
all other uses, or such additional width and design as shown in section
5-13-5, "Off Street Parking Chart", of this chapter. No driveway across
property nor curb cut shall exceed a width of thirty feet (30').
   E.   In Yards: Except for transitional yards in a B district which are
governed by section
5-10-9 of this title, off street parking spaces may be located in required
interior side and rear yards, but in no case closer than ten feet (10') to any
lot line.
   F.   Design And Maintenance:
      1.   Open And Enclosed Parking Spaces: Accessory parking spaces located
on the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or
enclosed in a building. Accessory parking spaces located in a residence
district elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use served shall be
open to the sky except when otherwise allowed as a special use.
      2.   Surfacing: The minimum surfacing requirements shall be as follows:
         a.   Except in detached, single-family residential areas, all open off
street parking spaces and secondary drive aisles shall be improved with a
geotextile fabric (200 pound strength); ten inches (10") of CA-6, grade 8 or 9
(excluding crushed concrete); one and one-half inches (1.5") of bituminous
binder and one and one-half inches (1.5") of bituminous surface material. All
open off street driveways and primary drive aisles shall be improved with a
geotextile fabric (200 pound strength); twelve inches (12") of CA-6, grade 8 or
9 (excluding crushed concrete); two inches (2") of bituminous binder and two
inches (2") of bituminous surface material;
         b.   Open off street parking areas and driveways in detached, single-
family residential areas shall either be improved with six inches (6") of
compacted stone and two inches (2") of bituminous surface material or eight
inches (8") of compacted stone;
         c.   Alternative materials which provide equivalent strength may be
used subject to approval by the village engineer.
      3.   Screening And Landscaping: All open automobile parking areas
containing more than five (5) parking spaces shall be effectively screened on
each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residence
district by a densely planted compact hedge. Such required screening shall
conform with the front and side yard setback requirements of the district in
which the parking is located.
      4.   Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas
shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to
create a nuisance.
      5.   Signs: See chapter 20 of this title.
      6.   Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work of any kind, except
for routine maintenance, shall be permitted in conjunction with accessory off
street parking facilities provided in a residence district.
The sale or storage of gasoline and motor oil in conjunction with accessory off
street parking facilities is not permitted in any residence district. (Ord. 95-
O-681, 1-4-1995)
5-13-4: LOCATION OF ACCESSORY OFF STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
The location of off street parking spaces in relation to the use served shall
be as prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be walking
distances between such parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served.
   A.   For Uses In A Residence District: Parking spaces accessory to dwellings
shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. Spaces accessory to
use other than dwellings may be located on a lot adjacent to, or indirectly
across a street or alley from the lot occupied by the use served, but in no
case at a distance in excess of three hundred feet (300') from such use.
   B.   For Uses In PD-1 And PD-2 Districts: All required parking spaces shall
be located on the lot of the use served. Off street parking accessory to a
municipal parking lot may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with
chapter 17 of this title within two hundred feet (200') of and adjacent to any
PD district. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-13-5: OFF STREET PARKING CHART:
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d54cd01a02ea8953ad3a88fd261627e42b829a53/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1852.gif]
 
Parking Aisle Curb Length Stall Depth Stall Width Aisle Width Bay Width
P             C           S           W           A           B
90°          9.0'        18.0'       9.0'        24.0'       60.0'
60°          10.4'       20.0'       9.0'        16.0'       56.0'
45°          12.7'       19.1'       9.0'        12.0'       50.2'
0°a          24.0'       9.0'        9.0'        12.0'       ---
 
Notes:
Standards are based on a 9' x 18' parking stall. Drawing is not to scale.
   a.   Parallel parking; assumes one-way traffic flow.
(Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995)
5-13-6: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Employee Parking: Parking requirements determined by the number of
employees shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty and/or
residing on the premises at any one time.
   B.   Capacity Calculations: When parking spaces are required on the basis of
capacity, capacity shall be determined based on the occupancy standards
established by the village building code 1 . (Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995)
   C.   Mixed Uses: When two (2) or more uses are located on the same zoning
lot or within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the sum of
the separate requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking
spaces or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use
unless otherwise recommended by the plan commission/board of appeals and the
board of trustees. (Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   D.   Special Uses: The parking space requirements listed below shall apply
to uses processed as special uses, unless the village determines that the
specific requirements of a special use warrant a different parking space
standard.
   E.   Spaces Required: Accessory off street parking spaces shall be provided
as required for the following uses:
1. Residential:                          
Single-family dwellings                 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Townhomes                               2 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit
2. Retail And Service Uses:              
                                        5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
Bank/financial institution              area, plus 7 stacking spaces for each
                                        drive-up window
Barbershop/hair styling salon           2 spaces per chair, plus 1 space per
                                        employee
                                        1 space per room, 1 space per employee,
Hotel/motel                             plus additional spaces for accessory
                                        uses as required by this schedule of
                                        parking requirements
                                        5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
Nursery/lawn and garden supply          area, plus 1 space per each 2,000
                                        square feet of outdoor sales area
Photography studio                      4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
                                        area
Produce stand:                          As determined by the Zoning
                                        Administrator
Repair shop:                            4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
                                        area
                                        1 space per 3 persons of design
Restaurant:                             capacity, plus 8 stacking spaces for
                                        each drive-up window
Retail sale of food:                    6 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
                                        area
Retail store:                           5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
                                        area
Service shop (such as tailer or shoe    4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
repair):                                area
Tavern or bar:                          1 space per 3 persons of design
                                        capacity
Transportation ticket office:           5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
                                        area
Undertaking establishment/funeral home/ 15 spaces per parlor, 1 space per
funeral parlor:                         employee, plus 1 space per vehicle
                                        owned, leased or rented
Veterinary clinic or animal hospital/   4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
shelter:                                area
Video rental:                           6 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
                                        area
3. Office:                               
Medical or dental office/clinic:        5 parking spaces per doctor, plus 1
                                        space per each employee
Offices (business, professional and     5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
governmental):                          area
4. Automotive Service:                   
Autobody repair shop:                   1 space per employee, plus 1 space per
                                        service bay (not including bay)
                                        1 space per each 2 gasoline service
                                        bays (not including bays), 1 space per
                                        repair service bay (not including bay),
Automobile service station:             1 space per employee, 1 space per
                                        vehicle owned or leased, plus 5 spaces
                                        per 1,000 square feet of floor area
                                        devoted to retail sales
                                        1 space per each employee, plus
Car wash (automatic):                   stacking spaces equal to 5 times the
                                        capacity of the wash bays
                                        1 space per employee, plus 4 spaces per
Car wash (manual):                      washing bay (including bay), one of
                                        which shall be located directly in
                                        front of each bay
                                        1 space per each 2 gasoline service
                                        bays (not including bays), 1 space per
Gasoline station (self- service):       employee, plus 5 spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area devoted to
                                        retail sales
5. Religious/Institutional:              
Child day care center:                  1 space per each employee, plus 2
                                        spaces per each 15 children
                                        1 space per each 4 seats, or 1 space
Church or synagogue:                    per each 90 lineal inches of seating
                                        capacity in main chapel or auditorium,
                                        based on design capacity
Vocational school (excluding            1 space per each 5 students, plus 1
correspondence schools):                space per each 2 employees
6. Recreational/Civic:                   
Dance hall:                             1 space per 3 persons of design
                                        capacity
Dance studio/school:                    5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
                                        area
                                        5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
Municipal building:                     area, plus 1 space for each vehicle
                                        leased, owned or rented by the Village
Park (publicly owned and operated):     As determined by the Zoning
                                        Administrator
                                        2 spaces per tennis court, 1 space per
Swimming and tennis clubs (private,     employee, plus additional parking for
nonprofit):                             accessory uses as required by this
                                        schedule of parking requirements
                                        10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of pool
                                        surface area, 5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                       feet of floor area devoted to accessory
                                        uses, plus adequate spaces to serve
                                        spectators, as determined by the Zoning
                                        Administrator
7. Research And Development:             
                                        3.3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
Research and development facilities:    floor area up to 50,000 square feet,
                                        and an additional 2.5 spaces per 1,000
                                        square feet of floor area over 50,000
                                        Parking spaces for uses not listed in
                                        this schedule of parking requirements
8. Other Uses:                          shall be provided according to the most
                                        similar use, or as determined by the
                                        Zoning Administrator
 
(Ord. 95-0-681, 1-4-95)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4 of this code.
5-13-7: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS, OFF-STREET LOADING:
   A.   Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two (2) tons'
capacity shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any property in a residence
district unless completely enclosed by building walls or a uniformly non-see
through plant material, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet (6')
in height. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located in any
required front or side yard. No permitted or required loading berth shall be
located within twenty five feet (25') of the nearest point of intersection of
any two (2) streets.
   B.   Size: Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at
least ten feet in width by at least twenty five feet in length (10' x 25'),
exclusive of aisles and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance
of at least fourteen feet (14').
   C.   Access: Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movement.
   D.   Surfacing: The minimum surfacing requirements shall be as follows:
      1.   All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a
geotextile fabric (200-pound strength); twelve inches (12") of CA-6, grade 8 or
9 (excluding crushed concrete); two inches (2") of bituminous binder and two
inches (2") of bituminous surface material;
      2.   Alternative materials which provide equivalent strength may be used
subject to approval by the Village Engineer.
   E.   Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind
shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any PD-
1 or PD-2 Districts.
   F.   Spaces: Spaces allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not,
while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-
street parking facilities or portions thereof.
   G.   Loading Berths: For special uses other than prescribed for hereinafter,
loading berths adequate in number and size to serve such uses as determined by
the Zoning Administrator shall be provided.
   H.   Uses: Uses for which off-street loading facilities are required herein
but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum
prescribed for such required facilities shall be provided with adequate
receiving facilities off any adjacent alley, service drive or open space on the
same lot which is accessible by motor vehicle. (Ord. 95-0-681, 1-4-95)
CHAPTER 14
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
5-14-1: Purpose
5-14-2: Definitions
5-14-3: Standards
5-14-4: Procedure
5-14-5: Changes In The Planned Development
5-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the planned development provisions is to promote efficient land
patterns in order to preserve trees, wetlands and other natural resources,
provide site amenities, and secure large parcels of permanent open space,
characteristic of Kildeer's existing rural environment. These provisions are
intended to encourage and allow more creative and imaginative design for land
developments than would be possible under the strict application of Kildeer's
conventional Zoning and Subdivision Code provisions. The efficient land
patterns which will result from implementation of these provisions will also
result in more economical land development.
The following objectives of the Village will be attained through the use of the
planned development process:
   A.   Foster high-quality development by allowing flexibility in land use and
design standards, thereby encouraging innovative site planning.
   B.   Promote more efficient land patterns which not only preserve open space
and natural resources, but also provide for more economical networks of
utilities, streets and other facilities.
   C.   Protect the character of existing large lot single-family developments
in the Village by:
      1.   Requiring adequate separation and screening between more intensive
uses and existing large lot development; and
      2.   Promoting compatibility in design between new and existing
developments.
   D.   Promote diverse, high quality, residential environments.
   E.   Permit a land use pattern with a mixture of residential and
nonresidential uses that will maintain, expand, and enhance the existing
residential character of Kildeer.
   F.   Create a method for the permanent preservation of common open space for
the continued use and enjoyment of the residents of the development.
   G.   Provide for usable and suitably located public and private recreational
facilities.
   H.   Encourage developers to provide amenities that enhance the quality of
life, both within the planned development, as well as within the community as a
whole.
   I.   Combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms, and
building relationships for developments which include more than one land use.
   J.   Encourage a land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort,
morals and welfare. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
5-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to planned developments:
BUSINESS: For the purposes of this Chapter, business shall be defined as retail
commercial, office or service uses.
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION: A single-family, detached home residential subdivision,
consisting of three (3) or more residential lots, that concentrates the
buildings on a part of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for
recreation, common open space, and/or preservation of environmentally sensitive
features. This form of development permits a reduction in minimum lot area and
bulk requirements of the underlying zoning provided: a) there is no increase in
the number of lots permitted, or overall density, compared to that which would
be possible under a conventional subdivision; and b) the land outside of lot
area is devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of
environmentally sensitive areas, or agriculture. The maximum density shall be
determined by the "underlying zoning", defined as follows: The gross site area,
minus an estimated fifteen percent (15%) of the residual site area for rights
of way, divided by forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square
feet. While underlying zoning determines the maximum number of lots, actual
allowable density will depend on individual site characteristics.
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE: An ordinance adopted by the village board upon
completion of both preliminary and final plan approvals which includes graphics
and other support documentation upon which village board approval is based. The
development ordinance shall also specify conditions of approval established by
the village board, if any.
LARGE LOT RESIDENTIAL: For the purpose of this chapter, "large lot residential"
development shall mean detached single-family homes on lots one or more acres
in size.
NET DENSITY: For the purpose of determining the number of units per acre in a
planned development for net density calculations, lot area shall be included,
but not streets, street rights of way, or open space.
OFFICE PARK: A three (3) or more acres planned development developed
exclusively with office or office/research uses shall constitute an office
park.
OFFICE/RESEARCH: For the purposes of this chapter, office/research uses shall
be limited to: offices for general business uses (excluding retail);
professional or religious, philanthropic or fraternal nature; technology and
research centers, including medical and hospital research establishments 1 ; or
other similar uses which may be approved by the village board. Office/research
uses shall meet all applicable standards of village ordinances. Light
industrial, assembly, and laboratory facilities, as such uses relate to the
production of products and parts, shall be prohibited. All research shall be
conducted within enclosed buildings, and ancillary outside storage of materials
shall be prohibited. No use shall be permitted which involves environmentally
hazardous materials, toxic wastes, or contaminants, unless otherwise approved
by the village board.
PLAN: A drawing of a tract of land that contains information related to
proposed development.
PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE: The group that meets with a petitioner during the
preapplication review stage of the land use regulation process. The committee
shall consist of either:
   A.   The Village Board;
   B.   The Plan Commission; or
   C.   An ad hoc committee as determined by the Village Administrator or
Village President and in each case including. village staff and consultants.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land under single ownership or unified
control, for which the specific requirements of the underlying zoning district
may be modified when: a) the proposed development offers benefits to the
neighborhood and/or community of which it is a part, beyond those required by
the zoning code provisions; and/or b) the proposed use of land includes
substantial amenities not otherwise required. This includes, but is not limited
to: provisions for common open space; recreational facilities; or specific
design, engineering, architectural, site planning or landscape features.
A planned development includes a program for the provision, operation, and
maintenance of such areas, facilities, and improvements which will be for
common use by residents of the planned development and/or community, but which
will not be provided, operated, or maintained at public expense.
PLAT OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION: A drawing representing a tract of
land of the approved planned development, with all approved site data set forth
thereon, and suitable for recording with the Lake County recorder of deeds,
which shows the subdivision or consolidation of one or more properties,
including individual lots or parcels, if any, streets and rights of way,
easements, boundary markers and other site information as required by the
village's subdivision code 2 .
REDEVELOPMENT: Alterations of a business property that do not expand the total
gross floor area as measured from exterior wall surfaces by more than ten
percent (10%).
TOWNHOME: A dwelling containing two (2) or more residential units, each having
a completely separate entrance at ground level.
UNIFIED CONTROL: The combination of two (2) or more tracts of land wherein each
owner has agreed that his or her tract of land shall be developed as part of a
planned development, and shall be subject to all control applicable to and
adopted for the planned development. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 96-O-
714, 3-4-1996; Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005; Ord. 22-O-031, 12-20-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. Establishments which render services on site to patients shall be required
  to provide sufficient parking facilities.
2 1. See title 6 of this code.
5-14-3: STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise recommended by the plan commission/board of appeals and
approved by the village board, the following standards shall apply. The plan
commission/board of appeals may recommend exceptions from these standards when
determined appropriate to achieve one of the objectives set forth in section
5-14-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-
2005)
   A.   General Standards For All Planned Developments: The following shall
apply to all planned developments, regardless of land use type:
      1.   Ownership: The planned development shall be under the unified
control of the petitioner. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      2.   Size: Unless otherwise recommended by the plan commission/board of
appeals and approved by the village board, petitioners shall be required to
process nonresidential and cluster/townhome residential developments as planned
developments when land assemblage is in accordance with the following: (Ord.
91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         a.   Cluster/townhome: Five (5) acres or more.
         b.   Business or office park: Three (3) acres or more.
         c.   Mixed use: Ten (10) acres or more.
      3.   Rand Road: All new development or redevelopment of properties
adjacent to Rand Road shall be processed as planned developments, regardless of
parcel size.
      4.   Mixed Use Planned Developments: A planned development which combines
large lot residential, cluster and townhome, business, and/or office park
development.
      5.   Comprehensive Plan: The proposed planned development should conform
to the land uses, intent, and spirit of the comprehensive plan and other
planning objectives established for the village.
      6.   Compatibility: The uses permitted in a planned development shall be
compatible with the surrounding land uses.
      7.   Subdivided: Unless otherwise approved by the village board, only one
principal building shall be constructed per parcel. Preliminary and final plats
of subdivision shall be required in accordance with procedures set forth in
title 6 of this code. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      8.   Yards: The required yards along the periphery of the planned
development shall be at least equal in depth to those of the underlying zoning
district, or the adjacent zoning district, whichever is greater. The plan
commission/board of appeals may recommend greater setbacks from the boundary
line of a planned development when determined necessary to protect the privacy
of residents within both existing and proposed subdivisions.
      9.   Pedestrian Circulation: Where determined appropriate by the plan
commission/board of appeals, pedestrian circulation systems, which shall be
privately owned and maintained, shall be provided within cluster, townhome, or
mixed use planned developments, and shall be separated, to the maximum extent
possible, from streets and rights of way. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord.
05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      10.   Public Streets: All streets shall be publicly dedicated, and
constructed in accordance with the applicable standards contained in the
village's subdivision code 1 .
      11.   Off Street Parking And Loading:
         a.   Off street parking spaces provided for townhome, commercial,
office and institutional uses shall be not less than nine feet by eighteen feet
(9' x 18') in size. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
         b.   Drive aisle widths provided for ninety degree (90°) parking shall
be at least twenty four feet (24'). Widths of drive aisles for angled parking
shall be as determined by the plan commission/board of appeals, after
consultation with the village planner and village engineer. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-
5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         c.   Pavement provided for off street parking and loading shall be
constructed in accordance with village standards set forth in the village's
subdivision code 2 .
         d.   Sufficient parking facilities must be provided.
      12.   Underground Utilities: All utilities (including electric,
telephone, gas and cable) shall be installed underground. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-
1991)
      13.   Tree Replacement: Where determined appropriate by the plan
commission/board of appeals, trees greater than six inches (6") in caliper, as
measured twelve inches (12") above grade, which are identified to be removed
for construction shall be replaced in accordance with a tree replacement plan
reviewed by the plan commission/board of appeals and approved by the village
board. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      14.   Preliminary Approval: Preliminary approval shall be null and void
in the event that the petitioner has failed to obtain final planned unit
development approval for at least the first phase of the development within one
year of the date of preliminary approval. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      15.   Completion: The planned development shall be substantially
completed within the period of time specified by the petitioner and set forth
in the development ordinance prepared for the project, unless an extension is
requested by the petitioner and approved by the village board, after review and
recommendation by the plan commission/board of appeals. All planned development
phases shall be completed within two (2) years of final planned unit
development approval for that phase, except when the size or complexity
dictates a longer period, which may be granted by the village board. (Ord. 91-
O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      16.   Compliance With Zoning And Other Codes And Ordinances: Where there
is a conflict or difference between the provisions of this chapter and those of
other chapters of this code, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
Except as otherwise set forth herein, all other applicable provisions of this
code shall apply. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      17.   Exceptions: The plan commission/board of appeals may recommend, and
the village board approve, exceptions to standards and criteria when determined
necessary to achieve the planning objectives set forth in this chapter. (Ord.
91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      18.   Separability: It is the intention of the board of trustees that
this title, and every provision hereof, shall be considered separable; and the
invalidity of any section, clause, provision or part or portion of any section,
clause or provision of this title shall not affect the validity of any other
portion of this title. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
   B.   Standards For Large Lot Residential Development: In addition to the
general standards and criteria presented above, standards and criteria listed
below shall specifically apply to large lot residential development: (Ord. 95-
O-681, 1-4-1995)
      1.   Use: In addition to dwellings, open space, and recreational
facilities permitted by this chapter, schools, churches or other institutional/
governmental uses also may be permitted as part of a planned development which
includes large lot single-family development, when determined appropriate by
the plan commission/board of appeals. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-
942, 11-7-2005)
      2.   Minimum Lot Size:
         a.   Minimum lot size shall be one acre per unit, unless active
recreational areas and/or facilities, common open space, or preservation of
major stands of trees or other natural areas have been proposed as amenities
for the planned development.
         b.   Where such facilities are proposed and determined to be of
benefit to the residents of the proposed planned development, the lot size may
be reduced in accordance with the formula listed below:
 
Open Space/Recreation Maximum Units Per Net Acre
30 percent            1.43
35 percent            1.54
40 percent            1.67
45 percent            1.82
50 percent            2.00
 
Note: This assumes 15 percent of the land area proposed for residential
development will be set aside for streets and rights of way.
(Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
         c.   Minimum lot size shall not be less than one-half (1/2) acre.
         d.   For the purpose of this section, active recreation facilities and
open space provided as part of the planned development shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
            Community center or health club
            Golf course
            Jogging trails and/or physical fitness courses
            Swimming pools
            Tennis courts
         e.   Maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.30. See section
5-1-6 of this title for information regarding calculation of floor area ratio.
(Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995)
         f.   At the discretion of the plan commission/board of appeals, ponds
required for storm water retention or detention basins may be included as
amenities if provided with trails, benches and other substantial landscape
features.
      3.   Streets And Rights Of Way: The plan commission/board of appeals may
recommend, and the village board may approve, a reduction in the required width
of pavement and rights of way for streets and cul-de-sacs, provided the
reduction is determined necessary and appropriate for preservation of major
stands of trees or other natural areas, and public safety is not compromised.
(Ord. 95-O-681, 1-4-1995; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   C.   Standards For Cluster And Townhome Planned Developments: Kildeer has
traditionally been developed as a community of homes on lots one acre or more
in area. The purpose of this section is to provide an alternative to large lot
residential living, and to establish standards for townhome and cluster
developments which are responsive to the purpose and intent of this chapter, as
set forth in section
5-14-1 of this chapter. Standards and criteria which follow in this section
shall specifically apply to cluster and townhome planned developments. General
standards and criteria established for all planned developments, presented in
subsection A of this section, shall also apply. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      1.   Use: In addition to dwellings, open space, and recreational
facilities permitted by this chapter, schools, churches or other institutional/
governmental uses also may be included as part of a cluster or townhome planned
development when determined appropriate by the plan commission/board of
appeals. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      2.   Maximum Lot Coverage: (Rep. by Ord. 96-O-714, 3-4-1996)
      3.   Minimum Floor Area: Two thousand (2,000) habitable square feet. If
two (2) story, not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) habitable square
feet shall be provided on the ground floor.
      4.   Building Height: Dwellings shall not exceed thirty five feet (35'),
or two and one-half (21/2) stories, whichever is lower. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-
1991)
      5.   Setbacks: Minimum setbacks from front, rear and side lot lines
established for cluster and townhome dwellings shall be evaluated by the plan
commission/board of appeals on a case by case basis in accordance with the
purpose and intent of this chapter, as set forth in section
5-14-1 of this chapter.
      6.   Design: Cluster and townhome dwellings shall be designed to blend
with the landscape of which they are a part. Both visual and acoustical privacy
for residents shall be provided by means of site and architectural design. The
plan commission/board of appeals may require architectural controls to set
guidelines and standards for planned developments. Pedestrian circulation
systems shall be privately owned and maintained, such as by a homeowners'
association. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      7.   Materials: Brick, stucco, synthetic stucco, stone or wood are
examples of acceptable siding materials. Aluminum or vinyl siding are not
acceptable.
      8.   Garages: Townhome and cluster dwellings shall include two (2) car
attached garages. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      9.   Maximum Number Of Units Per Townhome Building: Five (5). (Ord. 96-O-
714, 3-4-1996)
      10.   Minimum Spacing Between Townhome Buildings:
 
Corner to corner 25 feet
Front to front   106 feet
Front to side    80 feet
Rear to rear     80 feet
Side to rear     50 feet
Side to side     30 feet
 
      11.   Off Street Parking: Guest parking shall be provided for townhomes
as follows:
         a.   Off street parking bays shall be located not more than two
hundred fifty feet (250') from the units served, and shall be provided at a
ratio not less than one-half (0.5) space per townhome unit.
         b.   Evergreen trees and/or shrubs shall be installed at the end of
all guest parking bays to soften the visual effect of these paved areas and to
eliminate headlight intrusion for living units which are in proximity to off
street parking bays. Shrubs shall be at least four feet (4') high at
installation.
      12.   Landscaping:
         a.   Landscaping shall be installed for the aesthetic enhancement of
cluster and townhome planned developments, and to provide screening between
adjacent dwellings.
         b.   In addition to street tree plantings required by Kildeer's
subdivision code 3 , trees and shrubs shall be provided as foundation plantings
in front, side and rear yards to:
            Soften the visual effect of buildings.
            Articulate the front and side building elevations.
            Provide privacy between living units.
         c.   Trees and shrubs used for landscaping around townhomes and
cluster dwellings shall conform to the following minimum size requirements:
 
Evergreen trees  Not less than 6 feet tall
Ornamental trees Not less than 8 feet tall
Shade trees      Not less than 3 inches in caliper, as measured 6 inches above
                 grade
                 Not less than 24 inches in height, unless used for screening,
Shrubs           in which case shrubs shall not be less than 3 feet to 4 feet
                 tall
 
(Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      13.   Streets And Rights Of Way: The plan commission/board of appeals may
recommend, and the village board may approve, a reduction in the required width
of pavement and rights of way for streets and cul-de-sacs, provided the
reduction is determined necessary and appropriate for preservation of major
stands of trees or other natural areas, and public safety is not compromised.
(Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      14.   Buffer Yards: If a planned development includes cluster dwellings
or townhomes adjacent to, or across the street from single-family homes on lots
averaging one or more acres in size, the following shall apply:
         a.   A landscaped fifty foot (50') wide buffer yard shall be set aside
along the common lot line to provide additional separation between the large
lot development and cluster and/or townhome dwelling units. Said buffer yard
may be considered part of the required open space for the project as defined in
this subsection C14.
         b.   Landscaping within the buffer yard shall, at a minimum, include
six (6) shade trees for each one hundred (100) linear feet. Trees shall be not
less than three inch (3") caliper upon installation, as measured six inches
(6") above grade.
         c.   Buffer yard plantings shall be included on the landscape plan
prepared for the planned development. Trees not acceptable for use in
landscaped buffer yards are identified in section
6-5-9 of this code. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
         d.   The location, type and quantity of trees shall meet the approval
of the plan commission/board of appeals. The plan commission/board of appeals
may recommend, and the village board may approve, additional separation or
increased quantities of plant materials when determined necessary to protect
the privacy of residents in adjacent single-family large lot developments.
(Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         e.   Front and side yards must be sodded or hydroseeded. Rear yards
must be seeded or sodded. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      15.   Open Space: Unless otherwise recommended by the plan commission/
board of appeals and approved by the village board, not less than fifty percent
(50%) of the land within a townhome or cluster planned development shall be
reserved and designated as common space and/or public recreational facilities.
No open areas may be delineated or accepted as common open space under the
provisions of this section unless the following standards are met: (Ord. 91-O-
587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         a.   The designated common open areas or public recreational
facilities shall be of usable size and character. For the purposes of this
section, private property, streets and street rights of way shall not be
included in calculating the minimum open space requirement. Storm water
detention/retention ponds may be included in the open space calculations only
if improved in accordance with standards contained in subsection B2f of this
section.
         b.   Designated common open areas or public recreational facilities
reserved under a planned development shall be held and maintained by a
homeowners' association, unless conveyed to a public authority approved by the
village board in accordance with procedures established by the village's
subdivision code 4 . All designated common open space and/or recreational
facilities shall be dedicated as open space in perpetuity, and shall be so
designated in the development ordinance and planned development plat. The cost
of construction of any common open areas or public recreational facilities
shall be included in the letter of credit or other surety required for the
public or quasi-public improvements as more fully described in title 6 of this
code.
         c.   Uses authorized for common open space shall be appropriate to the
scale and character of the planned development, considering parcel size,
density, anticipated population, topography, and the number and type of
dwellings to be provided.
         d.   Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use,
but common open space containing natural features worthy of preservation,
including traditional agricultural uses, may be left unimproved. Agricultural
lands included as common open space may continue to be farmed. Building,
structures, and improvements approved for construction shall be compatible in
design with dwellings approved for the planned development, and shall be so
designed as to enhance the amenities of the common open space with regard to
its topography and unimproved condition. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
         e.   No portion of a planned development shall be conveyed or
dedicated for public use to any public body until the plan commission/board of
appeals reviews it, and the village board approves such conveyance or
dedication. When performing its review, the plan commission/board of appeals
shall consider the: (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
            (1)   Size and character of the dwellings proposed in the planned
development.
            (2)   Topography, existing trees, vegetation, wetlands, or other
surface water areas, ground cover, and other natural features.
            (3)   Manner in which the open space is to be improved and
maintained for recreational or amenity purposes.
            (4)   Existence of public parks or other public recreational
facilities in the vicinity. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
         f.   Unless open space is to be conveyed to a public body in
accordance with village board approvals, all land shown on the final plan and
planned development plat as common open space shall be conveyed to a
homeowners' association or similar organization created for the purpose, among
others, of owning and maintaining common buildings, areas and land within the
planned development. The common open space shall be conveyed subject to
covenants to be recommended for approval by the plan commission/board of
appeals and approved by the village board which restrict the common open space
to the uses specified on the final plan and planned development plat, and which
provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which assures
its continuing use for its intended purpose. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd.
Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   D.   Standards For Planned Business Developments: In addition to the general
standards and criteria presented in subsection A of this section, the following
standards shall apply to planned developments which incorporate business or
office components: (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      1.   Use:
         a.   Uses within a business or office portion of a planned development
shall be limited to those identified in the underlying zoning district unless
the plan commission/board of appeals recommends, and the village board
approves, similar or compatible uses. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-
942, 11-7-2005)
         b.   No building intended for business or office use shall be
inhabited as a residential dwelling.
         c.   All business shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings.
         d.   Unless otherwise approved as part of a planned development
special use permit, all merchandise and materials shall be displayed and stored
within a completely enclosed building. Outdoor storage approved as part of a
business planned development shall comply with all standards set forth in
subsections
5-10-3G and
5-10A-3G of this title.
      2.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Perimeter: A minimum fifty foot (50') building setback shall be
maintained from the boundary line of a business planned development. Buildings
which are constructed adjacent to a residentially zoned or used property
outside the planned development shall, however, be set back one hundred feet
(100') from the boundary line of the business planned development. (Ord. 91-O-
587, 8-5-1991)
         b.   Front And Corner Side Yards: Buildings shall be set back not less
than fifty feet (50') from street rights of way which border the business
planned development. Setbacks less than fifty feet (50') from streets interior
to the planned development may be considered by the plan commission/board of
appeals and village board on a case by case basis. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991;
amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         c.   Interior Side And Rear Yards: Side and rear yard setbacks shall
not be less than those set forth in section
5-10-10 of this title.
      3.   Maximum Lot Coverage: The lot coverage of structures, off street
parking, and off street loading shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of each
individual lot.
      4.   Design: A planned development which incorporates business or office
use shall be so designed as to:
         a.   Promote compatibility with adjacent residential properties, both
existing and proposed, through architectural design and landscape screening.
         b.   Provide an integrated and harmonious architectural design and
arrangement of all buildings.
         c.   Furnish landscaping and such other amenities determined to be
necessary to provide an attractive environment.
      5.   Access And Circulation: Planned developments which include business
and office uses shall include:
         a.   Shared points of ingress and egress in order to maximize the
operational efficiency of public streets.
         b.   Properly arranged off street parking and loading facilities which
are designed and located to assure safe and efficient circulation of
automobiles and trucks.
         c.   Streets and rights of way which comply with the village's
subdivision control ordinance 5 .
      6.   Off Street Parking And Loading: The following shall apply to all off
street parking and loading facilities:
         a.   The number of off street parking and off street loading spaces
shall be in accordance with requirements of sections
5-13-1 through
5-13-7 of this title.
         b.   Off street loading shall not be located in a front or corner side
yard.
         c.   Setbacks for off street parking, loading and drive aisles shall
meet or exceed the following:
            Thirty feet (30') from public rights of way.
            Ten feet (10') from a lot line that abuts another property
developed with business or office uses.
            Thirty five feet (35') from a lot line that abuts an existing or
proposed residential property.
         d.   Where off street parking spaces are provided in a front or corner
side yard, landscaped berms or shrub plantings not less than three feet (3')
high shall be installed to buffer the view of the parking facility from street
rights of way.
         e.   Where off street parking and off street loading abuts an existing
or proposed residential development, landscaped berms, planted with trees and
shrubs, shall be installed to provide an effective screen of all off street
parking and loading facilities. Landscaping shall be so designed as to achieve
year round screening.
         f.   Concrete curbs shall be constructed around the perimeter of all
off street parking and off street loading facilities.
         g.   Concrete curbed, landscaped islands shall be provided in off
street parking lots containing four (4) or more spaces in accordance with the
following:
            Landscaped islands shall be a minimum of six feet (6') wide, as
measured between backs of curbs.
            One island shall be installed for each fifteen (15) off street
parking spaces. Landscaped islands shall be planted with not less than one
shade tree and ground cover and/or shrubs.
            Shrubs installed in islands shall be low growing, and trees shall
be high branched so as to maintain a clear line of sight for motorists that is
between three feet (3') and five feet (5') above grade.
      7.   Lighting: Whenever off street parking spaces are used at night,
parking lot lighting shall be provided as follows:
         a.   Lighting used along streets and rights of way and individual lots
shall be uniform in design.
         b.   An appropriate amount of lighting shall be maintained within the
parking lot to assure safe levels of illumination.
         c.   Maximum to minimum and average to minimum uniformity ratios shall
demonstrate that an even distribution of light will be provided within the
parking lot.
         d.   Light standards and luminaries shall be so designed and placed
to:
            Confine lights to the property. Light spillage in excess of one-
half (0.5) foot-candle beyond the property line shall be prohibited, except at
entrances to and from the business or office property.
            Prevent glare visible from residential properties and street rights
of way, by adequately shielding luminaries.
         e.   Security lighting installed on business or office buildings shall
be shielded to fully cover lamps and to cast light downward.
      8.   Landscaping: Landscaping in a business planned development shall
comply with the following standards and criteria:
         a.   Screening From Residential: A minimum thirty five foot (35') wide
landscaped yard shall be provided to screen a business or office building or
use within a business planned development which abuts a residential property or
properties. This shall apply to residential properties that are within or which
abut the boundary lines of the planned development.
            Landscaping may include berming to supplement screening.
Landscaping installed in the required yard shall include evergreen trees and
shrubs, and shall be designed to provide effective year round screening.
         b.   Perimeter Yards: At least one shade tree per forty (40) linear
feet shall be installed in the perimeter yards which are ten feet (10') wide or
greater, or perimeter yards which abut properties planned for, or developed
with existing business or office uses.
         c.   Foundation Plantings: Trees and shrubs shall be installed along
the front and side elevations of business or office buildings to provide
articulation, provide shade, and to enhance the pedestrian environment.
         d.   Plant Material Sizes: Trees and shrubs shall be installed at
sizes not less than the following:
 
Evergreen trees  8 feet to 10 feet tall
Shade trees      3 inches to 4 inches in caliper, as measured 6 inches above
                 grade
Ornamental trees 8 feet to 10 feet tall
Shrubs           Not less than 24 inches tall, unless used for screening, in
                 which case shrubs 3 feet to 4 feet tall shall be required
 
(Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      9.   Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment:
         a.   All roof mounted mechanical equipment including, but not limited
to, heating, ventilating and air conditioning units (HVAC), shall be fully
screened from public view on all sides of the building. (Ord. 92-O-622, 11-2-
1992)
         b.   Screening shall be accomplished by the roof structure or parapet
walls. The height of the parapet walls or roof structure shall be at least
equal to the heights of the tallest rooftop element installed on the building.
Such screening shall be designed to blend with and complement the architecture
of the building.
      10.   Trash Receptacles:
         a.   Trash receptacles shall be located only in a rear or interior
side yard, enclosed by a masonry wall, compatible with the principal structure,
not less than the height of the containers, and provided with gates to contain
trash.
         b.   Where visible to the public, landscaping shall be installed
around the enclosure to soften its appearance.
      11.   Utility Meters/Transformers: Wall mounted utility meters and ground
supported transformers shall be painted to match the building. If visible to
the public, meters and transformers shall be screened by landscaping equal in
height to the tallest meter or transformer. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      12.   Existing Business Or Office Uses: Lot coverage for existing
developed properties may be increased upon recommendation by the plan
commission/board of appeals and approval by the village board, provided all of
the following additional conditions are met: (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd.
Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         a.   Off Street Parking And Loading: No exception from the required
number of off street parking or off street loading spaces is proposed.
         b.   Landscaping: Existing landscaping is improved by planting trees
and other landscape materials along public rights of way, near buildings, and
in parking lots.
         c.   Signage: Existing signage is improved or replaced so that it
conforms to village standards.
         d.   Architecture: Architectural improvements are made to upgrade the
appearance of all structures on the zoning lot or lots.
   E.   Standards For Office Parks: In addition to the general standards for
planned developments set forth in subsections A and D of this section, the
following shall apply to office park planned developments. If there is a
conflict between standards set forth herein and those found elsewhere in this
chapter, the provisions of this section shall govern. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      1.   Use:
         a.   Development in office parks shall be limited to business and
professional offices, financial institutions, and research facilities, unless
similar or compatible uses are recommended by the plan commission/board of
appeals and approved by the village board. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord.
05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         b.   There shall be no warehousing, manufacturing, processing, or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and essential
to the use conducted on the same premises.
      2.   Design: Office park planned developments shall include: generous
building and parking setbacks; large tracts of open space; and abundant
landscaping, in order to achieve a campuslike setting. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-
1991)
      3.   Building Setbacks: The plan commission/board of appeals may request,
and the village board approve, building setbacks which exceed those established
for commercial and office uses as set forth in sections
5-10-9 and
5-10-10 of this title, and subsection D2 of this section. The increased
setbacks are intended to: (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-
2005)
         a.   Provide increased separation between buildings which are
typically larger in scale than structures used for other business uses.
         b.   Provide additional yard area, typical of campuslike environments.
      4.   Maximum Lot Coverage: The lot coverage of structures, off street
parking, and off street loading shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of each
individual lot.
      5.   Building Heights: Buildings shall not exceed thirty five feet (35').
Taller buildings may be approved by the village board, for office parks which
are ten (10) or more acres in size.
      6.   Off Street Parking And Loading:
         a.   Setbacks for off street parking, loading and drive aisles shall
be provided for office park planned developments as follows:
            Fifty feet (50') from public rights of way.
            Twenty five feet (25') from an interior side lot line that abuts
another property developed with office uses.
            Seventy five feet (75') from any lot line that abuts an existing or
proposed residential property outside the planned development.
         b.   Off street loading facilities shall be enclosed, and shall be
accessible from side and rear yards only.
      7.   Landscaping:
         a.   Office park planned developments shall be designed to include
unified street tree plantings, entry treatments, and accent plantings at
intersections.
         b.   The size of proposed plant materials shall exceed minimum
standards set forth in subsection D8d of this section.
         c.   Street rights of way shall be planted with sod and shall be
properly maintained to provide a finished appearance for the planned
development. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
      8.   Signage:
         a.   Freestanding entry monument signs proposed to identify the office
park planned development shall be reviewed by the plan commission/board of
appeals and village board on a case by case basis.
         b.   Unless a unified sign package for individual buildings in an
office park planned development is reviewed by the plan commission/board of
appeals and approved by the village board, after a hearing before the plan
commission/board of appeals, if necessary, signs for individual office
buildings shall comply with the requirements within chapter 20 of this title.
(Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      9.   Open Space: Open space, consistent with a campuslike setting, shall
be set aside for the common enjoyment of employees when office parks are
developed on five (5) or more acres.
         a.   Open space may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
            Areas which have been set aside to preserve major stands of trees
or other natural vegetation.
            Recreational amenities, including jogging trails and/or athletic
fields or physical fitness courses, but excluding buildings.
            Amenities for passive recreation, such as gardens, picnic areas and
water features.
            Storm water retention ponds, when trails and/or other amenities are
provided around the perimeter of the ponds. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
         b.   Unless otherwise recommended by the plan commission/board of
appeals and approved by the village board, open space shall be maintained by
the owner or an association created for the office park. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-
1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         c.   Open space shall be dedicated in perpetuity and so designated in
the development ordinance and planned development plat.
   F.   Standards For Mixed Use Developments: A mixed use development may
include large lot residential, cluster and townhome, business, and/or office
park development. The established standards for each type of development as
otherwise set forth in this title shall apply to the comparable portion of the
mixed use development. For example, if the mixed use development contains an
office park development portion, that portion shall comply with the standards
set forth in the office park development provisions. Mixed use developments
shall be further subject to the general standards for all planned developments.
(Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6 of this code.
2 1. See title 6 of this code.
3 1. See title 6 of this code.
4 1. See title 6 of this code.
5 1. See title 6 of this code.
5-14-4: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Administrative:
      1.   Because planned developments are unique and substantially different
from conventional developments, they shall be administered as special uses, in
accordance with procedures set forth herein. Planned developments may be
approved as special uses in any of Kildeer's zoning districts.
      2.   Applications shall be made on forms provided by the village
administrator and shall be accompanied by the required plans, drawings,
documents and other information. Applications, plans, and other documentation
shall be reviewed by the village administrator for all submittal requirements,
for preapplication, preliminary and final plan review, before forwarding to the
plan review committee, plan commission/board of appeals, or the village board.
      3.   Planned developments shall be controlled by means of development
ordinances prepared by the village attorney, and adopted by the village board
subsequent to approval of preliminary and final plans. Said development
ordinance shall include graphics and other support documentation upon which
village board approval is based. The development ordinance shall also specify
any conditions of approval established by the village board.
      4.   Ordinances approving preliminary and final plans may provide for
exceptions from district regulations governing use, density, area, bulk, and
parking, and the subdivision design standards, as may be desirable to achieve
the objectives of the proposed planned development, provided such exceptions
are consistent with the standards and criteria contained in this chapter.
   B.   Preapplication Plan Review Procedure (Optional):
      1.   Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a planned
development, the petitioner may contact the village administrator to arrange a
meeting with the plan review committee. The committee may request the presence
of the village's consultants, as determined appropriate by the village
administrator or village president. The consultants shall be remunerated under
the provisions of section
1-17-2 of this code.
      2.   The purpose of the preapplication meeting is to discuss the proposed
development in conjunction with village planning and zoning objectives, as
expressed in the comprehensive plan, and as set forth within this chapter.
      3.   At or before the preapplication meeting, the petitioner shall
provide five (5) copies of:
         a.   A sketch plan describing the proposed development and surrounding
area in sufficient detail to demonstrate the relationship of the planned
development to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed, and to the
topography and natural features of the adjoining land uses. The sketch plan
shall include:
North arrow, scale, and date of preparation.
Name and address of site planner or surveyor who prepared the plan.
Proposed land uses.
Total acreage, and percent of the site devoted to each land use.
Proposed layout of streets, lots, and blocks.
Proposed dedication of school and park sites, if any.
Proposed building footprints and estimated floor area for all nonresidential
structures, if any.
Approximate densities of dwellings, if any.
Wetlands, floodplains, floodways and surface waters, including lakes, ponds,
streams, and drainage swales, if any.
Major stands of trees and other existing vegetation, if any.
Any other data reasonably necessary to provide an accurate overview of the
proposed development.
         b.   A brief written statement that contains a general description of
the planned development and includes:
Evidence of ownership or approval from the property owner.
A description of contiguity, when proposed for annexation.
Economic benefits to the village attributable to the planned development.
Preliminary implementation schedule.
         c.   A list of all requested exceptions to the applicable village code
provisions.
         d.   Other information determined to be necessary by the village
administrator to clearly describe the planned development.
      4.   The plan review committee shall review the proposed sketch plan and
other documentation, and shall advise the petitioner as to the compatibility of
the planned development with the comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance,
subdivision ordinance 8, and the goals and policies for planning of the
village. Recommendations relative to a preapplication plan review are advisory
only, and shall not constitute a waiver from the requirements contained in this
code.
      5.   The plan review committee may, at its discretion, require plans and
support documentation to be revised before making a recommendation on the pre-
application plan. This may require additional meetings between the petitioner
and the committee, to assure that the proposed planned development conforms, to
the maximum extent possible, with the applicable code provisions, goals, and
policies of the village.
      6.   When deemed desirable by the committee, village staff or consultants
shall prepare a written report which shall be forwarded to the plan commission/
board of appeals and village board. The report shall:
         a.   Evaluate compatibility of the planned development with Kildeer's
comprehensive plan.
         b.   Identify exceptions from applicable codes and ordinances which
have been requested by the petitioner.
         c.   Summarize recommendations by the plan review committee regarding
the proposed planned development.
         d.   Summarize the petitioner's proposed schedule for submitting
preliminary and final plans in accordance with procedures set forth herein.
   C.   Preliminary Plan:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of the preliminary plan is to obtain a
recommendation from the plan commission/board of appeals and preliminary
approval by the village board that all plans and programs that the petitioner
intends to build and follow are acceptable, and that the petitioner can
reasonably proceed with preparation of detailed architecture, engineering, site
and landscape plans. The preliminary plan is more detailed than the sketch plan
required for preapplication, and is meant to assure the petitioner that final
plans will be approved if they substantially conform to the approved
preliminary plan.
      2.   Procedure:
         a.   Application: An application for a preliminary plan approval for a
planned development must be filed with the Zoning Administrator. All
applications must be filed in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Once it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning
Administrator will schedule the application for consideration by the Plan
Commission/Board of Appeals. A request for preliminary approval must be
approved by the owner of record of a planned development.
         b.   Preliminary and final plans shall be filed and processed
consecutively unless the Village Administrator determines that the proposed
planned development can be processed simultaneously.
         c.   Preliminary plats of subdivision may be processed along with the
preliminary plan submittal in accordance with procedures set forth in title 6
of this code. Submittal requirements for preliminary plat approval are
identified in title 6, chapter 3 of this code.
      3.   Submittals: The petitioner shall file the required number of copies
of plans and other supporting documentation, as identified below, with the
village administrator.
Once all required drawings and information have been received, the village
administrator shall distribute the preliminary plan submittal to the plan
commission/board of appeals. The petitioner shall deliver copies of all such
documents to the other reviewers designated by the village administrator.
Required plans and support documentation shall be submitted no later than
fifteen (15) working days before the regularly scheduled meeting of the plan
commission/board of appeals, to assure adequate time for review by members of
the commission/board, village staff, and its consultants. Required submittals
shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
         a.   Location map.
         b.   Plans and surveys at a scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1"
= 100'), unless the area of the site is more than two hundred (200) acres, in
which case said plans and surveys may be submitted that are two hundred feet to
the inch (1" = 200'). The following information shall be provided:
Boundary survey: A boundary line survey of the subject site prepared and
certified by a registered land surveyor.
Topography: Existing topographic character of the land with contours shown at
intervals no greater than two feet (2').
Site analysis: A detailed planning factors map depicting the following
information:
   Existing land uses both on the site and immediately adjacent.
   Scenic views.
   Wooded areas, as well as identification of trees over six inches (6") in
caliper.
   Soils with severe limitations that are unsuitable for building, road
construction and septic fields, as defined by the soil conservation service.
Additional soils information may be requested by the plan commission/board of
appeals or village engineer.
   Portions of the site in any floodplain or floodway.
   Streams, drainage ditches, culverts, wetlands and standing water.
   General directions of the storm water runoff across the property.
   Public utilities information, including the location and size of existing
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water lines both on the site and in
easements and rights of way immediately adjacent to the site, including gas,
electric, telephone and cable.
Site plan: The proposed site plan shall be superimposed upon the topographic
map prepared for the site. The proposed site plan shall contain all the
information required at the preapplication stage, as well as the following:
   Location of the subject site by section, town, and range or by other
approved legal description.
   Name and address of the site planner, engineer, architect and landscape
architect.
   Name and address of the owner and/or trust beneficiary.
   Site data, including:
   Total acreage, and acreage of each proposed lot, outlot, and common areas.
   Acres and percent of the planned development devoted to each land use.
   Percent of land devoted to streets and public rights of way.
   Percent of impervious surface.
   Percent of the site devoted to usable open space.
   Net residential densities (if any).
   Minimum lot size.
   Existing zoning on and adjacent to the site.
   Proposed zoning.
   Municipal and school district boundaries.
   Utility easements.
   Proposed lotting and footprints of all nonresidential structures.
   Maximum lot coverage by buildings and other impervious surfaces, for all
residential and nonresidential areas within the planned development.
   Off street parking and service loading areas, including number and
dimensions of parking spaces, drive aisles and loading zones.
   Configuration and acreage of all land proposed to be dedicated as common
open space and all sites to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for parks,
playgrounds, school sites, public buildings, and similar public and quasi-
public uses.
   Pedestrian and/or bicycle circulation systems.
   Parkway or greenbelt system.
   Proposed phasing.
   Location of proposed trash bins and enclosures for all nonresidential uses.
   All other information determined necessary by the plan commission/board of
appeals to clearly show the proposed elements of the planned development.
Grading plan: That grading plan shall show both existing and proposed contours
and elevations for the entire planned development, and shall identify all areas
proposed for excavation and/or filling of the property.
Landscape plan: The landscape plan shall be superimposed on the grading plan,
and shall include:
   Any proposed fences, walls, berms and entry monuments.
   Contours for any landscaped berms.
   One or more sections through the site to illustrate the relationship between
the landscape materials, the landform, proposed buildings and nearby
residential properties. Locations of all trees and shrubs, keyed into a plant
list which identifies species, sizes and quantities for all proposed plantings.
   Method of screening any trash bins and enclosures.
Photometric plan: The plan shall be superimposed on the site plan, and shall:
   Identify the location and heights of all light standards.
   Identify foot-candle intensities on the site of the planned development, and
extending ten feet (10') beyond the proposed property lines.
   Include specifications for proposed lighting, including wattage, method of
illumination, and color of light standards and luminaries.
Development schedule: A development schedule shall be submitted which
addresses:
   The approximate dates for initiating project construction.
   Phasing and anticipated date of completion for each phase.
   The area and location of common space that will be provided with each phase.
   The mix of uses proposed for implementation within each phase of a mixed use
planned development.
Architectural drawings: Preliminary architectural drawings for all primary
buildings shall be submitted which include:
   Typical elevations for proposed residential and nonresidential buildings
which identify materials for all elements of the building and proposed color
styling.
   Gross floor area for all nonresidential buildings.
   Minimum and maximum habitable floor areas for residential buildings,
excluding garages, basements, porches, and patios.
   Proposed building heights.
   Roof plan for all nonresidential structures which shows the proposed
location of all roof mounted mechanical equipment.
   Cross sections of all nonresidential structures which show the relation of
the roof structure and/or parapet wall to proposed roof mounted equipment.
Protective covenants: Proposed covenants shall be prepared and submitted which
include:
   Architectural controls for residential dwellings, including:
   Minimum floor area, excluding garages, basements, porches and patios.
   Maximum lot coverage.
   Materials.
   Antimonotony code.
   Required landscaping for individual lots.
   Gross floor area and maximum lot coverage for all other structures.
   Provisions for dedication and maintenance of all open space and common
areas.
Utility plan: A proposed utility plan shall be superimposed on the proposed
land use plan, and shall:
   Show the approximate location and dimensions of all sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, and water lines for all proposed land uses.
   Show drainage ditches, culverts, and water retention areas as well as any
utility easements.
   Be accompanied by a statement from the petitioner's engineer attesting to
the capability of existing sewer systems to service the proposed development.
Traffic impact study, prepared by a traffic engineer, which:
   Identifies anticipated volumes of traffic to be generated by each phase of
the planned development.
   Includes required public roadway improvements and/or traffic regulation
devices needed to ensure the proper safety or traffic circulation to, through,
and around the planned development.
Written statement: A written statement shall be submitted which describes:
   How the proposed planned development meets the objectives of the
comprehensive plan.
   How the project is compatible with adjacent development or planned land
uses.
   How the project will economically benefit or otherwise affect Kildeer,
including information regarding additional public facilities and/or services
that will be needed as a result of the proposed project.
   The mix of land uses proposed for development.
   The type and number of dwelling units for any residential land uses.
   Proposed phasing, and estimated dates of project initiation and completion.
Other: The plan commission/board of appeals may require preparation and
submittal of the following for review and evaluation:
   Tax impact study, detailing the estimated cost which the planned development
will have upon all taxing bodies and anticipated revenues which will be
realized from each phase of development.
   A school demographic study, as required by subsection
6-3-3B of this code.
   Other information determined appropriate by the plan commission/board of
appeals.
      4.   Plan Commission/Board of Appeals Review:
         a.   Upon receipt of all required submittals, the village
administrator shall notify the petitioner of the next available regularly
scheduled meeting of the plan commission/board of appeals. At that time, the
petitioner may request to present the proposed planned development to the plan
commission/board of appeals for review on an informal basis pursuant to this
section or request the proposed planned development be set for review at a
public hearing. The petitioner may submit revised plans based on village staff
feedback and comments prior to scheduling a public hearing.
         b.   The village planner and village engineer shall prepare staff
reports, which evaluate the proposed planned development for compliance with
applicable codes, ordinances, and the comprehensive plan. Staff reports shall
be available to the petitioner before the scheduled meeting. Reports may be
obtained from the village administrator at the village hall.
         c.   The petitioner shall present the proposed planned development to
the plan commission/board of appeals, and shall respond to questions raised by
commissioners, village staff, and its consultants.
         d.   Plans and other supporting documentation shall be revised as
necessary to respond to questions and concerns. The petitioner shall present
revised submittals to the plan commission/board of appeals at a date determined
to be mutually acceptable by the commission/board, village staff, its
consultants, and the petitioner. Meetings shall be scheduled to allow the
village staff and its consultants a minimum of ten (10) working days to review
revised submittals and prepare supplemental staff reports for plan commission/
board of appeals distribution.
      5.   Public Hearing:
         a.   Scheduling: To set a public hearing, the petitioner shall submit
the required number of copies of plans and support documentation required for
preliminary plan review as set forth in subsection C3 of this section. Upon
receipt of all required documentation, the village administrator shall
coordinate the time, date, and place of the public hearing with the petitioner
and the plan commission/board of appeals.
         b.   Content Of Notice: The notice of public hearing shall be provided
in accordance with
         c.   Conduct Of Hearing: The petitioner shall enter all plans,
drawings and other support documentation into the record as official exhibits,
and shall demonstrate compliance with notice of public hearing, notice of
surrounding property owners, and posting of the property. The hearing may be
continued by the plan commission/board of appeals from time to time to a date
certain, during which time drawings and support documentation may be revised
and resubmitted.
      6.   Action by the Plan Commission/Board of Appeals:
         a.   After the close of the public hearing, the Plan Commission/Board
of Appeals shall forward its recommendations to the Village Board. The
recommendation may include conditions of approval intended for incorporation
into final plans and supporting documentation.
         b.   The Plan Commission/Board of Appeals shall review the application
based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing pursuant to the
approval standards of this section. The Plan Commission/Board of Appeals may
recommend approval, approval with conditions or an unfavorable recommendation
of the preliminary plan. In the event of a tie vote, the minutes of the Plan
Commission/Board of Appeals' proceedings shall be forwarded to the Village
Board, which reflect the tie vote with no recommendation.
         c.   Conditions. The Plan Commission/Board of Appeals may recommend
and the Village Board may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the
proposed planned development as may be deemed necessary for the protection for
the public health, safety and welfare.
         d.   Approval Standards. The recommendation of the Plan Commission/
Board of Appeals and the decisions of the Village Board shall make findings of
fact to support the proposed planned development by considering the following
standards:
            (1)   The proposed planned development will not be injurious to the
use and enjoyment of other property in the vicinity and that any departures
from the zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including, but not limited to, density, setbacks, lot area, bulk, and
use are in the public interest.
            (2)   The physical design of the proposed planned development
includes adequate provisions for public services; adequate control over
vehicular traffic; protects designated common open space; and furnishes the
amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
            (3)   The proposed planned development will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the zoning district.
            (4)   The proposed planned development includes provisions for
adequate utilities, drainage, off-street parking and loading, pedestrian access
and all other necessary facilities.
            (5)   The proposed planned development includes provisions for
adequate vehicular egress and ingress designed to minimize traffic congestion
upon public streets.
            (6)   The location and arrangements of structures, parking areas,
walks, lighting and appurtenant facilities, are compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood and adjacent land uses.
            (7)   Compatibility with the comprehensive plan and the goals and
policies for planning within the village.
      7.   Village Board Review:
         a.   Within 60 days of receiving the plan commission/board of appeals'
statement of findings of fact and recommendation, the village administrator
shall schedule the proposed planned development for review by the village
board.
         b.   The petitioner shall present all exhibits and testimony
applicable for review and action by the village board.
         c.   The village board shall approve, approve with modifications, or
disapprove the preliminary plan for the proposed planned development.
      8.   Action By The Village Board: If the preliminary plan is approved,
the village board shall approve a development ordinance for the preliminary
plan. The ordinance shall identify all applicable exhibits and support
documentation upon which village board action is based, and shall include any
conditions of approval.
   D.   Final Plan:
      1.   Request For Final Approval: Following the approval of the
preliminary plan (unless preliminary and final approval are granted at the same
time), an application for a final plan for a planned development must be filed
with the Village Administrator within two years, unless an extension of time is
requested by the applicant and granted by the Village Board. All applications
must be filed in accordance with the requirements in this section
      2.   Final Plats Of Subdivision: Final plats of subdivision may be
processed along with the final plan submittal in accordance with section
6-3-5 of this code.
      3.   Submittals: Final plan submittals shall demonstrate compliance with
the preliminary plan development ordinance. The petitioner shall file requisite
number of copies of plans and other required supporting documentation with the
village administrator. Required submittals shall include, but not necessarily
be limited to, the following:
         a.   An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned development.
         b.   A final site plan which includes:
Identification of all use areas, including common open space.
Approved building setbacks and separation.
Footprints of all nonresidential buildings.
         c.   An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use
area, such as common open space.
         d.   Tabulations of each use area, including land area, and number of
dwelling units per net acre.
         e.   Final landscape plan, superimposed on a grading plan.
         f.   Final utilities and drainage plan.
         g.   Final agreements, bylaws, provisions, or covenants which govern
the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned development and
any of its common open area or other common facilities.
         h.   Final development and construction schedule.
         i.   Detailed elevations of buildings, excluding custom homes.
         j.   Final engineering drawings.
         k.   A certificate from the county which documents that no delinquent
taxes exist, and that all special assessments constituting a lien on the whole
or any part of the property of the planned development have been paid.
      4.   Final Plan Process: The final plan shall be processed as follows:
         a.   The Plan Commission/Board of Appeals shall review the final plan
submittal at a public meeting:
            (1)   If the final plan is in substantial compliance with the
preliminary plan, the Plan Commission/Board of Appeals shall recommend approval
of the final plan to the Village Board. The recommendation may include
additional conditions based on the final planned development documentation
submitted, such as, but not limited to, final engineering drawings.
            (2)   If the final plan is not in substantial conformance with the
preliminary plan, the Plan Commission/Board of Appeals must inform the
applicant as to specific areas found not to be in compliance and the applicant
must resubmit the final plan with changes to those areas found not to be in
substantial compliance. If the revised final plan remains noncompliant with the
preliminary plan, the applicant may request that the Plan Commission/Board of
Appeals render a decision to be forwarded to the Village Board. In such case,
the Plan Commission/Board of Appeals will recommend to the Village Board that
the final plan be denied
         b.   Action by the Village Board: Within 60 days of receipt of the
Plan Commission/Board of Appeals recommendation, the Village Board must review
the final plan. The Village Board must approve or deny the final plan. If
denied, the applicant may reapply by submitting a new final plan. If the Final
Plan is approved, the village board shall approve a development ordinance for
the Final Plan. The ordinance shall identify all applicable exhibits and
support documentation upon which village board action is based and shall
include any conditions of approval.
         c.   Effects of Approval
            (1)   After final plan approval, the final plan will constitute the
development regulations applicable to the subject property and must be recorded
with the Lake County Recorder of Deeds. The planned development must be
developed in accordance with the final plan. Violation of any condition is a
violation of the Ordinance and constitutes grounds for revocation of all
approvals granted for the planned development.
            (2)   No plats shall be recorded and no building permits issued,
until final plan submittals have been approved by the village board.
         d.   Expiration
            (1)   The final plan approval expires if a site development or
building permit has not been issued within two years after the date the Village
Board grants final plan approval. As part of the Village Board approval of the
final plan, the Village Board may extend this period of time. An extension of
the two year validity period may be granted by the Village Board prior to the
expiration date of the approval if the applicant requests an extension in
writing prior to the expiration date of the approval.
            (2)   If a map amendment was approved as part of the planned unit
development approval, once the final plan has expired with no request for
extension pending, the Village Board may initiate a map amendment to rezone the
lot to its most appropriate district classification, as deemed suitable by the
Village Board, acting on the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board.
      5.   Guarantees: In all cases where special use permits for a planned
development are granted, the Village Board shall require such evidence and
guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof of compliance or future compliance
that the conditions stipulated in the special use permit. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-
1991; amd. Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991; Ord. 03-O-866, 1-6-2003; Ord. 05-O-942, 11-
7-2005; Ord. 22-O-031, 12-20-2022)
5-14-5: CHANGES IN THE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   The planned development shall be developed only according to the
approved final plan development ordinance. The recorded final plan and
supporting data, together with all recorded documents and amendments, if any,
shall be binding on the owners, successors, heirs, and assigns.
   B.   Changes to a planned development may be made as follows:
      1.   Major Changes: Changes which alter the concept or intent of the
planned development may be approved by the village board only by submission of
a revised planned development plan and plat or other approval under the zoning
code. All revisions shall be reviewed by the plan commission/board of appeals
at a public hearing, in accordance with procedures set forth in subsection
5-14-4D of this chapter. Major changes include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Increases in residential density.
         b.   Increases in the heights of buildings.
         c.   Reductions in approved common open space or preservation areas.
         d.   Modifications to the approved uses and a change by more than ten
percent (10%) in the acreage allocated to each use.
         e.   Increases in square footage of business planned developments of
more than one percent (1%).
         f.   Rearrangement of lots, blocks, and building tracts.
      2.   Minor Changes: Minor changes may be approved by the village board,
after review and report by the plan commission/board of appeals, provided said
changes do not alter the spirit and intent of the approved planned development.
Minor changes include:
         a.   Minor modifications to the location of buildings, provided all
setbacks established for the planned development are met.
         b.   Minor changes to the location and configuration of streets and
rights of way which are made to preserve natural features.
         c.   Minor changes to the location and configuration and size of
approved open space and common areas due to circumstances not foreseen at the
time that final plans were approved.
         d.   Changes in project phasing and development.
         e.   Modifications to the final governing agreements, provisions, or
covenants.
      3.   Incidental Field Changes: Incidental field changes may be approved
by the village administrator, after review by appropriate staff personnel.
Incidental Field Changes include:
         a.   Changes required by other governmental bodies having jurisdiction
over the development
         b.   Changes required during construction when related to final
engineering issues such as topography, drainage, underground utilities,
structural safety, or vehicular circulation.
         c.   Minor changes in building location that continue to meet the
requirements of this Ordinance and any conditions of the final plan approval.
         d.   Minor changes in the location of walkways, vehicle circulation
ways and parking areas that continue to meet the requirements of this Ordinance
and any conditions of the final plan approval.
         e.   Interior modifications that do not increase the total floor area
or building footprint by more one percent (1%).
         f.   Changes in building materials and architectural elevations that
are minor in nature such as replacement of discontinued materials, changes in
color scheme, etc.
         g.   Modifications to the approved landscape plan that does not result
in a reduction of the total amount of plant material required such as plant
substitutions or relocations.
         h.   Reduction in parking spaces in a business planned development of
less than the greater of one percent (1%) or one (1) space.
      4.   Recording: Major changes which are approved for the final plan must
be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final plan. (Ord. 91-O-
587, 8-5-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005; Ord. 22-O-031, 12-20-2022)
CHAPTER 15
CLUSTER SUBDIVISIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991)
CHAPTER 16
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
5-16-1: Statement of Purpose
5-16-2: Continuance of Use
5-16-3: Discontinuance of Use
5-16-4: Change of Nonconforming Use
5-16-5: Repairs and Alterations
5-16-6: Damage and Destruction
5-16-7: Additions and Enlargements
5-16-8: Use District Changes
5-16-9: Exempted Buildings, Structures and Uses
5-16-10: Conversion to Special Use
5-16-11: Record of Nonconforming Uses and Structures
5-16-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming
buildings, structures and uses and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses which
adversely affect the maintenance, development or use and taxable value of other
property in the district in which they are located shall be gradually
eliminated in accordance with the authority granted by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
5-16-2: CONTINUANCE OF USE:
   A.   Any lawfully established use of a building or land, on the effective
date hereof or of amendments hereto, that does not conform to the use
regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a
legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise permitted
herein.
   B.   Any legal, nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use,
provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
   C.   Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date hereof or of amendments hereto, may be completed in accordance
with the approved plans; provided, construction is started within ninety (90)
days and diligently prosecuted to completion. Such building shall thereafter be
deemed a lawfully established building.
5-16-3: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
   A.   Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a
nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the
provisions of this Title, such premises shall not thereafter be used or
occupied by a nonconforming use, even though the building may have been
originally designed and constructed for the prior nonconforming use.
   B.   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part thereof
has been discontinued for a consecutive period of one year or whenever there is
evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use,
such use shall not after being discontinued or abandoned be re-established, and
the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations
of the district.
   C.   Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a
nonconforming use of land for a period of three (3) consecutive months shall
constitute abandonment and shall not thereafter be used in a nonconforming
manner.
   D.   A nonconforming use not authorized by the provisions of this Title in
effect at the time the amendatory ordinance becomes effective, shall be
discontinued and not re-established, except when the provisions of the
amendatory ordinance find the use to be conforming to the district in which it
is then located.
5-16-4: CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
   A.   The nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or substantially
all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in
which it is located, may be changed to a use permitted in the same district as
the nonconforming use in which the building or structure is located.
   B.   No nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be changed to
another nonconforming use when such nonconforming use is located in a building
or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is
designed or intended for a permitted use.
   C.   The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or structure,
or in connection with which any building or structure thereon in incidental or
accessory to the principal use of land, shall not be changed to any other use,
except to a use permitted in the district in which the land is located.
5-16-5: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
   A.   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a
nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
   B.   No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure
containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration is required by law.
      2.   When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the
nonconforming use.
      3.   When a building in a residential district containing residential
nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve livability, provided no
alterations shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units or
the bulk of the building.
5-16-6: DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION:
If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or
destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its
replacement value at that time, the building or other structure can be rebuilt
or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with the
provisions of the district in which it is located. In the event the damage or
destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value based
upon prevailing costs, the building may then be restored to its original
condition and the occupancy or use of such building may be continued which
existed at the time of such partial destruction.
In either event, restoration or repair of the building or other structure must
be started within a period of six (6) months from the date of damage or
destruction and diligently prosecuted to completion.
5-16-7: ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS:
   A.   A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the entire
building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use, and is made to conform to
all regulations of the district in which it is located.
   B.   No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered
in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space occupied
by such nonconforming use.
   C.   No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required usable open space or any land beyond the boundaries of the
zoning lot as it existed on the effective date hereof or to displace any
conforming use in the same building or on the same parcel.
   D.   A building or structure which is nonconforming with respect to yards or
any other element of bulk regulated herein shall not be altered or expanded in
any manner which would increase the degree or extent of its nonconformance with
respect to the bulk regulations of the district in which it is located.
5-16-8: USE DISTRICT CHANGES:
Whenever the boundaries of a use district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one use district to another use district of a different
classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming
uses existing therein.
5-16-9: EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
Wherever the lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conforms
to the use regulations herein but is nonconforming only in the particular
manner hereinafter specified, the building and use thereof shall be exempt from
the requirements of Section
5-16-4 of this Chapter.
   A.   In any residential district where a dwelling is nonconforming only as
to the number of dwelling units it contains, provided no such building shall be
altered in any way so as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
   B.   In any business or industrial district, where the use is less distant
from a residential district than that specified in the regulation for the
district in which it is located.
   C.   In any district, where an established building, structure or use is
nonconforming with respect to the standards prescribed herein for any of the
following:
      1.   Yards - front, side, rear or transitional;
      2.   Off street parking or loading;
      3.   Building height. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-16-10: CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE:
Any nonconforming use may be made a special use by the granting of a special
use permit, as authorized in chapter 17 of this title. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-
1976)
5-16-11: RECORD OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
A complete record of the location, value, nature and extent of all
nonconforming uses shall be made and kept by the enforcing officer. (Ord. 76-O-
227, 12-2-1976)
CHAPTER 17
ZONING ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
5-17-1: Administration
5-17-2: Administrative Officer, Duties
5-17-3: Zoning Certificates
5-17-4: Occupancy Certificates
5-17-5: Certificate For Continued Occupancy Of Nonconforming Uses
5-17-6: Appeals
5-17-7: Variations
5-17-8: Plan Commission/Board Of Appeals Jurisdiction
5-17-9: Amendments
5-17-10: Special Uses
5-17-11: Fees
5-17-12: Violation, Penalty, Enforcement
5-17-13: Notice
5-17-1: ADMINISTRATION:
The administration of this title is hereby vested in the following:
   The zoning administrator
   The plan commission/board of appeals 1
(Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
5-17-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER, DUTIES:
The building commissioner, as zoning administrator, shall be in charge of the
administration and enforcement of this title, and such officer shall:
   A.   Receive applications required, issue permits and furnish certificates,
all in his judgment and discretion.
   B.   Examine premises for which permits have been issued, and make necessary
inspections to determine compliance.
   C.   When requested by the village president, or when the interest of the
village so requires, make investigations and render written reports.
   D.   Issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
   E.   Adopt rules and procedures consistent with this title.
   F.   Keep careful and comprehensive records of applicants, permits,
certificates, inspections, reports, notices, orders and all localized actions
of the board of trustees and shall file the same permanently by street address.
   G.   Keep all such records open to public inspection, at reasonable hours,
but not for removal from his office.
   H.   Report to the village president, at least once each month as to permits
and certificates issued, and orders promulgated.
   I.   Request and receive the assistance and cooperation of the police
department, the village attorney and the village officials.
   J.   Inform the legal department of all violations and all other matters
requiring prosecution of legal action.
   K.   Be entitled to rely upon any opinion of the legal department as to the
interpretation of this title, or the legal application of this title to any
factual situation.
   L.   Discharge such other duties as may be placed upon him by this title.
(Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 84-O-385, 5-7-1984)
5-17-3: ZONING CERTIFICATES:
   A.   No permit as required by the village building code 1  shall be issued
by the village clerk for the construction of a building, structure or land
improvement or an alteration or enlargement of an existing building, structure
or land improvement and the uses thereof, until the building commissioner
certifies in such permit that the application for a permit with accompanying
plans and specifications conforms with the regulations of this title.
   B.   When a permit is not required by the village building code for an
improvement and the use thereof requiring conformance with the regulations of
this title, an application for a zoning certificate shall be filed with the
building commissioner. A zoning certificate shall be issued only when the
application shows conformance with the regulations of this title.
   C.   All applications for building permits or zoning certificates shall be
accompanied by a plat in duplicate drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions
of the lot or lots to be built upon, the size of the building or structure to
be erected or structurally altered, its location on the lot or lots or such
other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these
regulations. A careful record of such applications and plats shall be kept in
the office of the building commissioner. The building commissioner shall, in
writing, approve or disapprove all building permits or zoning certificates
within thirty (30) days after submission thereof; failure to act shall be
deemed approval thereof. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 84-O-385, 5-7-
1984)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4 of this code.
5-17-4: OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES:
   A.   No building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date
hereof and no addition to a previous existing building shall be occupied, and
no land vacant on the effective date hereof shall be used for any purpose,
until an occupancy certificate has been issued by the building commissioner. No
change in a use in any district shall be made until an occupancy certificate
has been issued by the building commissioner. Every occupancy certificate shall
state that the use or occupancy complies with all the provisions of this title.
   B.   Every application for a building permit shall also be deemed to be an
application for an occupancy certificate. Every application for an occupancy
certificate for a new or changed use of land or building where no building
permit is required shall be made to the building commissioner.
   C.   No occupancy certificate for a building or addition thereto,
constructed after the effective date hereof, shall be issued until the
construction has been completed and the premises have been inspected and
certified by the building commissioner to be in full and complete compliance
with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate was based.
No addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied, and no new use
of a building in any district shall be established until the premises have been
inspected and certified by the building commissioner to be in full compliance
with all the applicable standards of the zoning district in which it is
located. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate
may be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its
date during the completion of any addition or during partial occupancy of the
premises. An occupancy certificate shall be issued, or written notice shall be
given to the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued,
not later than fourteen (14) days after the building commissioner is notified
in writing that the building or premises is ready for occupancy. (Ord. 76-O-
227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 84-O-385, 5-7-1984)
5-17-5: CERTIFICATE FOR CONTINUED OCCUPANCY OF NONCONFORMING USES:
Certificates for the continued occupancy of nonconforming uses existing on the
effective date hereof, or made nonconforming by this title, shall state that
the use is a nonconforming one and does not conform with the provisions of this
title. The building commissioner shall notify the owners of the property being
used as a nonconforming use and shall furnish said owner with a certificate of
occupancy for such nonconforming use. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 84-
O-385, 5-7-1984)
5-17-6: APPEALS:
   A.   Authority: The plan commission/board of appeals shall hear appeals from
an administrative order, requirement or determination under this title, made by
the building commissioner, and make its recommendations to the village board.
   B.   Initiation And Processing: An appeal may be taken to the plan
commission/board of appeals by any person, or by an office, department, board,
bureau or commission aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement,
decision or determination under this title.
      The appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the
plan commission/board of appeals by a general rule by filing with the village
clerk and with the plan commission/board of appeals, a notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof. Such appeal shall be taken on forms provided by
the plan commission/board of appeals. The officer from whom the appeal is taken
shall forthwith transmit to the commission/board all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
      An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the building commissioner certifies to the plan commission/board
of appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In this event, the proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the plan
commission/board of appeals or by a court of record on application and on
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due causes shown.
      The plan commission/board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the
appeal within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or
attorney.
      The plan commission/board of appeals may recommend the reversal or
affirmative, wholly or partly, or may recommend the modification of the order,
requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in
the premises.
   C.   Decision: All decisions of the village board, after hearing by and
recommendation of the plan commission/board of appeals on appeals from an
administrative order, requirement decision or determination of the building
commissioner, shall in all instances be final administrative determinations and
shall be subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable Illinois
statutes. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 84-O-385, 5-7-1984; Ord. 05-O-
942, 11-7-2005)
5-17-7: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Authority: The village board of trustees shall decide variations of the
provisions of this title in harmony with its general purpose and intent, and
shall vary them only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth where the
plan commission/board of appeals shall have made a finding of fact based upon
the standards hereinafter prescribed that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this title.
   B.   Initiation: An application for a variation may be made by any person,
or by any office, department, board, bureau or commission requesting or
intending to request application for a building permit, zoning certificate or
occupancy certificate.
   C.   Processing: An application for a variation shall be filed with the
village clerk. The village clerk shall forward such application to the plan
commission/board of appeals for processing in accordance with applicable
statutes of the state of Illinois and the provisions of this title.
No variation shall be recommended by the Plan Commission/Board of Appeals
except after a public hearing before the Plan Commission/Board of Appeals, of
which there shall be a notice as required by 5-12-13.
   D.   Decisions: All recommendations and findings of the plan commission/
board of appeals on variations arrived at after the hearing shall be
accompanied by the findings of fact specifying the reason or reasons for
recommending the approval or disapproval of the variation, and the decision of
the village board of trustees shall be final and subject to judicial review
only in accordance with applicable statutes of the state.
   E.   Standards:
      1.   The board of trustees of the village shall not vary the provisions
of this title as authorized in this chapter, unless it shall have made findings
based upon the evidence presented to it and the plan commission/board of
appeals in the following cases:
         a.   That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
governing the district in which it is located;
         b.   That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances;
         c.   That the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
      2.   A variation shall be permitted only if the evidence, in the judgment
of the village board, sustains each of the three (3) conditions enumerated
above.
      3.   For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the board of
trustees in making this determination whenever there are practical difficulties
or particular hardships, shall also take into consideration the extent to which
the following facts, favorable to the applicant, have been established by the
evidence:
         a.   That the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved will bring a particular hardship
upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter
of the regulations were to be carried out;
         b.   That the conditions upon which the petition for variation is
based would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoned
classification;
         c.   That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
         d.   That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by
any person presently having an interest in the property;
         e.   That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or unduly injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; or
         f.   That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of
fire, or otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
      4.   The village board may require such conditions and restrictions upon
the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the
standards set forth in this chapter to reduce or minimize the effect of such
variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and to implement the general
purpose and intent of this title.
   F.   Authorized Variation: Variations from the regulations of this title
shall be granted by the village board only in accordance with the standards set
out in this section, and may be granted only in the following instances, and in
no others:
      1.   To permit up to a twenty percent (20%) reduction in the required
front, side, or rear yard, except that no such variation shall be permitted in
any business or commercial district for any required yard abutting a lot line
in any residential district.
      2.   To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited
solely because of insufficient area or width of the lot or lots, but in no
event shall the respective area and width of the lot be less than ninety
percent (90%) of the required area and width. The percentage set forth in this
subsection is not to be reduced by any other percentage for minimum lot width
and area set forth in this title.
      3.   To permit the same off street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two (2) or more uses, provided the substantial uses of
such facility by each use does not take place at approximately the same hours
of the same days of the week.
      4.   To reduce the applicable off street parking or loading facilities
required by not more than one parking space or loading space, or twenty percent
(20%) of the applicable regulations, whichever number is greater.
      5.   To increase by not more than twenty percent (20%) the gross area of
any sign.
      6.   To increase by not more than ten percent (10%) the maximum gross
floor area of any use so limited by the applicable regulations.
      7.   To extend the period of time a nonconforming use may continue or
remain.
      8.   To exceed any of the authorized variations allowed under this
section when a lot of record or a zoning lot, vacant or legally used on the
effective date hereof, is by reason of the exercise of the right of eminent
domain by any authorized governmental body or by reason of a conveyance under
threat of an eminent domain proceeding reduced in size so that the remainder of
said lot does not conform with one or more of the regulations of the district
in which said lot of record or zoning lot or structure is located.
   G.   Other Variation: Variations other than those listed in subsection F of
this section may be granted by the village board, except in the LC limited
commercial district. No such other variation shall be granted except after a
public hearing as set forth herein for variations generally and a report from
the plan commission/board of appeals recommending the variation. The
affirmative vote of five (5) members of the village board shall be necessary to
grant such other variation. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 93-O-648, 9-7-
1993; amd. Ord. 03-O-866, 1-6-2003; Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005; Ord. 22-O-031,
12-20-2022)
5-17-8: PLAN COMMISSION/BOARD OF APPEALS JURISDICTION:
The plan commission/board of appeals of the village, which has been duly
established 1 , is the plan commission/board of appeals referred to in this
title, and shall have the following duties under this title: (Ord. 76-O-227,
12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   A.   To hear all applications for amendments and special uses and thereafter
submit reports of findings and recommendations thereon to the village board in
the manner prescribed in this chapter for amendments and special uses.
   B.   To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the
provisions of this title, and to make reports of its recommendations to the
village board not less frequently than once each year.
   C.   To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under
this title. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
5-17-9: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the
authority of this title may be amended from time to time, by ordinance in
accordance with applicable statutes of the state of Illinois. An amendment
shall be granted or denied by the village board of trustees only after public
hearing before the plan commission/board of appeals and a report of its
findings and recommendations has been submitted to the village board of
trustees.
   B.   Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the village
board, by the plan commission/board of appeals, other governmental bodies, or
by any resident of or owner of property within the jurisdictional limits of
this title.
   C.   Processing: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the
village clerk and thereafter introduced to the village board of trustees. Such
application shall be forwarded to the plan commission/board of appeals, with a
request to hold a public hearing. Notice shall be given of the time and place
of the hearing as required in section 5-12-13. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd.
Ord. 03-O-866, 1-6-2003; Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005; Ord. 22-O-031, 12-20-2022)
5-17-10: SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Purpose: The development and execution of this title is based upon the
division of the village into districts, within any one of which the use of land
and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or structures, as related
to the land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are
special uses, which, because of their unique character, cannot be properly
classified in any particular district or districts without consideration, in
each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring lands and upon the
public need for the particular use or the particular location. Such special
uses fall into two (2) categories:
      1.   Uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated utilities, or
uses traditionally affected with public interest.
      2.   Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities.
   B.   Authority: Special uses shall be authorized or denied by the village
board in accordance with the provisions of this title applicable to amendments
of this title and the regulations and conditions set forth in this title for
special uses.
No application for a special use shall be acted upon by the village board until
after:
      1.   A written report is prepared and forwarded to the village board by
the plan commission/board of appeals in a manner prescribed herein for
amendments to this title; and
      2.   A public hearing has been held by the plan commission/board of
appeals after due notice by publication as prescribed herein, for amendments,
and the findings and recommendations of the plan commission/board of appeals
have been reported to the village board.
   C.   Initiation: An application for a special use may be made by any person,
or by an office, department, board, bureau or commission requesting or
intending to request a building permit or occupancy certificate.
   D.   Processing: An application for a special use, in such form and
accompanied by such information as shall be established from time to time by
the plan commission/board of appeals shall be filed with the village clerk and
thereafter introduced to the village board of trustees. Such application shall
be forwarded to the plan commission/board of appeals, with a request to hold a
public hearing. Notice shall be given of the time and place of the hearing in
accordance with section
5-17-13.
The plan commission/board of appeals shall hold a public hearing and forward
its recommendations in the form of a written report to the village board within
thirty (30) days following the date of public hearing on each application
unless it is withdrawn by the petitioner.
The application shall state:
      1.   The proposed use at that particular location requested is necessary
or desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in the interest of
public convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of the
neighborhood or community; and
      2.   Such use will not under the circumstances of the particular case be
detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property values or
improvement in the vicinity; and
      3.   The proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions
specified in this title for such use, and with the stipulation and conditions
made a part of the authorization granted by the village board of trustees.
In the case of written protest against any proposed amendment of the
regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley
therefrom, or by the owner of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the village clerk,
the special use shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of all of the village trustees. Any proposed special use which fails to
receive the approval of a majority of the plan commission/board of appeals
members and is so reported, shall not be passed by the village board except by
a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the trustees of the village.
      4.   Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this title where an
"adult use" as defined in section
5-1-6 of this title is allowed as a special use in any zoning district, no
other criteria shall be used for granting or denial of the special use permit
than those listed herein:
         a.   The property line of each adult use must be located no less than
five hundred feet (500') from the property line of any other adult use;
         b.   No adult use shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of
a residential zoning district;
         c.   The building line of any adult use shall not be located within
five hundred feet (500') of the property line of any public building, church,
school, library, park or playground.
The adult use, special use permit shall be granted if the aforementioned
criteria are met but shall be subject to revocation if in judicial proceedings
it is found that activities engaged in under such special use permit constitute
obscenity or distribution of harmful material to minors in violation of state
statutes.
   E.   Decisions: The village board, upon report of the plan commission/board
of appeals and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed
special use in accordance with applicable statutes of the state or may refer it
back to the plan commission/board of appeals for further consideration. (Ord.
76-O-227, 12-2-1976; amd. Ord. 97-O-742, 3-6-1997; Ord. 03-O-866, 1-6-2003;
Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005; Ord. 22-O-031, 12-20-2022)
5-17-11: FEES:
The village board shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for
zoning certificates, occupancy certificates, appeals, application for
amendments or special use, and other matters pertaining to this title. The
schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the village clerk and may be
altered or amended by the village board.
Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on any application or appeal. (Ord. 76-O-227, 12-2-1976)
5-17-12: VIOLATION, PENALTY, ENFORCEMENT:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with,
or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall,
upon conviction, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-
1991; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
5-17-13: NOTICE:
   A.   Required Notice: The following types of notice are required for public
hearings of each of the following actions:
 
Zoning Application                            Published Mailed Posted
Zoning Text Amendment                         X
Zoning Map Amendment                          X         X
Special Use (including variations)            X         X
Variation                                     X         X
Planned Development (including special use or X         X      X
variations)
Plan Review                                   X         X      X
 
   B.   Published Notice: Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be
published at least once, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15)
days before the hearing, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation
within the village. The applicant shall provide an affidavit that notice as
herein required was given which shall include a copy of the published notice.
   C.   Mailed Notice: Notice of the hearing shall be given by the applicant by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to all record owners of property
within five hundred feet (500') in each direction of the subject property.
Notice as required herein shall be given no less than fifteen (15) days nor
more than thirty (30) days in advance of the hearing date. At the time of the
hearing, the applicant shall provide an affidavit that notice as herein
required was given and which shall include a copy of the notice along with a
list of the property owners and their addresses to whom notice was given and
the receipts for certified mailing.
   D.   Content Of Mailed and Published Notice: The notice of public hearing
shall, at a minimum, include:
      1.   A legal description of the subject property.
      2.   The address or common name of the subject property.
   C.   The name of the petitioner.
   D.   A description of the petitioner's request including, but not limited
to, the requested rezoning, acreage of the subject property, proposed mix of
uses, and number and type of dwelling units, if any.
   E.   The time, place, and purpose of such hearing. (Ord. 91-O-587, 8-5-1991)
   F.   Posted Notice: The petitioner shall post and maintain, for a period of
not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, the notice of public
hearing. Said notice shall be erected not more than fifteen feet (15') from the
front lot line(s), and not less than four feet (4') above ground, nor more than
six feet (6') above ground, and placed in such a manner so as to be visible
from the adjacent street(s). The face of the notice shall be three feet by four
feet (3' x 4') with black letters on a white background; said letters shall be
of minimum size as indicated below. Said notice shall be in the following form:
ZONING HEARING THIS PROPERTY (2" size print)
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
      Petitioner:
      (1.5" size print)
         Purpose:
         Date:
         Time:
         Place:
   (1" size print) At the hearing, all those who may be interested may appear
and be heard. For further information please contact the Kildeer Village Office
at 847-438-6000. Removal or defacing of this sign by unauthorized persons is
prohibited.
(Ord. 22-O-031, 12-20-2022)
CHAPTER 18
ZONING MAP 1
SECTION:
5-18-1: Official Zoning Map
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-3-2 of this title.
5-18-1: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
The official zoning map for the village of Kildeer is approved annually, and is
available for purchase or inspection at the village hall during normal business
hours. (Ord. 91-O-596, 11-4-1991; amd. Ord. 92-O-606, 3-2-1992; Ord. 93-O-633,
3-1-1993; Ord. 94-O-655, 3-7-1994; Ord. 95-O-689, 3-6-1995; Ord. 97-O-741, 3-5-
1997; Ord. 98-O-765, 3-2-1998; Ord. MM-O-801, 3-6-2000; Ord. 01-O-826, 3-5-
2001; Ord. 02-O-847, 3-4-2002; Ord. 03-O-870, 3-3-2003; Ord. 05-O-932, 3-7-
2005; Ord. 06-O-963, 3-1-2006; Ord. 08-O-1010, 3-3-2008; Ord. 09-O-1035, 3-2-
2009)
CHAPTER 19
SATELLITE ANTENNAS
SECTION:
5-19-1: Findings And Determinations
5-19-2: Building Permit Required
5-19-3: Building Permit Requirements
5-19-4: Special Use
5-19-5: Residential Zones Only
5-19-6: Building Permit Fee
5-19-6-1: Location
5-19-6-2: Screening
5-19-6-3: Materials
5-19-6-4: Architecture Committee Review
5-19-7: Penalty
5-19-1: FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS:
The village has determined that satellite antennas of various sizes, shapes,
varieties and configurations can be installed and operated in such a manner as
to be unsightly nuisances not compatible with existing structures and land uses
within the village, and that they further can be located in such a fashion that
the appearance of the structures produces major undesirable consequences for
owners of adjacent properties. The village has further determined that
satellite antennas shall be considered structures for the purposes of this code
subject to all applicable provisions concerning structures. (Ord. 01-O-839, 9-
4-2001)
5-19-2: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to install, erect, or operate a satellite antenna system
without prior thereto having secured a building permit therefor prior to the
commencement of construction. (Ord. 84-O-381, 2-5-1984)
5-19-3: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
The installation, erection, construction and operation of a satellite antenna
system shall be considered a permissible accessory use in all residentially
zoned areas, provided, however, that any such satellite antenna system shall
not exceed four feet (4') in diameter for data communication, nor eight feet
(8') in diameter for video reception purposes. The satellite antenna system
must be ground supported, with the center of the dish no higher than six feet
(6') aboveground. Satellite antenna twenty four inches (24") or less in
diameter may be mounted on the residential structure. For the purposes of this
section "residential zone" shall mean, and include, R-1 single-family
residential district, R-2 single-family residential district, PD-1 single-
family residential district and PD-2 low-density single-family residential
district. (Ord. 01-O-839, 9-4-2001)
5-19-4: SPECIAL USE:
A person desirous of installing, erecting, constructing or operating a
satellite antenna system in excess of the diameter or the height set forth in
section
5-19-3 of this chapter may apply for a special use. The plan commission/board
of appeals shall consider the application in accordance with the procedures set
forth in section
5-17-10 of this title. The plan commission/board of appeals may recommend a
special use to the village board of trustees to construct a satellite antenna
system in excess of the diameter specified in section
5-19-3 of this chapter, provided that the proposed system shall satisfy all the
following criteria: (Ord. 91-O-601, 12-2-1991; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   A.   The system as proposed shall be compatible with existing uses in the
surrounding area.
   B.   The construction and installation of the satellite antenna system shall
strictly conform to all applicable village code provisions.
   C.   The proposed satellite antenna system shall have no adverse impact on
adjacent properties.
   D.   The proposed satellite antenna system shall be structurally sound and
adequate for anticipated wind loads, and must have a permanent foundation
therefor.
   E.   The applicant must demonstrate that a larger diameter antenna is
necessary for adequate reception due to the proposed location of the antenna,
or any other unavoidable conditions.
   F.   In any event, the maximum diameter of any satellite antenna installed,
pursuant to a special use, shall not exceed ten feet (10') in diameter, and the
maximum height of the center of the dish shall be no higher than ten feet (10')
aboveground. (Ord. 91-O-601, 12-2-1991)
5-19-5: RESIDENTIAL ZONES ONLY:
Satellite antenna systems shall not be allowed in any zone other than a
residential zone, as described in this chapter. (Ord. 84-O-381, 2-5-1984)
5-19-6: BUILDING PERMIT FEE:
The building permit fee for a satellite antenna system shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). (Ord. 84-O-381, 2-5-1984)
5-19-6-1: LOCATION:
A satellite antenna system shall not be installed within the front yard
(between the front of the principal building and the front yard lot line), nor
within any setback area. (Ord. 91-O-601, 12-2-1991)
5-19-6-2: SCREENING:
All satellite antenna systems shall be installed with adequate all weather
vegetative screening so that the system is not visible from any adjacent
property or from any public street; provided that the screening shall not
interfere with reception through the geosynchronous arch. No screening shall be
required for a satellite antenna eighteen inches (18") or less in diameter.
(Ord. 95-O-679, 1-4-1995)
5-19-6-3: MATERIALS:
A satellite antenna system over four feet (4') in diameter shall be made of
open mesh material. (Ord. 91-O-601, 12-2-1991)
5-19-6-4: ARCHITECTURE COMMITTEE REVIEW:
All applications for a building permit for the construction and operation of a
satellite antenna system shall be reviewed and approved by the architecture
committee to assure conformity with all the requirements of this chapter and
all other applicable village code provisions. In addition to all other
requirements, the proposed system shall satisfy the conditions set forth in
subsections
5-19-4A through D of this chapter. (Ord. 91-O-601, 12-2-1991)
5-19-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum as
set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day during, or upon which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 84-O-381, 2-5-1984; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 20
SIGNS
SECTION:
5-20-1: Statement Of Purpose
5-20-2: Definitions
5-20-3: Administration And Enforcement
5-20-4: Architecture Committee Approval
5-20-5: Permit Required
5-20-6: Permit Requirements
5-20-7: Issuance Of Permit
5-20-8: Permit Lapse
5-20-9: Sign Permit Fees
5-20-10: Permit Penalty
5-20-11: Renewal Fees
5-20-12: Nonconforming Signs
5-20-13: Permit To Alter Sign
5-20-14: Compliance With All Code Provisions
5-20-15: Revocation Or Termination Of Permit
5-20-16: Removal Of Certain Signs
5-20-17: Construction And Maintenance
5-20-18: Prohibited Signs
5-20-19: Exemptions
5-20-20: Temporary Signs
5-20-21: Abandoned Signs
5-20-22: Advertising Structures
5-20-23: Highway Advertising Control Act Signs
5-20-24: Penalties
5-20-25: Avoidance Of Prosecution (Rep. by Ord. 02-O-852, 6-3-2002)
5-20-26: Separability
5-20-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Regulate signs in such a way as to support and complement land use
objectives set forth in the zoning ordinance and this code.
   B.   Ensure that all signs within the village are compatible with existing
land uses and buildings within the general vicinity of the sign and the
community as a whole, with regard to size, location, color, construction,
materials, and manner of display.
   C.   Permit such signs that do not confuse, mislead, obstruct the vision
necessary for traffic safety, or otherwise endanger the public health, safety,
morals, or general welfare. (Ord. 90-O-552, 10-1-1990)
5-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
definitions and meanings:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which for at least fourteen (14) days no longer serves a
bona fide purpose.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a sign permit.
APPROVED COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS: Any material more than one-twentieth of an inch
(1/20") in thickness, which burns at a rate of not more than two and one-half
inches (21/2") per minute when subjected to the American Society for Testing
Materials, prevailing standard test for flammability in sheets of six-
hundredths inch (0.06") in thickness.
APPROVED COMBUSTIBLE PLASTICS: Those plastics which, when tested in accordance
with American Society for Testing Material standard method of testing for
flammability of plastics over five-hundredths of an inch (0.05") in thickness
(D635-44), burn no faster than two and five-tenths inches (2.5") per minute in
sheets of six-hundredths inch (0.06") thickness.
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE: Any pennant, flag, valance, banner, propeller,
spinner, streamer, searchlight, balloon or similar device designed for the
purpose of attracting attention, promotion or advertising.
BACKGROUND AREA: The entire area of a sign on which copy could be placed, as
opposed to the copy area, when referred to in connection with wall signs.
BANNER: A temporary sign composed of lightweight material either enclosed or
not enclosed in a rigid frame, including but not limited to, secured or mounted
so as to allow movement of the sign caused by the movement of the atmosphere.
BILLBOARD SIGNS: Signs which advertise or direct attention to a business
commodity, service or entertainment conducted or offered for sale off-site.
BRAND NAME SIGN: Sign which advertises a specific brand name, trademark, or
trade name.
BUILDING DEPARTMENT: The Village of Kildeer Building Department, which is
authorized and directed to administer the provisions of this Chapter.
BUILDING FACE or WALL: All window and wall area of a building in one plane or
elevation.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The linear length of a building facing the right of way or
the linear length of the right of way facing the building, whichever is
smaller.
CAR SIGN: Any advertising or business sign attached to an automobile, which is
parked or placed in position for display to the public.
CHANGING SIGN (AUTOMATIC): A public service time, temperature, or date sign,
with electronically controlled message centers.
COPY AREA: The area as measured in square feet of the smallest rectangular
figure which circumscribes the area embraced by the actual copy on a sign.
COPY (PERMANENT AND TEMPORARY): The wording and numbering on a sign surface
either in permanent or removable letter form.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Any noncommercial sign which serves solely to designate the
location or direction of an activity, business, or event.
ERECT: To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create,
paint, draw or in any other way bring into being or establish; but does not
include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to the
change of advertising message or normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign
structure.
FACADE: The face of a building from grade to parapet in height and from side
wall to side wall in width.
FLASHING SIGN: Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light
source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by
means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
Automatic changing signs such as public service time, temperature and date
signs or electronically controlled message centers are classed as "Changing
Signs", not "Flashing Signs".
FRONTAGE: The length of the property line on a parcel or zoning lot parallel to
and along each public right of way it borders.
GROUND SIGN, or FREE-STANDING SIGN: Includes any sign supported by one or more
uprights, poles or braces placed upon the ground or a sign placed directly on
the ground, and not attached to any building.
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street grade,
or upper surface of the nearest street curb, other than an elevated roadway, to
the highest point of the sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN, EXTERNAL: Any sign externally illuminated by a source of
light which is cast upon the surface or face of the sign to illuminate by
reflection only.
ILLUMINATED SIGN, INTERNAL: A sign, all or any part of which, is made of
incandescent neon, or other types of lamps attached thereto; or a sign having a
border of incandescent or fluorescent lamps thereto, attached and reflecting
light thereon; or a transparent sign whether lighted by electricity or other
illuminant.
INCOMBUSTIBLE: Any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of
one thousand two hundred degrees (1,200°) Fahrenheit and will not continue to
burn or glow at that temperature.
INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS: Bulletin Boards not over twenty (20) square feet in area
for public, charitable, or religious institutions.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which was lawfully erected and continuously
operated and maintained, but which fails to conform to all applicable
regulations and restrictions of this Chapter.
OBSCENE: Statements, words, suggestions, or pictures of an obscene, indecent,
or immoral character, such as will offend public morals or decency. All being
those prohibited by Illinois statutes and/or Village Code Title 9, Chapter 4.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN: Off-premises sign shall be deemed another term for billboard
sign.
OWNER: Any person who is in lawful possession of a zoning lot or parcel of
land.
PARAPET: That portion of a building wall that rises above the roof level.
PERMITTEE: The recipient of a valid sign permit.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or any
other legal entity.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The main building as distinguished from a subordinate or
accessory building.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign supported by a building or other structure, which sign
projects over any street, sidewalk, alley, or public way or public easement; or
which projects more than twelve inches (12") from the face of any building,
structure, or supporting wall. This term also includes those signs commonly
known as overhanging signs.
QUASI-PUBLIC SIGN: Any sign erected by a community based organization or an
organization which qualifies for an exemption pursuant to section 501 (c) (3)
of the Internal Revenue Code, which advertises an event being sponsored by the
organization.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGN: Permanent residential development signs at major
entrances designed to identify a residential subdivision and containing no
advertising.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained entirely or partially
upon or over the roof of any building, with the principal support on the roof
structure.
SIGN: A "sign" shall mean any copy, device, display or structure other than
building or landscaping, readily visible from public property and used
primarily for visual communication for the purpose of, or having the result of,
bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the person, group of persons,
or the public generally. A sign includes but is not limited to, any and all
reading matter, letters, numerals, pictorial representations, emblems,
trademarks, service marks, trade names, flags, banners, streamers, pennants,
inscriptions, and patterns whether affixed to a building, painted, or otherwise
depicted on a building, or separate from any building, and shall include window
signs.
SIGN FACE: The entire area of sign on which copy could be placed.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Includes any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric,
cardboard, wallboard, or other light materials, with or without frames,
intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.
VILLAGE: The Village of Kildeer, Lake County, Illinois.
WALL SIGN: Any sign which is placed against a building or other structure and
attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall of any building. This sign
shall not extend more than eighteen inches (18") from the face of the wall. A
sign attached to a mansard roof is a wall sign. A canopy or awning shall be
considered a wall sign.
WINDOW SIGN: A window sign shall mean any sign affixed to, in contact with, or
within twelve inches (12") of a window. (Ord. 90-0-552, 10-1-90)
ZONING LOT: For the purposes of this Chapter, a zoning lot shall mean and
include a lot of record in a recorded subdivision, or a single tract of land or
parcels described by metes and bounds which are designated by their owner as a
tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a single unit in common
ownership. Multiple, contiguous parcels in common ownership may be aggregated
for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 91-0-596, 11-4-91)
MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS: The use in this Chapter of the phrase "any sign or
other advertising device" or similar phrase shall mean any sign as defined in
this Chapter. The word "shall" is mandatory, and not discretionary.
5-20-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The Zoning Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce
the provisions of this Chapter.
5-20-4: ARCHITECTURE COMMITTEE APPROVAL:
All sign permit applications, except for those described in Section
5-20-19, shall be reviewed and approved by the Architecture Committee before
the issuance of a permit.
5-20-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, or relocate any
sign or other advertising structure without first obtaining a sign permit from
the Building Department and having paid the required fees.
5-20-6: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Application for a sign permit shall be made upon the form provided by the
Building Department. It shall be signed by the applicant, and shall contain or
have attached to it the following information:
   A.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant (the name of an
officer or principal in the case of corporate, partnership, or association
applications).
   B.   Location of building, structure, or zoning lot to or upon which it is
to be attached or erected.
   C.   Location of sign upon the zoning lot and a copy of the sign.
   D.   Size of sign and height of top of sign above ground.
   E.   Two (2) sets of plans and specifications showing the method of
construction, location, support, attachment to the buildings or grounds,
illumination and the lighting intensity. Two (2) sketches showing the sign
faces, exposed surfaces and proposed message, all accurately represented in
scale as to size, proportion and color. If the sign is to be attached to a
building, a drawing shall be submitted showing the sign on the facade of the
building.
   F.   If required by the Building Department, stress sheets and calculations
demonstrating that the structure is suitably designed to withstand deadload and
wind pressure in any direction.
   G.   Name of person constructing and erecting the sign.
   H.   Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or zoning lot
on or upon which the sign is to be erected.
   I.   Any required electrical permit for the sign. All illuminated signs
shall, in addition, be subject to the provisions of the building code
pertaining to electricity.
   J.   Such other information that the building department shall require to
ensure compliance with all applicable ordinances of the village. (Ord. 90-O-
552, 10-1-1990)
5-20-7: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
It shall be the duty of the building department, upon the filing of an
application for a sign permit, to examine the plans, specifications, and other
data and the premises upon which it is proposed to be erected. If it shall
appear that the proposed sign is in compliance with all the requirements of
this chapter, and all other applicable provisions of this code, that the
application has received the approval of the architecture committee, and that
the appropriate permit fee has been paid, it shall issue the sign permit. If
not, it shall deny the permit and give written notice to the applicant of the
denial. (Ord. 90-O-552, 10-1-1990)
5-20-8: PERMIT LAPSE:
If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within six
(6) months after date of issuance, the permit shall be null and void. (Ord. 90-
O-552, 10-1-1990)
5-20-9: SIGN PERMIT FEES:
Fees shall be as set forth in section
4-2-2 of this code and shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. (Ord. 95-
O-693, 4-3-1995; amd. Ord. 06-O-970, 6-5-2006)
5-20-10: PERMIT PENALTY:
If a person installs, permits to be installed, or attempts to install any sign
without first securing a permit as required by this chapter, the fee for the
sign permit shall be one hundred percent (100%) more than otherwise provided
for by this chapter. (Ord. 90-O-552, 10-1-1990)
5-20-11: RENEWAL FEES:
Sign permits shall expire June 30 of each calendar year. The building
department shall inspect annually, or at such other times as it deems
necessary, each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this chapter
for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is secure and safe, and whether it
is in need of removal or repairs. To meet the expense of such inspection, each
permittee shall pay to the village collector annually on or before July 1 a
renewal fee:
 
Illuminated sign    $ 200.00
Nonilluminated sign 100.00
 
(Ord. 08-O-1001, 2-4-2008)
5-20-12: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Any sign lawfully existing or under construction as of August 6, 1990, which
does not conform to the provisions contained herein, may be continued or
maintained, but may not be replaced, structurally altered, or reestablished (if
discontinued), or restored, if destroyed or damaged to the extent of fifty
percent (50%) or more of its current market value.
In any event, all nonconforming signs 1  shall be removed, altered, or repaired
to conform to the provisions of this chapter, as set forth in the following
schedule:
   A.   Projecting signs, roof signs, wall signs, ground signs, illuminated
signs and temporary subdivision signs regulated by this chapter within four (4)
years (October 1, 1994).
   B.   All other signs within three (3) months (January 1, 1991). (Ord. 90-O-
552, 10-1-1990)
 
Notes
  1. If a sign becomes nonconforming because of annexation of the land on which
1 it is located after October 1, 1994, the time period shall run from the
  effective date of the annexation.
5-20-13: PERMIT TO ALTER SIGN:
Whenever a holder of a permit desires to enlarge or alter the display surface
of a sign, he shall be required to submit an application for a new permit and
pay the requisite fee. There shall be no refund or credit for fees previously
paid.
The existing permit will be canceled, and a new permit issued. However, the
repairing, changing of parts, or preventive maintenance of a sign shall not be
deemed to be an alteration. (Ord. 90-O-552, 10-1-1990)
5-20-14: COMPLIANCE WITH ALL CODE PROVISIONS:
In addition to the requirements contained in this chapter, a sign permit
applicant shall fully comply with all other applicable village code provisions.
(Ord. 90-O-552, 10-1-1990)
5-20-15: REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked by the
Village Administrator, if he finds noncompliance with this Chapter, which is
not corrected within fourteen (14) days after written notice by the Zoning
Administrator to the permittee.
5-20-16: REMOVAL OF CERTAIN SIGNS:
   A.   Removal of Obsolete Signs: Any sign or other advertising structure,
which advertises a business no longer being conducted, or a product no longer
being sold, is deemed abandoned, and shall be taken down and removed by the
permittee. Removal shall be made within fourteen (14) days after written
notification from the Zoning Administrator.
   B.   Expired Permits: Within not more than five (5) days after the
expiration of any permit issued hereunder, the permittee shall cause the sign
to be removed. This is the joint and several obligation of the zoning lot owner
and permittee. At the expiration of the five (5) day period, any such sign
which has not been removed is hereby declared to be a common nuisance.
   C.   Prohibited Signs: Signs which are identified as being prohibited by
this Chapter shall be removed by its owner immediately upon written notice by
the Zoning Administrator.
   D.   Unsafe and Unlawful Signs: If the Zoning Administrator shall find that
any sign is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been
constructed, erected, or maintained in violation of the provisions of the
Building or Zoning Code, he shall give written notice to the permittee thereof
and to the owner of the property as shown on the most recent tax rolls. If the
permittee and/or owner fails to make corrections or fails to remove or alter
the sign within fourteen (14) days after said notice, the sign may be removed
by the Zoning Administrator at the expense of the permittee and/or owner of the
property upon which it is located. However, the Zoning Administrator may cause
any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property, to be removed
summarily with or without prior notice, at the owner's expense. Notice will
then be sent out within three (3) days after its removal.
5-20-17: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Wind Pressure and Deadload Requirements: Any sign, other advertising
structure, canopy or awning, as defined in this Chapter, shall be designed and
constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds
per square foot of net surface area; and shall also be constructed to receive
other loadings as required in the most recently adopted edition of the Building
Officials Conference of America (BOCA) Basic Building Code and other ordinances
of the Village.
   B.   Sign Face to be Smooth: Any sign, other advertising structure, canopy
or awning which is within ten feet (10') of a public right-of-way or
thoroughfare, shall have no nails, tacks, wires, or other hazardous projections
protruding therefrom.
All letters, figures, characters or representations in conjunction with,
attached to or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or
attached to the sign structure.
   C.   Glass; Limitations: Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be
safety glass with a minimum thickness of one-fourth inch (1/4").
   D.   Maintenance of Property: All signs, posts and supports, and the
premises adjacent thereto shall be maintained by the permittee in a clean,
sanitary, and inoffensive manner, and free and clear of all obnoxious
substances, rubbish and weeds, and in good operating condition.
   E.   Painting Required Every Two Years: The permittee of any sign or other
advertising structure shall be required to have properly painted at least once
every two (2) years all parts and supports of said sign, unless they are
galvanized or otherwise made corrosion free.
5-20-18: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   A.   Miscellaneous Advertising Objects Prohibited: No person shall place on,
or suspend from the exterior of any building or structure, any goods, wares, or
merchandise.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any attention
getting device, which shall include pennants, banners, propellers, spinners,
streamers, balloons, and similar devices.
   Flashing Lights Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or
maintain any sign which is wholly or partially illuminated by flashing lights
or intermittent lights. No flashing or raceway signs shall be allowed.
   Revolving Light Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or
maintain any sign which is illuminated by revolving lights, except when
specifically required by law.
   Obscene Matter Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or
display an obscene sign.
   Signs Not to Constitute Traffic Hazards: No sign, or other advertising
structure, canopy or awning shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as
to obstruct free and clear vision of motorists or as to distract the attention
of the driver of the vehicle by reason of the position, shape, or color
thereof.
   Pursuant to the foregoing, no sign, or other advertising structure, canopy,
or awning, shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to be likely to
interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device. Accordingly, no sign, other advertising
structure, canopy, or awning shall make use of the words "stop", "go", "slow",
"danger", or any other similar word, phrase, symbol, or character, or employ
any red, yellow, orange, green, or other colored lamp or light, in such a
manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
   No sign other than a sign erected by public authority shall be erected or
maintained in such a manner as to be or purport to be an imitation of or
resemble an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or
which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal.
   B.   Community Appearance, Traffic Hazards: There shall be permitted no
flashing signs, rotating or moving signs, animated signs, signs with moving
lights, or creating the illusion of movement. A changing sign whereupon the
time and/or temperature is indicated by intermittent lighting shall not be
deemed to be a flashing sign if the lighting changes are limited to the
numerals indicating the time and/or temperature and are not more frequent than
every ten (10) seconds.
   Flags, pennants, or buntings shall not be permitted.
   C.   Obstructions: No sign, other advertising structure, canopy, or awning
as herein defined, shall obstruct any driveway, door, window, fire escape,
ladder or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress for any
building or structure.
   This Section shall not be construed to prohibit the affixing of temporary
window bills on or about any window, glass partition, or any other structure in
the interior of any building, as provided in this Chapter.
   No sign, or other advertising structure, canopy, or awning shall be attached
to a standpipe or fire escape.
   D.   Specific Prohibitions: The following signs are specifically prohibited
by this Chapter.
      1.   Signs which emit sounds including, but not limited to voice, music,
and similar methods of advertising.
      2.   Signs on fences, trees, utility poles, walls, or similar structures,
which are not part of a building structure.
      3.   There shall be no signs painted on any wall, fence, tree, or utility
pole.
      4.   Billboards except those as permitted via application under the
Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971.
      5.   Signs consisting of a string, cluster or series of lights, except on
such clocks and weather gauges as may be authorized by other sections of this
Chapter.
      6.   Home occupation signs
      7.   Car signs.
      8.   Projecting signs.
      9.   Portable signs. (Signs which were once portable but made permanent
shall be also considered portable.)
      10.   Roof signs.
      11.   Off-premises signs.
      12.   Free-standing multi-tenant or multi-business occupant signs.
      13.   Brand name signs.
   E.   Other Signs: Any sign not expressly permitted by this Chapter is
prohibited in the Village.
5-20-19: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions and regulations of this Chapter shall not apply to the following
signs; provided, however, said signs shall be subject to the provisions of
unsafe and unlawful signs.
   A.   Restrictions In Residential Districts: No signs may be installed or
erected within residential districts with the exception of the following:
   A single sign for the purpose of advertising the sale of property may be
installed within a residential district, provided that the sign conforms to all
of the following criteria:
      1.   No sign may be illuminated or electrically operated, nor may any
sign consist of any moving parts.
      2.   No sign shall exceed the dimensions of four (4) square feet.
      3.   All signs installed in residential districts in accordance with this
Section shall be limited to on-site advertising purposes only.
      4.   All signs situated within a residential district pursuant to the
provisions of this Section shall be removed no later than ten (10) days
subsequent to the completion of the purpose of the sign; to wit: the signing of
a purchase contract.
      5.   All signs shall be of wood and/or metal construction.
      6.   All signs shall have a total height no greater than four feet (4')
as measured from the top of the sign to ground level.
      7.   No sign shall be situated closer than thirty five feet (35') to the
side zoning lot line, and shall not be located within the Village right of way.
   B.   Plaques or tablets, denoting names of buildings and date of erection or
names of buildings or dates cut into any masonry surface (commonly known as
cornerstone).
   C.   Decorations displayed in connection with civic, patriotic, or religious
holidays for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
   D.   Flags, emblems, notices and signs of an official court, public office,
or governmental unit displayed for noncommercial purposes.
   E.   Traditional holiday lighting schemes.
   F.   Signs on windows and doors:
      1.   Signs located inside show windows and doors shall not occupy a total
of more than twenty five percent (25%) of the surface of such window or door.
      2.   No sign shall be placed or maintained on the exterior of any window
or door facing upon any sidewalk, street or other public way.
      3.   Provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to be contrary to
maximum allowable sign or coverage thereof as provided elsewhere within the
Code.
      4.   The provisions of this Chapter shall not restrict the reasonable
application upon the glass surface of a door or window of lettering or decals
giving the address, hours of business, entrance or exit information,
professional or security affiliations or membership, credit cards which are
accepted, or other similar information; nor shall the surface area of such
lettering or decals be included in the overall computation of allowable window
signs.
   G.   Quasi-Public Signs:
      1.   Nonprojecting wall or ground-type quasi-public signs, having an area
not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet, may be erected on the zoning lot on
which the event or activity advertised is to occur or be conducted.
      2.   No quasi-public sign shall be erected or maintained within any
public right of way except pursuant to written permission by the Building
Department.
      3.   A quasi-public sign may not be erected or maintained more than seven
(7) days prior to the date of which the event or activity advertised is to
occur or be conducted and shall be removed within three (3) days after the
termination thereof.
   H.   Institutional Signs: A bulletin board not exceeding twenty (20) square
feet in area located on the premises of a not for profit, charitable, or
religious institution.
   I.   Residential Development Sign: Residential development sign. (Ord. 90-O-
552, 10-1-1990)
5-20-20: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   In Residential Districts: See section
5-20-19 of this chapter.
   B.   In Nonresidential Districts: A temporary sign (nonilluminated) shall be
permitted for the length of time set forth on the required permit therefor as
established by the following schedule and shall thereafter be removed unless
such permit is extended by the building department. Temporary signs of the
following types may be erected in accordance with the following tables. All
temporary signs shall meet safety requirements of the building code. (Ord. 90-
O-552, 10-1-1990)
      1.   Advertising Permitted: The advertisement contained on any temporary
sign shall pertain only to the business, industry or pursuit conducted on or
within the premises on which such sign is erected or maintained. This provision
shall not apply to signs of a civic, political, or religious nature.
         a.   Special Advertising/Promotional Signs: All special advertising/
promotional signs of temporary nature, except those signs covered in section
5-20-19 of this chapter, for grand openings, sales, and other reasonable
similar events may be granted a temporary permit for a period not to exceed
seven (7) days, provided that such signs are not attached to fences, trees,
utility poles, or the like and further provided that such signs are not placed
in a position that will obstruct or impair vision or traffic or in any way or
manner create a hazard or disturbance to the health and welfare of the general
public. Such signs shall be professionally made, installed and removed.
Suitable sign materials shall be used in the construction of special
advertising/promotional signs. A maximum of two (2) temporary sign permits
shall be issued in a one year (365 day) period.
   A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid upon the issuance of a permit
for such sign, and a refundable cash deposit for a like amount shall be
deposited with the building department to ensure the removal of such sign at
the expiration of the permit. The building department, after seven (7) days'
written notice to the permit holder to remove such sign, and after the failure
of the permit holder to do so, shall cause said sign to be removed and the cash
deposit shall be forfeited to help defray the cost of removal. (Ord. 02-O-845,
2-4-2002)
      2.   Construction Signs: Construction signs which identify the project or
building name and/or name of the developers, contractors, engineers, lender,
and architects on the site being developed. Such sign(s) may be erected subject
to the following restrictions:
         a.   Each sign is limited in size to a maximum gross area of thirty
two (32) square feet and may not exceed a height of ten feet (10').
         b.   The height of each sign may not exceed ten feet (10') from the
ground surface to the top of the sign.
         c.   The sign(s) must be located a minimum distance of fifteen feet
(15') from the closest property line.
         d.   Only one sign may be displayed per site frontage.
         e.   The sign(s) may be displayed only upon the approval of the
(first) building permit and must be removed upon the issuance of the (last)
certificate of occupancy or until such time as construction has been
substantially completed on the principal building or buildings. If construction
is suspended for a period exceeding forty five (45) days the sign(s) must be
removed.
   C.   Subdivision/Planned Unit Development Business Signs: Signs which
advertise a residential, commercial, or planned unit development under
development and are located on the premises of the development. These signs may
be erected subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Each sign advertising a development of less than five (5) acres
shall be limited in size to a maximum gross area of thirty two (32) square
feet. Each sign advertising a development of five (5) acres or greater shall be
limited to a maximum gross area of one hundred (100) square feet.
      2.   The height of each sign may not exceed ten feet (10') from the
ground surface to the top of the sign.
      3.   The sign(s) must be located a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15')
from the closest property line.
      4.   Only one sign may be displayed per development site frontage.
      5.   The sign(s) may be displayed only upon approval of the final plat or
site plan and must be removed upon the acceptance of the public improvements by
the village, or sale of the last zoning lot or unit, or within two (2) years,
whichever comes first. (Ord. 90-O-552, 10-1-1990)
   D.   Other Provisions Regarding Temporary Signs:
      1.   Political Signs: All political signs must be displayed only on
private property. No permit is required for political signs. (Ord. 10-O-018,
11-2-2010, eff. 11-2-2010)
      2.   Location: No temporary sign shall extend over or into any street,
alley, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare or right of way or a distance
greater than four inches (4") from the wall to which it is attached, and shall
not be placed or project over any wall opening.
   No temporary sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress to or
egress from any door, window, or fire escape, nor shall any such sign be
attached to any standpipe or fire escape.
      3.   Signs Attached To Walls: If a temporary sign is attached to a wall,
it must be secured with wire or steel cables or approved supports. Strings,
ropes, or wood slats for anchorage or support purposes are prohibited. (Ord.
90-O-552, 10-1-1990)
5-20-21: ABANDONED SIGNS:
An abandoned sign shall be promptly removed or dismantled no later than
fourteen (14) days after it no longer serves a bona fide purpose. (Ord. 90-O-
552, 10-1-1990)
5-20-22: ADVERTISING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Illuminated Signs: The application for a permit for erection of a sign
or other advertising structure, in which electrical wiring and connections are
used, shall be submitted to the building department. The building department
shall examine the plans and specifications, inspecting all wiring and
connections, to determine if the same complies with the most recent edition of
the national electric code, and shall approve the issuance of said permit if
the said plans and specifications do comply with all applicable electrical
provisions, and all other applicable provisions of this chapter and other
village ordinances, or disapprove the application if noncompliance is found.
      1.   All illuminated signs within one hundred feet (100') of any
residential zoning district shall be turned off between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless the establishment is
engaged in the operation of business during such period, in which case the sign
may be lit during the hours of operation only.
      2.   Illumination shall be installed or applied only through a
translucent surface; or recessed into the sign structure; or if the light
source is external to the sign, directed to and concentrated on the sign. Signs
utilizing exposed neon tubing shall not be permitted.
      3.   Signs shall be shaded as necessary to avoid casting a bright light
upon property located in any residential district or upon any public street or
park.
      4.   Floodlights, gooseneck reflectors or other external sources of
illumination shall be contained within a protective casing.
      5.   Illumination shall be constant in intensity and color, and shall not
consist of flashing, animated, chasing, scintillating or other illumination
conveying the sense of movement. Signs which exhibit only time and temperature
are permitted, if they otherwise comply with this chapter.
   B.   Freestanding Signs:
      1.   Construction; Materials Required: All freestanding signs shall be
approved by the building department as being in compliance with the building
code and shall be constructed of incombustible or approved combustible
materials.
      2.   Number Of Signs: Each zoning lot or parcel of land under one
ownership or use may have not more than one freestanding sign, with a maximum
of two (2) display surfaces, except that any zoning lot or parcel with a
frontage of three hundred fifty feet (350') or more may have two (2) signs
located not less than two hundred fifty feet (250') apart.
      If a zoning lot has frontage on more than one street, highway, or other
public right of way, then said zoning lot will be allowed two (2) signs, one
per frontage, no closer than one hundred feet (100') apart.
      3.   Location; Setback: The minimum setback for all freestanding signs,
shall be fifteen feet (15') from the edge of pavement and all portions of the
sign(s) must be located on private property. No freestanding sign shall be
nearer than ten feet (10') to any sign, building, structure, side or rear
property line.
      4.   Size; Height: The gross area and height of a freestanding sign shall
be governed by the following factors:
         a.   Surface Area Calculation:
 
Type                                Permitted Gross Sign Area
Shopping center identification sign 3/4 square foot per lineal foot of building
                                    frontage, maximum of 100 square feet
All other freestanding signs        1/2 square foot per lineal foot of building
                                    frontage, maximum of 50 square feet
 
         b.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a freestanding sign may
not exceed ten feet (10') high as measured from the average crown of the street
to which the sign is intended to face. Shopping center identification signs may
extend to a maximum height of fifteen feet (15'). No freestanding sign shall
interfere with sight lines. Where the property grade and street crown differ by
three feet (3') or more, the height of the sign shall conform with the
recommendations of the Zoning Administrator, consistent with the purpose of
this Chapter.
   C.   Wall Signs: Wall signs may be permitted subject to the following
provisions:
      1.   Wall signs may be of wood, metal, or plastic. In no case shall any
side wall or rear wall sign be permitted to contain any form of illumination if
said wall is adjacent to a residential district.
      2.   Illuminated wall signs shall consist of individually constructed
letters mounted directly on the building face or on approved raceways.
      3.   Location/Limitation of Placement: No wall sign shall cover wholly or
partially any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to
which it is attached. Illuminated wall signs shall not be permitted to extend
more than twelve inches (12") beyond the face or structure to which it is
attached, and nonilluminated signs shall not be permitted to extend more than
six inches (6") beyond the face or structure to which it is attached. Wall
signs shall be attached to a height of not less than eight feet (8') above any
sidewalk or fifteen feet (15') above any thoroughfare, and may not extend over
said thoroughfare.
      4.   Front Wall Signs: Front wall signs shall be permitted subject to the
following regulations:
         a.   Single Business Occupant Building: A sign shall be permitted on
the front wall of a principal building. The total area of such sign or signs
shall not exceed eight percent (8%) of the area of the front face (including
doors and windows) and a maximum width of eighty percent (80%) of the front
width of the principal building, provided that the total area of such sign or
signs, front and side signs combined, shall not exceed two hundred (200) square
feet.
         b.   Multiple Business Occupant Building: Where a single principal
building is devoted to two (2) or more business or commercial uses, the
operator or each such use may install a front wall sign. The maximum area of
each sign shall be determined by determining the proportionate share of the
front face (including doors and windows) of the principal building occupied by
each such use and applying such proportion to the total sign area permitted for
the front wall of the building. Multi-business occupant office buildings shall
be permitted one wall sign identifying the building or a single business
occupant.
      5.   Side Wall Signs: Side wall signs shall be permitted subject to the
following regulations:
         a.   The total area of such sign or signs shall not exceed five
percent (5%) of the area of the front wall (including doors and windows) of the
principal building.
         b.   The sign or signs must be located on a side wall facing a side
yard of ten feet (10') or more in width on the same zoning lot, or a side wall
facing a side street.
   D.   Directional Signs: Directional or instructional signs accessory to
parking and driveway areas are permitted subject to the following regulations:
      1.   One sign may be erected to designate each entrance or exit from a
parking or driveway area; each such sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet
in area; such signs may be double-faced signs and placed no higher than four
feet (4') above ground level.
      2.   One sign designating the conditions of use will be permitted for
each parking or driveway area; such signs shall not exceed a maximum of three
(3) square feet in area (including, if necessary, the name of the business for
whose customers the parking or driveway area is maintained).
      3.   Lane markers, directional arrows, and other directional or
instructional devices painted on the pavement or parking and driveway areas
(including the traffic lanes thereof) shall be permitted without limitation;
such markings to conform to the International Traffic Code.
      4.   Such directional and/or instructional signs shall be constructed in
a manner to not exceed four feet (4') above average prevailing ground level.
      5.   Directional signs shall conform to wall sign requirements concerning
absolute projection.
      6.   A nonilluminated business sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in
area, for purposes of identifying each service entrance of a business
establishment, may be erected on the service door or wall directly above the
service door.
5-20-23: HIGHWAY ADVERTISING CONTROL ACT SIGNS:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this Section to establish procedures and
standards for the installation, erection, and maintenance of signs which are
permitted by, and for which application is made by virtue of the Highway
Advertising Control Act of 1971. 1  The Village desires to establish procedures
and standards consistent with the requirements of both the Highway Advertising
Control Act of 1971, as well as the interests of its citizenry, and to avoid
excessive, incompatible, or confusing signage.
The Village has conducted "a sign survey to determine customary use in those
areas where signs would be permitted under the Highway Advertising Control Act
of 1971.
   B.   Application: The provisions of Section
5-20-23 et seq., shall apply to all signs for which application is made by
virtue of the Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971, notwithstanding any
other provisions of the Village Code which might otherwise prohibit said signs.
It is the intent of this Section to permit signs, subject to the procedures and
standards set forth herein, within areas in which signs would be permitted by
the Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971.
   C.   Procedure: In order to obtain a permit for a sign within any area in
which a sign would be permitted by the Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971,
the following information and procedures shall apply:
      1.   The application shall be signed by the owner of record and the owner
of the sign to be constructed. The application shall include those items set
forth in Section
5-20-6.
      2.   A copy of the written lease, if any.
      3.   A detailed drawing and architectural rendering of the proposed sign
(excluding sign face copy).
      4.   Site drawing depicting the exact location and distance of the
proposed sign in relation to buildings, structures, and other existing signs
within a distance of one hundred feet (100'), and all existing signs greater
than one hundred (100) square feet in size, which are located within five
hundred feet (500').
      5.   Sufficient plans to demonstrate the sign as constructed will be
structurally safe.
      6.   A permit fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per square foot of signage.
For the purposes of this Section, signage shall consist of all sides of the
sign structure. For example, if the sign structure is double faced, the square
footage for the purposes of fees assessed shall be computed by adding the
square footage of each face.
      7.   Such other information as the Building Department may reasonably
require to determine that the sign conforms to Village and other appropriate
standards.
   D.   Standards: The following standards shall apply to the installation,
erection, and maintenance of any signs applied for under the provisions of the
highway advertising control act of 1971:
      1.   No sign shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area.
      2.   No sign shall be located within one hundred feet (100') of the
location of any other sign for which a permit has been issued or applied for.
In addition, no sign one hundred (100) square feet or greater shall be located
closer than five hundred feet (500') to any other sign one hundred (100) square
feet or greater, nor to the location of any such other sign for which a permit
has been issued or applied for.
      3.   Any sign illumination employed shall be directed upon the sign and
shall not shine upon adjacent properties or buildings.
      4.   All other provisions of this chapter not in conflict with this
section shall apply.
   E.   Permit Duration: An annual permit shall be required and sign permits
shall expire on June 30 of each calendar year.
   F.   Annual Inspection: An annual inspection shall be required for each
sign. A renewal permit shall be required for each successive year after the
issuance of the original permit. There shall be a renewal and annual inspection
fee of five dollars ($5.00) per square foot of sign area. The renewal fee shall
be calculated in the same manner as the original permit fee as provided in
subsection C6 of this section. Prior to the issuance of a renewal permit, the
permittee shall furnish to the building department a statement certified by a
structural engineer that the sign is structurally safe.
   G.   Permit Lapses: A sign permit shall be null and void if the sign is not
installed within six (6) months of permit issuance. If a permittee fails to
obtain a renewal permit within five (5) days of expiration of a sign permit, no
such renewal permit shall be issued and an original permit shall be required
prior to the continued operation and maintenance of said sign.
   H.   Conflict: In the event of a conflict between the terms of this section
and those provisions contained in 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 440/1 et seq.,
the more stringent provision shall prevail.
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this section and other
provisions of this code, the provisions of this section shall prevail. (Ord.
90-O-552, 10-1-1990)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 225 ILCS 305/1 et seq.
5-20-24: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as
set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or upon which a violation continues or occurs. (Ord.
90-O-552, 10-1-1990; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
5-20-25: AVOIDANCE OF PROSECUTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 02-O-852, 6-3-2002)
5-20-26: SEPARABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is held to be invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed to be excised herefrom,
and the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other provisions
contained in this chapter. (Ord. 90-O-552, 10-1-1990)
CHAPTER 21
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
5-21-1: Intent
5-21-2: General Requirements And Information
5-21-3: Building-Mounted Solar Energy Systems
5-21-4: Decommissioning
5-21-5: Penalty
5-21-1: INTENT:
   A.   The intent of these standards is to allow for the safe and effective
development of solar energy systems that reduce the on-site consumption of
fossil fuels or utility supplied electric energy throughout the Village of
Kildeer. These regulations are intended to encourage the use of local renewable
energy resources and promote sustainable building design and management
practices in a manner that minimizes the appearance of a solar collection
system.
   B.   Definitions:
                                        The sensation of brightness within the
GLARE:                                  visual field which causes annoyance,
                                        discomfort, or loss of visual
                                        performance and visibility.
PHOTOVOLTAIC CELL:                      A semiconductor device that converts
                                        solar energy into electricity.
                                        An active solar energy system that
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM:                    converts solar energy directly into
                                        electricity.
                                        A device, structure or a part of a
                                        device or structure for which the
SOLAR COLLECTOR:                        primary purpose is to transform solar
                                        radiant energy into thermal,
                                        mechanical, chemical or electrical
                                        energy.
                                        Any part of a solar collector that
                                        absorbs solar energy for use in the
SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE:                collector's energy transformation
                                        process. Collector surface does not
                                        include frames, supports and mounting
                                        hardware.
                                        Radiant energy received from the sun
SOLAR ENERGY:                           that can be collected in the form of
                                        heat or light by a solar collector.
                                        A system for which the primary purpose
                                        is to convert solar energy into
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES):              thermal, mechanical or electrical
                                        energy for storage and use and reduce
                                        on-site consumption of utility power.
                                        A solar energy system whose primary
                                        purpose is to harvest energy by
                                        transforming solar energy into another
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACTIVE:            form of energy or transferring heat
                                        from a collector to another medium
                                        using mechanical, electrical or
                                        chemical means.
                                        A solar energy system that is an
                                        integral part of a principal or
                                        accessory building, rather than a
                                        separate mechanical device, replacing
                                        or substituting for an architectural or
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-INTEGRATE structural part of the building.
D:                                      Building-integrated systems include,
                                        but are not limited to, photovoltaic or
                                        hot water systems that are contained
                                        within roofing materials, windows,
                                        skylights, awnings, shading devices and
                                        similar architectural components.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-MOUNTED:  A solar energy system that is mounted
                                        on the roof of a principal building.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, FLUSH-MOUNTED:     A solar energy system that is mounted
                                        flush with a finished surface.
                                        A solar energy system not attached to
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, FREESTANDING OR    another structure and is ground mounted
GROUND-MOUNTED:                         on a rack or pole that is attached to
                                        the ground.
                                        A solar energy collector or storage
                                        mechanism that supplies energy for
                                        structures or processes on more than
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, JOINT:             one lot or in more than one dwelling
                                        unit or leasehold, but not to the
                                        general public and involves at least
                                        two (2) owners or users.
                                        A photovoltaic solar energy system in
                                        which the circuits energized by the
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, OFF GRID:          solar energy system are not
                                        electrically connected in any way to
                                        electric circuits that are served by an
                                        electric utility company.
                                        A solar energy system that captures
                                        solar light or heat without
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PASSIVE:           transforming it to another form of
                                        energy or transferring the energy via a
                                        heat exchanger.
                                        A solar energy system mounted on a rack
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED:      that is fastened to or ballasted on a
                                        building roof.
                                        A commercial facility that converts
                                        sunlight into electricity, whether by
                                        photovoltaics (PV), concentrating solar
SOLAR FARM:                             thermal devices (CST), or other
                                        conversion technology, for the primary
                                        purpose of wholesale sales of generated
                                        electricity.
                                        A commercial solar-electric
                                        (photovoltaic) array that provides
                                        retail electric power (or a financial
SOLAR GARDEN:                           proxy for retail power) to multiple
                                        households or businesses residing or
                                        located off-site from the location of
                                        the solar energy system.
                                        A component of a solar energy device
SOLAR HEAT EXCHANGER:                   that is used to transfer heat from one
                                        substance to another, either liquid or
                                        gas.
                                        Racking, frames, or other devices that
SOLAR MOUNTING DEVICES:                 allow the mounting of a solar collector
                                        onto a roof surface or the ground.
                                        A group of photovoltaic cells are
SOLAR PANEL:                            assembled on a panel. Panels are
                                        assembled on-site into solar arrays.
                                        Equipment or elements such as piping
                                        and transfer mechanisms, containers,
                                        heat exchangers or controls thereof and
SOLAR STORAGE MECHANISM:                gases, solids, liquids or combinations
                                        thereof that are utilized for storing
                                        solar energy, gathered by a solar
                                        collector, for subsequent use.
                                        A system that includes a solar
                                        collector and a heat exchanger that
                                        heats or preheats water for building
SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM:                   heating systems or other hot water
                                        needs, including residential domestic
                                        hot water and hot water for commercial
                                        processes. (Ord. 20-O-003, 1-21-2020)
 
5-21-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND INFORMATION:
   A.   Permitted Systems Requirements: Solar energy systems (SES) are
permitted in any zoning district, unless otherwise specified in this article,
provided that all building permit requirements and general regulations are met
including the Building Code, Zoning Code and the requirements referenced
herein.
   B.   Prohibited Systems: The following shall be prohibited in all zoning
districts: freestanding or ground-mounted solar energy system, solar farm, and
solar garden.
   C.   Accessory Structure: SESs are permitted as accessory structures as
detailed in this article.
   D.   On-Site Use: Energy produced through the solar energy system shall be
utilized on site; however, the energy output may be delivered to a power grid.
   E.   Utility Provider Notification: Written evidence must be provided at the
time a building permit is requested that the utility company has been notified
of the customer's intent to install a solar energy system.
   F.   Glare: Installation of the solar collection system shall not adversely
impact adjacent properties. A solar collection device or combination of devices
shall be designed and located to avoid glare or reflection onto adjacent
properties, businesses, residential homes and adjacent roadways and shall not
interfere with traffic or create a safety hazard. All solar energy systems
using a reflector to enhance solar production shall minimize glare from the
reflector that impacts adjacent or nearby properties.
   G.   Emergency Disconnect: An external disconnect switch, readily accessible
by emergency responders, and which is clearly identifiable and unobstructed,
shall be provided to disconnect power at the solar panel.
   H.   Tree Removal: Tree removal shall be minimized. If trees or vegetation
are to be removed or reduced to allow for the proper functioning of an SES,
adherence to the Village's tree preservation ordinance will be required, which
may include the replacement of trees.
   I.   Arrangement: Where feasible, solar collector units shall be implemented
to cover an entire roof face.
   J.   Building Permit Required: No solar energy system (SES) shall be
constructed or installed without first obtaining a building permit.
   K.   Approved Solar Components: Electric solar energy system components must
have an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) listing or approved equivalent and solar
hot water systems must have a Solar Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC)
rating.
   L.   Compliance With Building Code: All solar energy systems shall meet
approval of local Building Code officials, consistent with Village of Kildeers'
current adopted codes; and solar thermal systems shall comply with HVAC-related
requirements of the current edition of the International Energy Conservation
Code as adopted by the State of Illinois.
   M.   Compliance With National Electrical Code (NEC): All photovoltaic
systems shall comply with the current edition of the National Electrical Code
(NEC) adopted by the Village.
   N.   Compliance With State Plumbing Code: Solar thermal systems shall comply
with applicable State of Illinois Plumbing Code requirements. (Ord. 20-O-003,
1-21-2020)
5-21-3: BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
Building-mounted solar energy systems shall be developed according to the
following parameters:
   A.   Residential:
      1.   Location: Building-mounted systems are permitted in the following
locations:
         a.   Principal structures. Solar Energy Systems, Building-Integrated,
shall be allowed on the roof of the principal structure of the property only
and must be mounted flush with the slope of the roof to ensure the lowest
profile permissible per manufacturer specifications. Solar shingles integral to
the roof of the structure on which they are installed, may be installed on any
roof face provided that the entire face of the roof level is covered by the
SES. Solar collection devices shall not be constructed on any part of the
vertical portion of a mansard roof. Roof-Mounted Solar Energy Systems are
permitted provided:
            (1)   Trim caps are installed on every edge;
            (2)   The Roof Mounted Solar Energy System does not extend more
than six inches (6") above the roof surface;
            (3)   The Roof Mounted Solar Energy System is not installed on that
portion of a roof that faces a street; and
            (4)   Conduit shall be installed close to gutter lines and painted
to match the surface where it is installed or otherwise masked.
         b.   Exterior Materials. Exterior materials for a solar energy system
must match the appearance of architectural shingles or cedar shake shingles and
match the color of any existing roof shingles.
      2.   Orientation: Panels shall be oriented to maximize solar access.
         a.   Sloping Roof: Solar energy systems shall be mounted flush with
the roof, shall not have a highest finished pitch steeper than the roof pitch
on which the system is mounted, and the surface of the collector shall not
extend any further than one inch (1") from the roof surface at any point. No
portion of the solar collectors shall extend beyond the ridgeline of the roof
at any point. The total height of the building, including the solar collection
devices, shall comply with the height regulations of the zoning district.
         b.   Flat Roof: Solar collection devices mounted on a flat roof may be
oriented to achieve maximum sun exposure but shall not exceed one and one-half
inches (1.5") in overall height, or extend above the building parapet. No such
mounted panel shall exceed the height regulations of the zoning district.
         c.   Projection: The collector surface and mounting devices for
building-mounted solar energy systems shall cover the entire face of the roof
level and not extend beyond the roof edge or the exterior perimeter of the
principal structure.
         d.   Roof Access: Building-mounted solar energy systems shall allow
for adequate roof access for fire-fighting purposes.
   B.   Nonresidential:
      1.   Location: Building-mounted systems are permitted in the following
locations:
         a.   Principal structures.
         b.   Any roof face, with the exception of mansard roofs.
      2.   Orientation: Panels shall be oriented to maximize solar access.
      3.   Height: Height is measured from the roof surface, on which the
system is mounted, to the highest edge of the system.
         a.   Sloping Roof: Solar collection devices mounted on a sloping roof
shall be mounted parallel to the roof whenever possible, and shall not exceed a
height of one inches (1") above the ridge of the roof. No such mounted panel
shall exceed the maximum permitted height of the structure.
         b.   Flat Roof: Solar collection devices mounted on a flat roof shall
not extend above the building parapet. Solar collection devices shall be
consolidated into array groupings located toward the center of the roof, where
feasible, rather than situated in a disjointed manner. No such mounted panel
shall exceed the maximum permitted height regulations of the zoning district
and no panel shall be visible from the street.
      4.   Projection: The collector surface and mounting devices for building-
mounted solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of
the building on which the system is mounted or built.
      5.   Roof Access: Building-mounted solar energy systems shall allow for
adequate roof access for fire-fighting purposes.
(Ord. 20-O-003, 1-21-2020; amd. Ord. 23-O-022, 12-19-2023)
5-21-4: DECOMMISSIONING:
   A.   An SES that is visibly damaged or not capable of operating for a period
exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days shall be deemed abandoned. The owner of
an abandoned SES and the owner of the property on which the SES is located
shall cause either: 1) the SES to be repaired and made operable within ninety
(90) days after receipt of a notice of abandonment from the Village; or 2) the
removal of all SES structures and facilities within ninety (90) days after
receipt of a notice of abandonment from the Village.
   B.   Any abandoned SES that is not removed within ninety (90) days after
receipt of a notice of abandonment shall be deemed a public nuisance, which
nuisance the Village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to: 1)
summarily abate by removing such system at the joint and several expense of the
owners of the system and of the property on which the system is located; or 2)
address through other means. In the case of such removal, the Village shall
have the right, but not the obligation, to file a lien for reimbursement of any
and all expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the SES removal and
related roof repair, including, without limitation, attorney fees and accrued
interest.
   C.   Upon removal of the SES, the owner of record of the subject property
shall restore that portion of the subject property on which the system was
installed in accordance with the standards required by the Village's then-
current applicable codes. (Ord. 20-O-003, 1-21-2020)
5-21-5: PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day during, or upon which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 20-O-003, 1-21-2020)
TITLE 6
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Title
6-1-2: Purpose
6-1-3: Application Of Provisions
6-1-4: General Provisions
6-1-5: Interpretation
6-1-6: Fees
6-1-7: Separability
6-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION
ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF KILDEER, ILLINOIS, and is adopted pursuant to the
authorization of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-1-2: PURPOSE:
While it is obvious that regulations are needed to assure orderly extension of
Village streets, the purpose of these regulations are:
   A.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare of the residents of the Village.
   B.   To ensure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community
growth, and to safeguard the interests of the homeowner, the subdivider, the
investor and the Village.
   C.   To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the Village.
   D.   To prevent scattered development beyond any public utilities and
excessive development costs, and to assure reasonable maintenance costs for the
Village and/or other responsible parties.
   E.   To assure the development of land for optimum use with necessary
protection against deterioration and obsolescence.
   F.   To limit and control the pollution of the environment that can be
caused by inadequate or incomplete urban development.
   G.   To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working
relationship between the Village and the subdivider.
   H.   To lessen congestion in the streets and highways.
   I.   To provide for adequate light and air.
   J.   To facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage,
schools and other public necessities.
   K.   To ensure proper legal description and proper monumenting of subdivided
land.
The regulations are established with reasonable consideration of the character
of the Village with a view toward conserving the value of buildings upon the
land and providing the best possible environment for human habitation. It is
intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement
of the provisions and development standards contained in the building code,
Zoning Map, Zoning Ordinance, and the Official Village Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-1-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Subdivision Within Corporate Limits: The provisions of this Title shall
apply to all subdivisions and consolidation of land, as defined in Chapter 2 of
this Title, located within the Village and entirely or in part within the
unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate
limits of the Village, in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes. This
Title shall apply to those subdivisions of land proposed after the effective
date hereof. This Title shall have no retroactive application. The subdivision
plans and plats hereafter submitted, proposed improvements to be installed, and
all procedures relating thereto, shall in all respects be in full compliance
with the regulations herein. Any subdivisions of land which were proposed, and
for which a preliminary plan and application for approval were filed prior to
the effective date hereof shall conform to the requirements for plans, plats
and property improvements to be installed of this Title, then in effect.
The provisions of this title shall also apply to all planned developments,
whether residential, commercial or otherwise in nature, and to any and all
other developments whether a subdivision is required or not under the laws,
statutes, ordinances or regulations of the governmental body or agency having
jurisdiction or control, and regardless of whether the same is labeled a
subdivision or not, it being the intent of this title to apply to all types of
development within the village.
   B.   Subdivision Outside Corporate Limits: Except as otherwise required by
statute, certification on final plats of subdivision located in the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the village
limits shall be those required by the Lake County subdivision regulations
except when village subdivision regulations are more restrictive, the
regulations contained herein shall also be required. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-1-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out within the
corporate limits of the village, or within contiguous territory not more than
one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the incorporated boundaries of the
village, the subdivider thereof or his agent shall submit both a preliminary
and a final subdivision plat to the village for its approval. The subdivision
plats and all procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in full
compliance with these regulations.
   B.   Until final plats and plans for the subdivision are approved:
      1.   No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any
improvements made to the natural land.
      2.   No lot, tract or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be
offered for sale, nor shall any sale, contract for sale, or option be made or
given.
      3.   No improvements such as water supply, storm water drainage, sanitary
sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service, lighting, grading, paving
or surfacing of streets shall hereafter be made by any owner or his agent, or
by any public service corporation at the request of such owner or his agent.
   C.   For flood limits, surface water runoff, refer to the following:
      1.   Watershed development, title 4, chapter 6 of this code.
      2.   Floodplain protection maps: FEMA flood insurance rate map dated
September 3, 1997.
      3.   The U.S. department of interior, U.S. geological survey, in
cooperation with the northeastern Illinois plan commission. Said maps are made
part of this regulation, including all supplements published by the U.S.
geological survey.
The data are guidelines for officials of the community to determine the
acceptability of any subdivision or development. Any use of the floodplain
shall not reduce the area available for flooding purposes nor cause any hazard
to surrounding properties.
      4.   Watershed development regulations, title 7, chapter 6 of this code
adopting the Lake County watershed development ordinance. The village is a
certified community working in participation with the Lake County storm water
management commission.
      5.   Soil erosion and sediment control: See section
6-5-13 of this title. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
   D.   All offerings or dedications of land to the village for use as streets,
schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses shall be referred to the plan
commission/board of appeals for review and recommendation before being accepted
by the village.
   E.   Where a tract of land proposed for subdivisions is part of a larger,
logical subdivision unit in relation to the village as a whole, the plan
commission/board of appeals shall, before approval, cause to be prepared a
sketch plan for the entire area or neighborhood, such sketch plan to be used by
the plan commission/board of appeals as an aid in judging the proposed plat.
The subdivider shall prepare this sketch plan and shall furnish such surveys
and data as may be necessary. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-
7-2005)
   F.   A legal lot of record shall not be further subdivided. (Ord. 03-O-880,
6-2-2003)
6-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Minimum Standards Established: In their interpretation and application
the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   Higher Standards Govern: Where the conditions imposed by any provisions
of this title upon the subdivision of land are less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulations of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose
higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   C.   Easements Or Covenants Not Abrogated: This title is not intended to
abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement; provided, that
where the regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private
agreement, the requirements of this title shall govern.
   D.   Existing Subdivisions: No subdivision of land which was not petitioned
for at the time of the effective date hereof shall be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of these provisions, and to the extent that said
subdivision of land is in conflict in any manner with the requirements of this
title, said subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-
7-1999)
6-1-6: FEES:
   A.   Conditions: In order to cover the costs of filing, recording, and other
expenses incidental to the approval of a subdivision, the subdivider shall pay
a fee at the time of application for approval of a preliminary plan. Such fee
shall be based on the projected number of lots to be created. At the time of
application for approval of the final plat, the required fee will be
recalculated on the basis of the actual number of lots created, and an
adjustment of the fee will be made; the subdivider to pay an additional amount
or to receive a refund. There shall be no refund of any portion of the fee if
the subdivider fails to apply for final approval of the subdivision. Developers
shall establish an escrow for the payment of village consultants as described
in title 1, chapter 17 of this code.
   B.   Amount:
 
Number Of Lots Fee
1   to   $ 50.00  
16   to  �50.00   plus $10.00 for each lot in excess of 15
26   to  �75.00   plus $10.00 for each lot in excess of 25
51   to  �100.00  plus $10.00 for each lot in excess of 50
101   to  150.00  plus $10.00 for each lot in excess of 100
Over 200       200.00  plus $10.00 for each lot in excess of 200
 
All such fees shall be payable to the village by certified check or money
order. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-1-7: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the village board that the several
provisions of this title be separable in accordance with the following:
   A.   Separability Of Parts: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge any provision of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect any other provision of this title not specifically included in said
judgment.
   B.   Separability Of Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction
shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this title to a
particular subdivision of land, such judgment shall not affect the application
of said provision to any other subdivision of land, not specifically included
in said judgment. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS, SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Rules
6-2-2: Definitions
6-2-1: RULES:
The language set forth in the text of this Title shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
   C.   The word "may" is permissive.
   D.   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece" and "parcel".
   E.   The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for",
"designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for". (Ord. 99-
O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
BORINGS, SOIL: Examination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific
parcel of land by drilling.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the
land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or
by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and
which is designed or intended for shelter, enclosure or protection of persons,
animals or chattels.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village for the construction, erection
or alteration of a structure or building.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street line at a distance from it
regulated by the front yard requirements of the Village zoning regulations
(Title 5 of this Code).
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Comprehensive Plan dated November 1990, expressly
incorporated in Section
5-1-7 of this Code.
CONSOLIDATION: Combining/merging two (2) or more parcels into one.
CORINGS, PAVEMENT: Examinations and analysis of the completed surface and/or
subsurface of a finished pavement by removing a core by drilling.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated
by a vehicular turnaround appropriate for the safe and convenient reversal of
traffic movement.
DATUM PLANE: A reference point from which elevations are measured. The datum
plane is mean sea level as established by the United States Geodetic Survey
(USGS).
DETENTION BASIN: A covered or uncovered reservoir designed to hold an excessive
accumulation of storm water so as to reduce peak flow in a storm water drainage
system.
DRAINAGE SWALE: A turf drainage ditch of shallow depth with side slopes not
exceeding one to twelve (1:12).
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the
general public, a corporation or a certain person for a specific purpose.
ELEVATION: The vertical distance measured from a point on the ground to the
datum plane.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
GRADE: The slope of the land, road, street or other public way expressed in
percent.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GROSS LAND AREA: The entire area of a development including lots, streets and
alleys, measured to the centerline of any bounding streets.
LOT: A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land
of record.
LOT OF RECORD: A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Lake County,
Illinois.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both street
lines shall be deemed front lines.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of the foregoing.
PLAN COMMISSION/BOARD OF APPEALS: Refers to the plan commission/board of
appeals of the village, as provided for in title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
PLAN, FINAL: The drawings and documents presented for final approval as
described in section
6-3-5 of this title.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY: The drawings and documents presented for tentative approval
as described in section
6-3-2 of this title.
PLAN, SKETCH: A general map or drawing on which the subdivider's design for the
subdivision of land is presented for discussion purposes prior to the
preparation of the preliminary plan.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land under single ownership or unified
control, for which the specific requirements of the underlying zoning district
may be modified when: a) the proposed development offers benefits to the
neighborhood and/or community of which it is a part, beyond those required by
the zoning code provisions; and/or b) the proposed use of land includes, but is
not limited to, provisions for common open space; recreational facilities; or
specific design, engineering, architectural, site planning or landscape
features.
A planned development includes a program for the provision, operation, and
maintenance of such areas, facilities, and improvements which will be for
common use by residents of the planned development and/or community, but which
will not be provided, operated or maintained at public expense.
PLAT: A plan, map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan for the
subdivision of land is presented and which he submits for approval and intends
to record in final form.
ROADWAY: The paved area within a street right of way intended for vehicular
traffic, including all curb and gutter facilities.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land or a contiguous combination.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and construction
driveways.
SOIL TESTING: Determination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a
specific land area by use of soil borings.
STREET, MAJOR: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended
to serve as a major traffic artery connecting various sections of the village.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to
highways and major streets and which provides access to abutting properties
intended for local traffic and not for through traffic.
STREET, MINOR: A street used primarily for access to abutting properties.
STREET, PUBLIC: Any major or secondary street or minor street which is shown on
the subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated to public use.
STREET, SECONDARY OR COLLECTOR: A street which carries traffic from minor
streets to the major street system including the principal entrance streets of
residential development and streets for circulation within such development.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the
public street.
SUBDIVIDER: The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording the
plats of the subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements
relating thereto as outlined in this title.
SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION: A tract of land which is to be or has been
divided into two (2) or more parcels. For the purpose of this title a
subdivision shall not include the following: a) the division of property from
one lot to an adjacent lot when said transfer does not result in any
nonconformance to village codes.
The plan commission/board of appeals may grant a partial or entire waiver of
the applicability of the subdivision code provisions for any division of
property if the plan commission/board of appeals finds the division does not
result in any nonconformance to village codes, and that the subdivision
process, in whole or in part, is not necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the village.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The person or firm charged with the responsibility of
municipal engineering matters.
ZONING MAP: The map showing the zoning districts, streets, highways, lots,
subdivision, planned developments, lakes, and parks therefor laid out, adopted
and established by law. Any amendments or additions thereto resulting from the
board of trustees' action or the approval of subdivision plats are amended in
March of each year. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 02-O-855, 10-7-2002;
Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
CHAPTER 3
PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL AND DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
6-3-1: Preliminary Consultation
6-3-2: Procedure For Approval Of Preliminary Plan
6-3-3: Preliminary Plan Requirements
6-3-4: Plans And Specifications For Required Land Improvements
6-3-5: Procedure For Approval Of Final Plat
6-3-6: Agreements And Guarantee Of Improvements
6-3-7: Construction Of Required Improvements
6-3-8: Acceptance Of Required Improvements
6-3-9: Unsuitable Land
6-3-10: Dedication Of Land For Public Use
6-3-11: Reservation Of Public Spaces And Sites
6-3-12: Dedication And Development Of Detention Ponds, Funds In Lieu Thereof
6-3-13: Dedication Of School Land Or Payment Of Fees In Lieu Thereof
6-3-14: Vacation Of Plat Of Subdivision
6-3-15: Other Divisions Of Land
6-3-1: PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION:
Prior to the submission of the preliminary plan of any proposed subdivision
within the jurisdiction of this Title, the subdivider shall make known his
intentions to the Village Board. Initially, the subdivider shall contact the
Village office and present a sketch plan to the Village Administrator and
request placement on an agenda of a regular meeting of the Village Board. A
deposit escrow for professional consulting services per Title 1, Chapter 17 of
this Code should also be presented at this time.
   A.   Action By The Village Administrator: During this preapplication stage,
the following actions shall be taken by the Village Administrator:
      1.   Comprehensive Plan Conformity: Advise the developer of the project's
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, and its conformity with the sewer
facility plan which delineates the areas to be served by either public and/or
private sanitary sewer service. This will determine the feasibility of the
proposed subdivision and the sizes of utilities and the lots therein.
      2.   Zoning Check: Check the existing zoning of the tract and advise the
subdivider if a zoning change is necessary or desirable.
      3.   Public Facility Impact: Determine the adequacy of existing or
proposed schools, parks and other public spaces in the vicinity of the proposed
subdivision.
      4.   Site Inspection: Inspect the site or otherwise determine its
relationship to major streets, utility systems, natural features, and adjacent
land uses and determine any unusual problems in regard to topography,
utilities, flooding, etc.
      5.   Placement On Board Agenda: Place matter on agenda for next regular
Board meeting.
   B.   Action By The Subdivider: The subdivider shall meet with the Village
Board at a regular meeting for the purpose of presenting a general outline of
his proposal, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
      1.   Written Notification: Written notification in the form of a letter
of intent from the subdivider to the Village Board establishing the
subdivider's intent to develop the land.
      2.   General Subdivision Information: General subdivision information
that shall describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the
proposed development as necessary to supplement the submitted plans. This
information shall include data on existing covenants, land characteristics, and
available community facilities and utilities; and information describing the
subdivision proposal, such as number of residential lots and units broken down
by type, typical lot width and depth, business areas, school, playground and
park areas and other public areas, proposed protective covenants and proposed
utilities, street improvements and soil information.
      3.   Sketch Plan: A plan on a topographic survey that shall show, in
simple sketch form, the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in
relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand sketch made
directly on a print of the topographic survey. The sketch plan shall include
the existing topographic data and contours of not less than five foot (5')
intervals. This may be attached to USGS topographic data. Proposals for sewage
disposal, storm water drainage and street improvements should also be
addressed. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
   C.   Action By Village Board: The village board shall discuss the proposed
subdivision with the subdivider and so advise of any village plans or projects
which might affect the proposed subdivision, the procedural steps, design and
improvement standards, and the general planning requirements and refer the
project to the plan commission/board of appeals for further processing. (Ord.
99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
6-3-2: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN:
   A.   Action By Subdivider: The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a
preliminary plan, which plan shall include all of the property owned or
controlled by the applicant, which properties are adjacent to or considered to
be contiguous to the proposed subdivision, together with improvement plans and
other supplementary material as specified. These shall be submitted to the
village administrator, with written application for approval. The preliminary
plan and enclosures shall also be submitted directly to the village planner and
village engineer and any others as designated by the village administrator. Ten
(10) copies of the preliminary plan and all accompanying documentation and the
required filing fee shall accompany the application. All materials shall be
folded and collated into separate and complete packets.
   B.   Action By Plan Commission/Board Of Appeals: The village administrator
shall receive the preliminary plan at least fifteen (15) working days prior to
a regular meeting of the plan commission/board of appeals and shall at the same
time, instruct the village engineer to collaborate with the plan commission/
board of appeals in assembling plans for the design and construction of streets
and other such public improvements as are required by this title or any other
ordinance of the village.
The plan commission/board of appeals in conjunction with the village planner,
village engineer and department heads of the village shall review the proposed
subdivision in accordance with the following guidelines:
      1.   Particular Attention Of Plan Commission/Board Of Appeals: The plan
commission/board of appeals, in the examination of subdivision plans for
approval, and in the application of this title, shall take into consideration
the requirements of the community and the best use of the land being
subdivided. Particular attention shall be given to width and location of
streets, sanitary utilities, storm water drainage, lot sizes and arrangements
as well as local requirements such as parks and playgrounds, schools and
recreation sites, and other public uses.
      2.   Conformity With Comprehensive Plan: The plan commission/board of
appeals shall especially require that all subdivisions conform to the
provisions and conditions of the comprehensive plan. Plat approval may be
withheld if a subdivision does not conform to the provisions of the
comprehensive plan.
      3.   Area Sketch Plan Required: Where a tract of land proposed for
subdivision is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the
village as a whole, the plan commission/board of appeals may, before
recommending approval, cause to be prepared by the subdivider a sketch plan for
the entire area or neighborhood, such sketch plan to be used by the plan
commission/board of appeals as an aid in judging the proposed plat.
      4.   Storm Water Provisions Required: The plan commission/board of
appeals shall not recommend for approval by the village board any plat of
subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm water runoff.
      5.   Preservation Of Natural Features: In all subdivisions due regard
shall be given to the preservation of natural features such as large trees,
watercourses, historical sites or structures and similar features.
The plan commission/board of appeals shall, within two (2) months from the
first regular meeting following referral or of the filing by the applicant's
last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such
time is extended by mutual consent:
      1.   Recommend approval or disapproval of the proposed preliminary plan
and submit its written recommendations, which shall include the recommendations
of the village consultants to the village board of trustees; or
      2.   If the plan commission/board of appeals finds that changes,
additions or corrections are required on the preliminary plan, the plan
commission/board of appeals shall so advise the subdivider in writing. The
subdivider may resubmit the preliminary plan to the plan commission/board of
appeals for its consideration at the next regular meeting of said commission/
board. The plan commission/board of appeals shall, at said meeting, approve or
disapprove the preliminary plan and submit its recommendations in writing,
which shall include the recommendations of the village consultants to the
village board of trustees and the subdivider.
      3.   The village administrator shall notify the owner or subdivider as to
the time and place of the plan commission/board of appeals meeting of which he
will be afforded an opportunity of being heard.
   C.   Action By Village Board: The village board of trustees shall accept or
reject said plan within thirty (30) days after its next regular meeting
following the action of the plan commission/board of appeals. The applicant and
the village board may mutually agree to extend the one month period.
      1.   Qualifications Of Approval: The following qualifications shall
govern approval of the preliminary plan:
         a.   Approval of a preliminary plan by the plan commission/board of
appeals and the village board of trustees is tentative only, involving merely
the general acceptability of the layout as submitted.
         b.   The plan commission/board of appeals and village board may
require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest of
the needs of the community.
         c.   Approval of the preliminary plan shall be effective for a maximum
period of one year, unless upon application of the developer, the village board
of trustees grants an extension. The application for said extension shall not
require an additional filing fee or the submittal of additional copies of the
plan of subdivision.
   D.   Preliminary and final plats of subdivision shall be filed and processed
consecutively, unless the Village Administrator determines that the proposed
plats can be processed simultaneously. It is the intent that larger, multi-use
or complex subdivisions be processed consecutively. Smaller subdivision or re-
subdivisions of previously approved subdivisions may be processed
simultaneously. The Village Administrator shall make the final determination on
whether a plat of subdivision s processed consecutively or simultaneously.
   E.   Subdivisions In Conjunction with Planned Developments: A subdivision
may be approved concurrently with a planned development as described in the
Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005; Ord.
22-O-031, 12-20-2022)
6-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
The purpose of the preliminary plan is to allow the plan commission/board of
appeals, the board of trustees, and other public bodies to determine whether
the proposed layout of the land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint
of the public interest. The preliminary plan shall be prepared by a qualified
professional, trained and experienced in the layout of subdivisions. (Ord. 99-
O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
The following graphic and descriptive items are normally required to be shown
on the preliminary plan and the accompanying application for approval. The lack
of information under any item specified herein, unless waived, shall be cause
for disapproval of a preliminary plan.
   A.   Application For Approval: Written application by the owner, or his
agent, for approval shall accompany each preliminary plan. All documents should
be clearly dated. The submission shall include the following information:
      1.   Name For File Identification:
         a.   Name of subdivision if property is within an existing
subdivision.
         b.   Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The
proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in
Lake County.
         c.   Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is
commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
      2.   Location And Description Of Property: Location of property by
government lot, section, township, range and county.
      3.   Basic Facts And Proposals Pertaining To The Property:
         a.   Size of tract in acres or of existing lots, if any, in square
feet.
         b.   Existing zoning classification of property and any rezoning
proposed to be requested.
         c.   Number of lots proposed in subdivision.
         d.   Area of lots proposed; minimum, average and maximum.
         e.   Proposed linkage with sewer facilities.
         f.   Any other proposals, such as parcels of land intended to be
dedicated, conveyed or reserved for public use, and the conditions proposed for
such disposal and use.
         g.   Drainage area that goes through the property being subdivided
from the outside of the developed land.
      4.   Information As To Ownership, Preparation Of Plat And Submission:
         a.   Name and address, including telephone number of legal owner or
agent of property and citation of last instrument conveying title to each
parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor,
grantee, date and land records reference.
         b.   Citation of any existing legal rights of way or easements
affecting the property.
         c.   Existing covenants on the property, if any.
         d.   Name and address, including telephone number of the professional
responsible for the subdivision design shall be shown on the preliminary plat
as submitted; registered professional engineer of Illinois responsible for the
design of public improvements, and registered Illinois land surveyor
responsible for surveys. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
      5.   Petition For Deviations Or Variances: A petition for any deviations
or variances shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time the
preliminary plan is filed for consideration by the plan commission/board of
appeals. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all
of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord.
05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   B.   School Demographic Study:
      1.   Notification Of School District: Within three (3) days after a plat
is submitted for approval, the village administrator shall notify the school
district in which any of the subdivided land is located, that the plat has been
submitted for approval and that it is available for inspection. (Ord. 99-O-791,
6-7-1999)
      2.   Demographic Study Requirements: A school demographic study shall be
prepared by the subdivider if requested by the plan commission/board of
appeals. It shall contain the following information: (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999;
amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         a.   The number and type of dwelling units to be constructed upon
approval of the plan, the density of such dwelling units on the land, and a
breakdown of each type of dwelling unit by the number of bedrooms.
         b.   Estimates of the number of dwelling units to be constructed, the
different types of dwelling units based on general standards approved by and on
file with the village.
         c.   Estimates of the number of children to be generated in each
school classification of each school district situated wholly or partially
within the area depicted in any such plat. (Reference: Table of estimated
ultimate population per dwelling unit published by Illinois school consulting
service.)
   C.   Accompanying Documentation Required: The preliminary plan of
subdivision shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Annexation Statement: A statement that the proposed subdivision
(where contiguous) is to be annexed to the village, if applicable.
      2.   Preliminary Plan For Sanitary Facilities: Either a preliminary
engineering plan for sewer or a written statement setting forth general plans
for such improvements and indicating the method to be employed to overcome
particular problems that may be encountered with the development of the
proposed subdivision, if applicable.
      Any subdivision which is to be served by a public sewer system shall not
receive preliminary approval until there is written concurrence by Lake County
public works. The subdivision shall not receive final approval until there is
an approved agreement with the county that the subdivision is included in a
sewer service area.
      Any subdivision which is not to be served by a public sewer system shall
not receive final plat approval unless and until written approval has been
secured from the Lake County health department of the suitability for
individual sewage disposal systems in accordance with the village septic
standards.
      The subdivider is encouraged to obtain said written approval
simultaneously with, or prior to preliminary subdivision approval to ensure
that the permitting agency does not require changes in the overall plan which
would result in a substantive difference between the preliminary plan and the
final plan when submitted for approval.
      3.   Soil Analysis: A soil analysis for each proposed subdivision shall
be completed by the Lake County soil and water conservation district and shall
be of sufficient scope to point out potential ground absorption, runoff,
flooding deficiencies, the presence of unstable soils or of soils of such low
bearing capacity as to constitute problems for conventional construction, or
the presence of subsurface rock that would affect the installation of
underground improvements on the provisions of aboveground improvements. If the
subdivision contains questionable soil and, in the opinion of the village
engineer, additional soil investigations, borings or other soil tests are
necessary to determine the nature and extent of such questionable material, the
owner or developer shall retain or cause to be retained the services of a
competent testing laboratory to perform the needed investigations.
         a.   Copies of the completed reports prepared by the testing
laboratory shall be filed with the village administrator and village engineer.
         b.   Neither the village engineer nor the village shall be liable for
costs connected with the tests, borings or interpretations of results of such
work.
      4.   Transportation Or Highway Department Approval: Any subdivision which
is dependent upon access to a road under the jurisdiction and control of the
Illinois department of transportation or Lake County highway department, shall
not receive final plat approval unless and until written approval for the
requisite access permit has been secured from the appropriate jurisdictional
body. The subdivider is encouraged to obtain said written approval
simultaneously with, or prior to preliminary subdivision approval to ensure
that the permitting agency does not require changes in the overall plan which
would result in a substantive difference between the preliminary plan and the
final plan when submitted for approval.
      5.   Protective Covenants: Draft of protective covenants, whereby the
subdivider proposed to regulate land use in the subdivisions and otherwise
protect the proposed development, if applicable.
   D.   Drawings And Data Required: The preliminary plan and required
accompanying maps shall be drawn on reproducible medium, no larger than thirty
by thirty six inches (30 x 36"), in a manner that clear and legible prints can
be made therefrom, and shall be at a scale of not more than two hundred feet
(200') to the inch. It shall show all existing conditions required below and
shall show all proposals including the following:
      1.   Identification And Description: Identification and description shall
be as follows:
         a.   Name Of The Subdivision: Not a duplication of a name of any plat
heretofore recorded in the village or in the county.
         b.   Location Of Subdivision: Location by section, township and range,
or by other approved legal description, including present tract designation
according to official county records.
         c.   Survey Of Subdivision: Boundary line survey on an accompanying
map which is prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor.
         d.   Designer Of Subdivision: Name and address of the site planner
and/or engineer.
         e.   Owner Of Subdivision: Name and address of the owner and/or
subdivider.
         f.   Date: The date on which the documents were produced, including
any revision dates for alterations/amendments. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
      2.   Existing Conditions: Data required as a basis for the preliminary
plan shall include existing conditions as follows, except when otherwise
specified by the plan commission/board of appeals: (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999;
amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         a.   Boundary Lines: In accordance with subsection D1c of this
section.
         b.   Total Acreage: Within the boundary lines.
         c.   Existing Zoning Districts: Both in proposed subdivision and
adjacent tracts.
         d.   Existing Improvements: Locations, widths and names of all
existing or previously platted streets or other rights of way showing type of
improvement (if any), railroad and utility rights of way, parks and other
public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements and section
and corporate lines within the tract and to a distance of one hundred feet
(100') beyond the tract.
         e.   Utilities On And Adjacent To Tract: Location and size of existing
sewer lines, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract and to a
distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract; also indicating such data
as locations and surface and invert grade elevations of catch basins, manholes
and fire hydrants. If sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the
direction and distance to, and the size of the nearest usable facilities.
         f.   Location Map: Drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals
one thousand feet (1" = 1,000') or larger, showing boundary lines of adjoining
unsubdivided or subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest arterial
streets or other natural boundaries, but not less than one-half (1/2) mile
beyond the subdivision boundaries in subdivisions located beyond the village
limits, identifying type of use and ownership of surrounding land and showing
alignment of existing streets; north arrow and scale should be located.
         g.   Topographic Data: Data including existing contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet (2'), except in unusual topographical
conditions, such vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined
by the village engineer (topographic data shall refer to United States geodetic
survey or adjusted village datum).
         h.   Other Conditions On Tract: Watercourses, wetlands, marshes, rock
outcrops, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees six inches (6") or more in
caliper at one foot (1') above ground level, houses, barns, shacks and other
significant features.
         i.   Reference To Monuments: Locations of or reference to locations of
existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of survey and grade
elevation of each bench mark.
         j.   Proposed Public Improvements: Streets/highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract.
         k.   Easements: Location, width and purpose.
         l.   Other Conditions On Adjacent Land: Approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls,
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other
nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; and owner of adjacent
unplatted land (for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name,
recording date and number and show approximate percent built-up, typical lot
size and dwelling type).
         m.   Drainage Area: That goes through the property being subdivided
from the outside of the developed land.
      3.   Subdivision Design Features: Subdivision design features shall be as
follows:
         a.   Accord With Comprehensive Plan: The preliminary plan shall be in
substantial accord with the comprehensive plan as amended from time to time.
         b.   Proposed Zoning Changes: The village zoning districts proposed
for the subdivision shall be shown.
         c.   Layout Of Streets: Showing right of way widths and street names,
and showing proposed through streets extended to the boundaries of the
subdivision and approximate grades and gradients. The names of any street
heretofore used in the village or its environs shall not be used unless such
street is an extension of or in line with an already named street. The street
numbering system will be administered by the Lake County map department.
         d.   Other Rights Of Way: Location and width of pedestrianways, and
utility easements.
         e.   Location Of Utilities: If not shown on other exhibits.
         f.   Lotting: Layout, total number of lots, and dimensions on the lot
containing the minimum width and depth and on the lot containing the maximum
width and depth, lot numbers.
         g.   Sites To Be Reserved Or Dedicated: Sites, if any, to be reserved
or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses. Such sites
shall be designated by alphabetical letter.
         h.   Setback Lines: Minimum front and side street building lines,
indicating dimensions.
         i.   Sewers And Drainage: Proposed location of sewer lines and storm
water drains and proposed method of sewage and waste disposal including
sufficient information to show the intent of surface drainage and detention
and/or retention facilities conforming to minimum standards of the village.
(Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
         j.   Drainage Plan: Proposed location and direction of flow for lot
drainage systems within block where natural drainage must be maintained. If
deemed necessary by the plan commission/board of appeals, detailed grading
plans of subareas or individual lots will be required as part of the
construction plans for the subdivision. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-
O-942, 11-7-2005)
         k.   Land Use Intent: Sites, if any, for nonpublic uses exclusive of
single-family dwellings.
         l.   Landscape Plans: Landscape plans (if appropriate) shall be
superimposed over the engineering plans. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-3-4: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Engineering Plans Required: After the approval of the preliminary plan
and prior to filing an application for approval of the final plat, the
subdivider shall submit to the village administrator ten (10) complete sets of
engineering plans and specifications for the land improvements required by this
title along with a single estimate of the cost of the proposed improvements.
One complete set of plans shall also be submitted by the subdivider to the
village engineer and village planner. Said plans and specifications shall bear
the seal of the design and shall include the following documents:
      1.   Topographic Map: A topographic map of the proposed subdivision at a
minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger, the
limits of which shall extend at least one hundred feet (100') beyond the limits
of the proposed development or a grading plan of the subdivision showing the
existing grades, the floor grade of the proposed structures, the direction of
flow of surface runoff, the finished grade of all corners of a lot, etc.
      2.   Construction Drawings: Construction drawings with a minimum
horizontal scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') and a vertical scale
of one inch equals five feet (1" = 5'). Existing and proposed construction are
to be shown on these drawings.
      3.   Detail Sheets: Detail sheets of the village showing the various
standards for streets, manholes, catch basins, valve boxes, sewer services,
shall be attached to and made a part of the subdivider's construction drawings.
      4.   Specifications: Complete set of specifications covering the work to
be done.
   B.   Review By Village Engineer: The village engineer and other public
officials having jurisdiction shall approve such engineering and specifications
or set forth the revisions necessary for approval. Based upon the conditions of
approval of the plans and specifications, the subdivider shall have prepared,
by a registered engineer, final plans and specifications covering such required
land improvements. Such plans and specifications shall be approved by the
village engineer and other public officials having jurisdiction and such
approval shall be certified on the final plat. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-3-5: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Action By Subdivider:
      1.   Application To Village Administrator: Application for approval of
the final plat and any other accompanying documentation described herein, shall
be submitted in writing to the village administrator. The application shall be
submitted at least ten (10) days prior to the regular meeting of the plan
commission/board of appeals for its review and recommendation for approval or
disapproval. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      2.   Conformance With Preliminary Plan: The final plat shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plan, as approved, and if desired by the
subdivider it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plan
which he proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that
such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
      3.   Transportation Or Highway Department Approval: Any subdivision,
which is dependent upon access to a road under the jurisdiction and control of
the Illinois department of transportation or Lake County highway department,
shall not receive final plat approval unless and until written approval for the
requisite access permit has been secured from the appropriate jurisdictional
body. (See subsection
6-3-3C4 of this chapter.)
      4.   Health Department; Sewage System Use Approval: Any subdivision, any
portion of which is not to be served by a public sanitary sewer system, shall
not receive final plat approval unless and until written approval for a sewage
disposal system for the subdivision, or the lots thereof, has been secured from
the Lake County health department. (See subsection
6-3-3C2 of this chapter.)
Any subdivision, any portion of which will be served by a public sanitary sewer
system, shall not receive final plat approval unless and until written approval
has been secured from the county of Lake/Lake County public works. (Ord. 99-O-
791, 6-7-1999)
   B.   Drawings And Data For Final Approval: The final plat shall be
accurately drawn on Mylar drafting film, in a manner that clear and legible,
transparent or contact prints or photostatic copies can be made. The final plat
shall be at a scale of one hundred feet (100') to the inch on sheets not to
exceed thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x 36"). Where necessary, the
plat may be drawn on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the
entire subdivision. For large subdivision, the final plat may be submitted for
approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the plan
commission/board of appeals. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-
7-2005)
      1.   General Information: General information shall be as follows:
         a.   Boundary Lines: In accordance with subsection
6-3-3D1c of this chapter.
         b.   Layout Of Streets: Showing right of way widths and street names
(not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the village or its
environs unless such street is an extension of or in line with an already named
street, in which event that name shall be used), and showing proposed through
streets extended to the boundaries of the subdivision.
         c.   Other Rights Of Way: Location and purpose of easements, bikeways,
paths, pedestrianways and other rights of way.
         d.   Sites To Be Reserved Or Dedicated: Sites to be reserved or
dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses, or for the
exclusive use of property owners within the subdivision. Such areas shall be
designated by letter or number and by legal description.
         e.   Accurate Dimensions: Accurate angular and linear dimensions for
all lines, angles, radii and arcs used to describe all boundaries including
perimeter survey of tracts, streets, easements, areas to be reserved or
dedicated for public use, and other important features. Error of closure of
boundary line surveys shall not exceed one in ten thousand (1 foot for each
10,000 feet of perimeter survey). Angular error shall not exceed plus or minus
twenty (±20) seconds. Lot lines to show dimensions in feet and hundredths, and
when angle occurs in any lot line between lot corners, the measurement of the
angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. The final plat shall show
accurately the location of all permanent lot markers as actually installed.
         f.   Control Points: True angles and distances to the nearest
established street lines and official monuments (not less than 3 which shall be
accurately described in the plat by location, size and elevation) to which all
dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
         g.   Identification System: An identification system for all lots
using consecutive numbers and, where applicable, a street address number in
accord with current village policies and Lake County map department
determination.
         h.   Correlation With Existing Boundaries: Municipal, township or
section lines accurately correlated to the lines of the subdivision by
distances and angles.
         i.   Location Of Monuments: Accurate location of all monuments which
shall be placed at all angle points and at intermediate points, as shall be
required by the village engineer, and installed in such a manner that they may
be located by a licensed surveyor. All USGS, state, county, village or other
official bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the
property shall be preserved in precise position.
         j.   Covenants: Protective covenants, or filed as an accompanying
document in form for recording.
         k.   Setback Lines: Proposed building setback lines on all lots and
other sites.
         l.   Name: Name of subdivision.
         m.   Location: By section, township and range.
         n.   Title; Scale: Title, scale, north arrow, date.
         o.   Certification: Certification by a registered land surveyor,
certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
         p.   Other Data: Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or
dedications as may be required by the plan commission/board of appeals in the
enforcement of these regulations. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942,
11-7-2005)
         q.   Recording Agency:
      Village of Kildeer
      by               , Village Administrator
      Kildeer, IL 60047
      2.   Certification Required: The following certificates must be provided:
         a.   Owner:
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE*
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LAKE ) SS
This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described in
the annexed plat, and has caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided, as
indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and does hereby
acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and title thereon indicated.
The undersigned hereby dedicates for public use the lands shown on this plat
for thoroughfares, streets and public services; and hereby also reserves for
Ameritech, ComEd (Commonwealth Edison) and, NICor (Northern Illinois Gas
Company), the easement provisions which are stated on their standard form which
is attached hereto.
Title             
Address             
Dated this         day of        , 20    .
*Corporate owner's certificate should be accompanied by a corporate form of
acknowledgment.
         b.   Notary:
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LAKE ) SS
I,                 , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State
aforesaid, do hereby certify that               personally known to me to be
the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such
owners, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed
the annexed plats as their own free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes
therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this         day of        , 20    .
                    
Notary Public
         c.   Surveyor:
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LAKE ) SS
This is to certify that I,                 , Registered Illinois Land Surveyor
No.     , have surveyed and subdivided the following described property:
as shown by the annexed plat which is correct representation of said survey and
subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof. I further
certify that all regulations enacted by the Board of Trustees relative to plats
and subdivisions have been complied with in the preparation of this plat.
Given under my hand and seal at                 , Illinois, this         day of
       , 20    .
                          
Surveyor
         d.   Village Engineer:
VILLAGE ENGINEER CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LAKE ) SS
I,                 , Village Engineer of the Village of Kildeer, Illinois,
hereby certify that the land improvements described in the annexed plat and the
plans and specifications therefor, meet the minimum requirements of said
Village and have been approved by all public authorities having jurisdiction
thereof.
Dated at Kildeer, Lake County, Illinois, this         day of        , 20    .
                          
Village Engineer
         e.   County Clerk:
COUNTY CLERK CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LAKE ) SS
I,                 , County Clerk of Lake County, Illinois, do hereby certify
that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid current general taxes, no
unpaid special taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes and no redeemable tax sales
against any of the land included in the annexed plat.
I further certify that I have received all statutory fees in connection with
the annexed plat.
Given under my hand and seal of the County Clerk at Waukegan, Illinois this
        day of        , A.D. 20    .
(Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
         f.   Plan Commission/Board Of Appeals:
PLAN COMMISSION/BOARD OF APPEALS CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LAKE ) SS
This is to certify that the members of the Plan Commission/Board of Appeals
have reviewed and approve the annexed plat.
Dated at Kildeer, Lake County, Illinois, this         day of        , 20    .
                          
Plan Commission/Board of Appeals Chairman
                          
Plan Commission/Board of Appeals Secretary
(Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
         g.   Special Assessments:
CERTIFICATE AS TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LAKE ) SS
I,                 , Village Collector of the Village of Kildeer, do hereby
certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special
assessments or any deferred installments thereof that have been apportioned
against the tract of land included in the plat.
Dated at Kildeer, Lake County, Illinois, this         day of        , 20    .
                          
Village Collector
         h.   Village President:
APPROVAL BY VILLAGE PRESIDENT
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LAKE ) SS
Approved by the Village President this         day of      , 20    .
                           
Village President
ATTEST:
                          
Village Clerk
         i.   Village Clerk:
VILLAGE CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LAKE ) SS
I,                 , Village Clerk of the Village of Kildeer, Illinois, hereby
certify that the annexed plat was presented to and by resolution duly approved
by the Board of Trustees of said Village at its meeting held on        ,
20    , and that the required bond or other guarantee has been posted for the
completion of the improvements required by the regulations of the Village.
In witness whereof, I have hereto set my hand and seal of the Village of
Kildeer, Illinois, this         day of      , 20    .
                          
Village Clerk
         j.   Surface Water Drainage:
SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE CERTIFICATE
                , owner, and I,                , Professional Engineer of the
State of Illinois, do hereby certify that to the best of our knowledge and
belief the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction
of this subdivision or any part thereof, or, if such surface water drainage
will be changed, adequate provision has been made for collection and diversion
of such surface waters into public areas, or drains which the subdivider has
the right to use, and that such surface waters will not be deposited on the
property of adjoining land owners in such concentrations as may cause damage to
the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision.
                          
Owner
                          
Registered Professional Engineer
         k.   Surveyor's Authorization:
SURVEYOR'S AUTHORIZATION TO RECORD
STATE OF ILLINOIS ) SS
COUNTY OF LAKE )
I,                 , Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No.       do hereby
authorize the Village of Kildeer to record this plat.
                          
Registered Illinois Land Surveyor
      3.   Other Documents:
         a.   A notarized statement identifying the school district in which
the property being subdivided is located. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
   C.   Action By Plan Commission/Board Of Appeals: After its meeting, at which
the application for approval of the final plat is reviewed, the plan
commission/board of appeals shall recommend approval or disapproval to the
village board.
   D.   Action By Board Of Trustees:
      1.   Plat Submitted To Board Of Trustees: After the plan commission/board
of appeals makes its recommendation concerning the final plat to the village
board and the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, one Mylar
of the final plat of the subdivision, not to exceed thirty inches by thirty six
inches (30" x 36") in size, shall be submitted to the village board of trustees
for approval or disapproval. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-
7-2005)
      2.   Action By Board Of Trustees: Action must be taken by the village
board of trustees within two (2) months after the meeting at which the final
plat and all drawings, maps and other documents required have been submitted
for its final determination. The applicant and the village board of trustees
may mutually agree to extend the two (2) month period.
      3.   Approved Plat Copies: Upon approval by the board of trustees, the
village administrator shall receive from the subdivider one Mylar reproducible
print and three (3) contact prints of the approved final plat, and four (4)
copies of the approved supporting documents. The cost of such prints and copies
of documents shall be paid by the subdivider.
         a.   One contact print of the final plat, when applicable, one copy of
the accompanying protective covenants, and one copy of the supporting documents
shall be retained by the village administrator.
         b.   One contact print and all specifications, drawings and estimates
shall be delivered to the village engineer and village planner.
   E.   Filing Of Final Plat:
      1.   Filing With County: Upon approval by the village board of trustees,
the village administrator shall record the plat with the Lake County recorder
within three (3) months.
      2.   Filing For Local Record: The final plat and accompanying documents,
in exact form as approved by the board of trustees, and as filed with the Lake
County recorder, shall be filed for local record by the village clerk. Such
local file copy shall bear the appropriate documentation number as assigned by
the Lake County recorder. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-3-6: AGREEMENTS AND GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The requirements of this section shall be complied with prior to the approval
and recording of a final plat of subdivision.
   A.   Action By The Subdivider: Prior to the filing of an application for a
final plat, the subdivider shall submit the following to the village
administrator:
      1.   Statement Of Agreement: A statement of agreement that:
         a.   Completion Of Land Improvements: The land improvements required
by this title shall be completed by the owner or subdivider in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the village engineer.
         b.   As Built Plans Submitted: Four (4) sets plus one reproducible set
on Mylar of as built plans, as required by this chapter, shall be submitted by
the owner or subdivider.
         c.   Completion Of General Improvements: All general improvements and
the as-built plans of said improvement, shall be completed by the owner or
subdivider within two (2) years or less following approval of the final plat by
the Village President and Board of Trustees. Natural area improvements shall be
completed within three (3) years.
         d.   Deeding Of Improvements: All public improvements shall be deeded
over to the Village and become the property of the Village after approval by
the Village Engineer and when accepted by resolution of the Board. All labor
and material for installing public improvements shall be furnished by the
subdivider. All testing required for acceptance shall be done by the subdivider
under the supervision of the Village Engineer.
         e.   Binder Course On Streets/Roadways: No home fronting on a newly
created street in any subdivision shall be occupied until the binder course has
been applied to the roadway. The final wearing surface shall not be applied
until the elapse of one winter season. The roadways remain the responsibility
of the developer until accepted by the Village Board.
         f.   Public Improvements; Fines And Extensions: The subdivider shall
pay to the Village a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for every
day beyond the two (2) year period required for installation of public
improvements that the public improvements have not been completed and received
the approval of the Village, unless an extension of time is granted by the
Village, upon written application of the subdivider and the recommendation of
the Village Engineer.
         g.   Snowplowing Required: The subdivider shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the public improvements as installed until the improvements are
completed according to the approved plans and formally accepted by the Village.
Until the public improvements are accepted by the Village, the subdivider shall
be responsible for maintenance, including snowplowing, of the roads.
   B.   Action By Village Clerk: The Village Clerk shall not certify the
approval of the Village President and Board of Trustees on the final plat until
the requirements of this Section have been completed.
   C.   Security For Installation Of Improvements:
      1.   General Improvements: Prior to the approval of the final plat of any
subdivision, the developer shall deposit with the Village an irrevocable letter
of credit or an irrevocable letter of commitment in substantially the form
contained in Appendix I on file in the Village Clerk's office, in an amount not
less than one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated costs of the
construction of all public improvements as estimated by the Village Engineer,
excluding designated natural areas, but including all roads, ditches, culverts,
sewers, landscaping, and all other public improvements, including a sum as
estimated by the Village Engineer for the cost of snowplowing for three (3)
seasons. The term of said security shall be for two (2) years.
      2.   Designated Natural Areas: Prior to the approval of the final plat of
any subdivision, the developer shall deposit with the Village an irrevocable
letter of credit or an irrevocable letter of commitment in substantially the
form contained in Appendix I on file in the Village Clerk's office, in an
amount not less than one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated
costs of the construction and completion of the designated natural areas and
associated buffer zones, as estimated by the Village Planner. The term of said
security shall be for three (3) years. The natural areas will be held to the
performance standards as outlined in Section
7-8-6 of this Code, which include the necessary grading, ground preparation,
planting, monitoring and management. Compliance with performance standards
shall be verified through an annual monitoring program undertaken by the
developer. Annual reports summarizing the results of the monitoring shall be
provided to the Village no later than December 1 of each year.
      3.   Reduction In Security: The securities as approved may be reduced
from time to time upon recommendation of the Village Engineer (re: general
improvements), or the Village Planner (re: natural areas), and approval of the
Village Board provided that one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
estimated cost of the balance of public improvements at all times be retained
by the Village to secure the completion of all public improvements. The
security for the designated natural areas may be incrementally reduced based on
the annual attainment of performance standards and the estimated cost of
potential remediation that could be required to meet said performance
standards.
      4.   Renewal Of Security: The above noted securities may be renewed upon
the recommendation of the Village Engineer and/or Village Planner and approval
of the Village Board. However, the amount of the security will increase by
twenty five percent (25%), and the term of the security will decrease by one-
half (1/2).
   D.   Guarantee Of Improvements:
      1.   General Improvements: Upon completion of the public improvements
(excluding the designated natural areas), the developer shall notify the
Village Engineer in writing and request an inspection of the improvements. The
developer shall submit, with the request, an as-built plan covering the
improvements to be accepted. After the improvements have been inspected by the
Village Engineer and found to be complete according to the approved plans and
specifications, the general public improvements may be accepted by the Village
Board. The developer shall guarantee the public improvements against defective
workmanship and/or materials for a period of one year from the date of
acceptance. As a precondition to the acceptance of the general public
improvements, the developer shall be required to deposit with the Village an
irrevocable letter of credit or an irrevocable letter of commitment in
substantially the form contained in Appendix II on file in the Village Clerk's
office, to provide financial security for the guarantee in the amount of ten
percent (10%) of the cost of the original improvements, or ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), whichever is greater. These funds shall be held by the Village,
and shall be available to repair defects in material or workmanship which the
developer fails to repair or replace within thirty (30) days of receipt of
written notice. After the one year guarantee period, all remaining funds shall
be released to the developer.
         a.   Designated Natural Areas: Upon completion of a three (3) year
period of natural area performance standards, the developer shall notify the
Village Planner in writing and request a final inspection of the natural areas.
The developer shall submit, with the request, an as-built plan and all other
documents necessary to confirm compliance with the performance standards. After
the wetlands and associated buffer zones, and other designated natural areas
have been inspected by the Village Planner and found to be complete according
to the approved plans and specifications, the designated natural areas may be
accepted by the Village Board. The developer shall guarantee the public
improvements against defective workmanship and/or materials for a period of two
(2) years from the date of acceptance. As a precondition to the acceptance of
the natural area improvements, the developer shall be required to deposit with
the Village an irrevocable letter of credit or an irrevocable letter of
commitment in substantially the form contained in Appendix II on file in the
Village Clerk's office, to provide financial security for the guarantee of the
continued management of the natural areas, in the amount of ten percent (10%)
of the cost of the original improvements, or two thousand dollars ($2,000.00),
whichever is greater. These funds shall be held by the Village, and shall be
available to repair defects in material or workmanship which the developer
fails to repair or replace within thirty (30) days of receipt of written
notice. After the two (2) year guarantee period, all remaining funds shall be
released to the developer, and the guarantee of the maintenance/management of
the natural areas will become the responsibility of the homeowners'
association.
   E.   Subdivisions Outside Corporate Limits: Such agreements, as set forth
above, shall not be required for subdivisions located in the unincorporated
areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the Village limits when there
is evidence that agreements are entered into between the owner or subdivider
and Lake County, except when the Village standards for public improvements are
of higher quality than Lake County standards, such agreements may be required
by the Village. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-3-7: CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Installation Required: After approval of the final plat by the Village
Board, and after approval of the plans and specifications by the Village
Engineer and Village Board for the required improvements, the subdivider shall
install street, utility, public, common, and other improvements as indicated on
the plans, or as required by this Chapter.
The Village Engineer shall give written authorization for the issuance of the
first building permit within the subdivision, provided that the following
requirements have been satisfied:
      1.   Binder course of asphalt is installed.
      2.   All erosion control measures are installed and functional.
      3.   All storm sewers are installed and functional.
      4.   All ditch lines and detention basins are graded, vegetated, and
functional.
      5.   All street signs are erected.
All general public improvements shall be installed and have received approval
from the village within two (2) years of the date of final plat approval. The
natural area improvements shall be installed and have received approval from
the village within three (3) years of the date of final plat approval.
Any subdivider who fails to install the required general improvements and have
them approved by the village within the two (2) year period shall be subject to
a one hundred dollar ($100.00) per day fine until the improvements are
completed and have received the approval of the village engineer and board.
The village board may, upon the written request of the subdivider, and upon the
recommendation of the village engineer, extend the twenty four (24) month
period for the completion of the required improvements; provided, that the
subdivider shall post suitable, acceptable surety to ensure the completion of
the balance of the improvements. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-3-8: ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Acceptance Of Improvements By Resolution: Upon the completion of
construction of any public improvements required by this title, in conformance
with approved engineering plans and specifications, the subdivider shall
prepare and submit to the village clerk four (4) sets plus one reproducible set
on Mylar of as built plans and certification by the village engineer that such
public improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the
approved engineering plans and specifications. The village board will enact a
resolution accepting said improvements. Acceptance of the improvements shall be
subject to receipt of security for the guarantee of said improvements. (See
subsection
6-3-6C of this chapter.) (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-3-9: UNSUITABLE LAND:
No land shall be subdivided for any use which is determined by the plan
commission/board of appeals and the village board after investigation to be
unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or bad drainage, adverse earth or
rock formation or topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the
health, safety or welfare of the future residents in the proposed subdivision
or to the community. However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements
which will, in the opinion of the village engineer, make the area safe for
occupancy and provide adequate lot and street drainage and storm water
detention facilities, the subdivision may then be approved. For flood limits
refer to FEMA flood insurance rate map dated September 3, 1997, as well as the
U.S. department of interior, U.S. geological survey in cooperation with the
Northeastern Illinois plan commission including all supplements published by
the U.S. geological survey. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-
2005)
6-3-10: DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE:
The purpose of this section is to provide additional open space for visual
pleasure and development of recreational areas for the benefit of village
residents.
   A.   Any proposed development of a land parcel equal to or less than five
(5) acres shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
   B.   The amount of land dedicated pursuant to this section shall be based
directly on the population density of the proposed development. The formula
shall be ten (10) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) population based on
population per dwelling unit. (Reference the table of estimated ultimate
population per dwelling unit published by Illinois School Consulting Service.)
   C.   Where the developer proposes to provide private recreational or open
space, the village board may, at its option, waive all or part of the required
public dedication. In general, a substitution of private for dedicated open
space will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement, in addition to
provisions for the permanence and maintenance thereof. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-
1999)
   D.   If, following recommendation of the plan commission/board of appeals,
the village board determines that on site land for the required dedication is
not available, or available land is not suitable or usable, then an amount of
money equal to two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per acre for each of
the otherwise required acres shall be paid to the village to be held in a
separate village fund for the purpose of purchasing and/or maintaining or
improving land for recreational purposes in the village for the use of the
village residents. Provided, however, if the subdivider files a written
objection to the two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per acre valuation,
he shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market value of improved land in
the area of his development. Final determination of the set fair market value
per acre of subject improved land shall be made by the village board of
trustees based upon the appraisal submitted by the subdivider and such other
information that has been submitted or is available to the village board. (Ord.
01-O-833, 7-2-2001; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   E.   The village board reserves the right to determine whether the land
dedication shall be to the village, a homeowners' association, another agency,
or a combination thereof.
   F.   The timing of the dedication shall be such that:
      1.   If land, dedication will coincide with the recording of the final
plat.
      2.   If cash contribution, fifty percent (50%) payable to the village at
the time the bond is posted for the public improvements, prior to commencement
of development; the balance shall be secured by a separate letter of credit and
payable at the time the certificate of occupancy is issued for the first unit,
or expiration of said letter of credit, whichever comes first. (Ord. 99-O-791,
6-7-1999)
6-3-11: RESERVATION OF PUBLIC SPACES AND SITES:
   A.   Plan For Public Land: Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a
proposed street, highway or parkway, or proposed site for a park, playground,
school or other public use as indicated in the comprehensive plan map of the
village, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the developer into his
subdivision plat after proper determination of its necessity by the plan
commission/board of appeals and the appropriate village office or other public
agency involved in the acquisition and use of each such site. (Ord. 99-O-791,
6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   B.   Adequate Open Space Required:
      1.   Floodplain Areas: See title 5, chapter 11, and title 7, chapter 6,
of this code.
      2.   Park And Playground Sites: Unless appropriate provision for
dedication or donation of park or playground sites has been made by the village
board in a previous action, any required park or playgrounds shall be acquired
by the appropriate village, county or state agency.
   C.   Acquisition Of Land For Public Use: The acquisition of land which is
identified on the preliminary plan and which is to be served by a public agency
shall be initiated within twelve (12) months of the village board approval of
the preliminary plan. Failure on the part of the public agency to initiate
acquisition within the prescribed twelve (12) months shall result in the
removal of the reserved designation from the property involved and the freeing
of the property for private development. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
      1.   Referral To Public Body: The plan commission/board of appeals shall
refer that plat to the public body concerned with acquisition for its
consideration and report. The plan commission/board of appeals may propose
alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency
thirty (30) days for reply. The agency's recommendation, if affirmative, shall
include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and
an estimate of the time required to complete the acquisition.
      2.   Notice To Property Owner: Upon receipt of an affirmative report from
an acquiring agency, the plan commission/board of appeals shall notify the
property owner and shall designate on the preliminary plan that area proposed
to be acquired by the public body. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-
942, 11-7-2005)
      3.   Duration Of Land Reservation: The acquisition of land reserved by a
public agency on the preliminary plan shall be initiated within twelve (12)
months of notification, in writing, from the owner that he intends to develop
the land. The twelve (12) month period shall commence from the date of approval
of the preliminary plan or the written notification, whichever is later.
Failure on the part of the public agency to initiate acquisition within the
prescribed twelve (12) months shall result in the removal of the "reserved"
designation from the property for private development. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-
1999)
      4.   Valuation Of Land: The value of such land shall be established by
three (3) qualified appraisers, one of whom shall be appointed by the plan
commission/board of appeals, one by the subdivider and one of whom shall be
mutually agreed upon by the other two (2). Should the village board decide to
acquire such premises, then and in that case, it shall make arrangements to pay
the subdivider thereof the appraised value or a sum that is mutually agreed
upon. The village board may accept any donation of land as above described,
should the subdivider desire to contribute the same to the village. (Ord. 99-O-
791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
6-3-12: DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF DETENTION PONDS, FUNDS IN LIEU THEREOF:
   A.   Contribution Of And Development Of Detention Ponds Or Funds Required:
No final plat shall be approved until such time as the subdivider shall have
fully complied with the provisions of this title by either submitting detailed
plans and specifications for the development of storm water detention ponds on
the property to be subdivided, or shall agree to deposit funds for the
development of storm water detention ponds (as required by the development of
his subdivision) to be constructed off the site in an area designated by the
village.
   B.   Engineering Studies: The developer, at his expense, shall hire a
professional engineer, registered in the state, to prepare a detailed study of
the detention required by his subdivision. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
   C.   Location Of Detention Ponds: After the required storm water detention
has been determined, as specified in subsection A of this section, these
calculations shall be submitted to the village for review by the village
engineer. If the detention area required to serve the proposed subdivision is
more than one acre foot in size, the detention pond shall be constructed as
part of the subdivision improvements.
If recommended by the village engineer, in subdivisions where less than one
acre foot of detention is required, the developer shall pay to the village, in
lieu of construction of the detention facility, the equivalent of two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per acre foot. (Ord. 01-O-833, 7-2-2001)
   D.   Determination Of The Cost Of Off Site Detention Ponds: If it has been
determined (by the criteria specified in subsection C of this section) that the
detention pond is to be constructed off the site of the subdivision, the
developer, at his expense, shall have a professional engineer, registered in
the state, prepare an estimate of the cost to construct the detention pond off
the site, including the comparable cost of the land. The estimate shall be
submitted to the village for review by the village engineer.
Upon approval by the village, the funds in the amount of the approved estimate
shall be deposited with the village in lieu of the construction of the
detention pond on the site. Once deposited with the village, the funds shall
become the property of the village. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-3-13: DEDICATION OF SCHOOL LAND OR PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of development, a final plat of
subdivision, or a final plat or special use permit for a planned unit
development, each subdivider or developer will be required to dedicate land for
school purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents and
children of the development, or make a cash contribution in lieu of actual land
dedication, or a combination of both at the option of the village, in
accordance with the following criteria and formula:
   A.   Criteria For School Land Dedication:
      1.   Requirements And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a
proposed development, subdivision or planned unit development shall bear
directly upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The
land dedication requirement shall be determined in accordance with the date for
the estimated number of children entering school per type of dwelling found in
the latest edition of the table prepared by the Illinois School Consulting
Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc., Naperville, Illinois.
School classifications and size of school sites within the village shall be
determined in accordance with the following criteria based upon
"Recommendations for Elementary and High School Spaces", published by the
office of the superintendent of public instruction (now the state
superintendent of education), state of Illinois, Springfield, Illinois:
 
School Classification By Maximum Number  Of Minimum Number  Of Acres Of
Grades                   Students           Land
Elementary               600                11
Junior high              900                29
Senior high              1,500              45
 
      2.   Location: The comprehensive plan of the village, the comprehensive
school plan or facility utilization plan of the school district and the
standards adopted by the school district shall be considered in locating school
sites. The location of dedicated school sites shall be determined with the
input of the school district involved. A central location which will serve
equally the entire development is most desirable. Additional guidelines which
shall be considered in locating sites include, but are not limited to, size of
the subdivisions, proximity of the site to other schools and municipal
services, topography and shape of the site, accessibility of the site, safety
and the environmental and use conditions.
   B.   Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of School Land: Where the
subdivision or development is small and resulting school site is, in the
opinion of the village, too small to be practical or when the available land,
in the opinion of the village, after consultation with the affected school
district, is inappropriate for school purposes, the village shall require the
subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of a school land
dedication which contribution shall be paid to the village which shall then pay
said contributions over the school district and such contributions shall be
held in trust by the school district in which the development is located. Such
contributions shall be expended solely for the acquisition of land for school
sites and/or the types of improvements of school land, as set forth in
subsection B2 of this section, which land and/or improvements will be available
to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that development,
subdivision or planned unit development or for the improvement of other
existing local school land which already serves such needs. The village shall
have the right to request and receive from the affected school districts annual
audit reports and any other information the village may need from time to time
to ensure compliance with this section. If any portion of a cash contribution
in lieu of school land dedication is not expended for the purposes set forth
herein within ten (10) years from the date of receipt, the school district (or
the village if applicable) holding the funds shall refund such contribution to
the owners of record of all lots, except lots dedicated pursuant to the
provisions of this section, in the development, subdivision, or planned unit
development for which such contribution was made. The refund shall be paid to
the persons who are the owners of record on the day which is the tenth
anniversary of the receipt of such contribution. The amount of the refund due
to each lot owner shall be equal to the amount of the original contribution,
together with such interest as may have been earned thereon, divided by the
total number of lots in the development, subdivision or planned unit
development (excluding only those lots which were dedicated pursuant to this
section) for which such contribution was made.
      1.   Acquisition Using Cash In Lieu Of School Land Donations:
         a.   The term "acquisition" as used in this section shall mean the
acquiring of land by purchase, condemnation or such other means as may be
appropriate.
         b.   The acquired land shall be used for the construction of new
facilities or shall support the types of improvements as set forth in
subsection B2 of this section.
      2.   Improvement Using Cash In Lieu Of School Land Donations: Where
existing school lands will serve the needs of the development, the cash
contribution in lieu of land dedication shall be used for the following types
of physical improvements: expansion of existing school facilities, additions to
existing facilities and, additions to school grounds and environment. (Ord. 99-
O-791, 6-7-1999)
      3.   Fair Market Value: The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be
based on the sum of the fair market value of a vacant, unimproved and
unsubdivided acre of land in the village and the estimate of the village
engineer as to the cost of improving such land with electrical utilities,
water, sewer and streets, including enclosed drainage and curbs and gutters,
and all other improvements required under this title. All cash contribution
calculations shall be made by the village and the affected school districts
shall refer all developers to the village for such calculations. It has been
determined that the present fair market value of a vacant, unimproved and
unsubdivided acre of land in and surrounding the village is one hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($150,000.00) per acre, and the estimate of the village
engineer as to the cost of improvements is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
for a total of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), and such figure of
two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) shall be used in making any
calculation herein unless the subdivider or developer files objections thereto.
In the event of any objection, the developer shall, at his cost and by a Member
of Appraisal Institute (MAI), submit an appraisal showing the "fair market
value" of the land in the development or other evidence thereof and final
determination of said "fair market value" per acre of such vacant, unimproved
and unsubdivided land shall be made by the village board based upon such
information submitted, by the subdivider or developer and from the sources
which may be submitted to the village board by others. The village on its own
motion or at the request of others may from time to time amend this provision
to provide for different fair market values for parcels that are deemed by
others and the village to be of greater or lesser value. (Ord. 01-O-833, 7-2-
2001)
Cash contributions shall be paid at the time set forth in subsection H of this
section, provided, however, an owner, may on written request to the village
submitted at the time of application for approval of a final plat, pay one-half
(1/2) of the required contribution at the time of final plat approval with the
balance to be paid six (6) months after the date of final plat approval
provided the balance due is secured by an irrevocable letter of credit in a
form and from an issuer approved by the Village at the time of final plat
approval. If the developer so chooses to pay the required contribution in two
(2) installments, the amount of the second installment shall be based on the
then current price per acre of land and the Engineer's estimate of cost of
improvements as computed hereunder.
      4.   Criteria For Requiring Dedication And A Fee: There may be situations
when both a land dedication and a cash contribution are necessary. These
occasions may arise, among others, when:
         a.   If it is determined by the Village that the land to be dedicated
for a school site within a development contains fewer acres than the amount
called for by this Section, a cash contribution shall be required for the
difference between the amount of land called for by this Section and the amount
of land which is actually to be dedicated.
         b.   If a major part of a local school site has already been acquired
and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the
site, the remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash
contribution for the difference is required.
   C.   Density Formula: The table of population density is generally
indicative of current and short range projected trends in family size for new
construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication
of acres of land or the cash contribution in lieu of unless a written objection
is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer:
      1.   Objections To Density Formula: In the event a subdivider, developer
or school district involved files a written objection to the table of estimated
ultimate population and submits his own demographic study showing the estimated
additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned unit
development, a final determination of the density formula to be used in such
calculations shall be made by the Village Board based upon such demographic
information as the Village shall require. It is recognized that population
density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years, and the
specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu
thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment if
necessary.
      2.   Presumed Density Formula: In applying the table of population
density to a subdivision for which the types of units and number of bedrooms
cannot reasonably be determined from the data on file with the Village at the
time the application for final plat approval is complete, the following types
of units and bedroom data shall be used unless written objection is filed
thereto by the subdivider, developer, or school district.
         Detached Single-Family: Four (4) bedroom unit per lot.
         Attached Single-Family: Equal mix of two (2) and three (3) bedroom
units at maximum unit density permitted by applicable zoning.
         Low Density Apartment: Equal mix of two (2) and three (3) bedroom
units at maximum unit density permitted by applicable zoning.
         High Density Apartment: Equal mix of one and two (2) bedroom units at
maximum unit density permitted by applicable zoning.
   D.   Combining With Adjoining Developments: Where the subdivision or planned
unit development is less than forty (40) acres, school space which is to be
dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining
developments in order to produce usable school sites without hardship on a
particular developer.
   E.   Topography And Grading: The slope, topography and geology of the
dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for school uses shall not differ greatly
from surrounding land.
   F.   Improved Sites: All sites shall be dedicated fully improved with
streets, water, sewer, enclosed drainage, curbs and gutter and in a condition
ready for full electrical and gas service, as applicable to the location of the
site, or acceptable provision made therefor.
   G.   Title To Sites: All sites to be dedicated shall be conveyed to the
Village either by warranty or trustee's deed, or such form of conveyance as the
Village shall require. The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for
conveying good, merchantable title to such sites, and shall be responsible for
payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including any
agricultural rollback taxes which might be extended or levied against such
sites. In the discretion of the Village, a commitment for title insurance
issued by a company authorized to do business in Illinois may be required as
evidence of clear title. Conveyance shall occur only after or simultaneously
with the passage of a resolution by the school district in which the
development is located in which it indicates that the property will be accepted
by the school district for school purposes. Immediately thereafter, the village
shall convey such property to the appropriate regional board of school
trustees, or the trustees of schools, for the use and benefit of the
appropriate school district, whichever is applicable.
   H.   Time For Dedication Or Payment Of Fees In Lieu Thereof: The dedication
of school lands or payments of fees in lieu thereof shall be made by the owner
of land at the time of application for a building permit, except as otherwise
provided in subsection B3 of this section.
   I.   Expenditure Of Cash Contributions: Any school district which has a
school building located within the corporate limits of the village may receive
cash contributions hereunder, such contributions to be utilized in accordance
with subsection B2 of this section only at the school district's building to
which children residing in the village are assigned.
   J.   Indemnification: Except as otherwise provided below, the affected
school districts shall be required, as a condition of receiving the donations
hereunder, to indemnify and hold harmless the village from any loss, claims and
causes of actions of every kind incurred by the village as a result, either
directly or indirectly, of the passage of this section, or the administration
or enforcement thereof, including any so incurred as a result of a lawsuit
brought or threatened by the affected school districts. If the village is sued
by any subdivider or developer as result, directly or indirectly, of the
passage of this section, the village may, at its option, undertake the defense,
and all litigation costs, including attorney fees, shall be immediately
reimbursed by the affected school district. The village may withhold delivery
of any contribution to a school district pending compliance with these
indemnity provisions.
      1.   Where school districts improperly use funds or fail to use funds and
do not return same as specified in this section, the village may sue the
affected school district and shall be entitled to recover as a part of the
judgment therein, or any settlement thereof, all costs and expenses, including
attorney fees, incurred by the village.
      2.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, the above indemnification
provisions shall be an implied condition of every intergovernmental contract
entered into pursuant to this section.
   K.   Covenant Not To Sue: The affected school districts covenant and agree
not to sue the village for any claim arising, directly or indirectly, out of
the passage of this section, or the administration or enforcement thereof.
(Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-3-14: VACATION OF PLAT OF SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Any plat or any part of a plat may be vacated by the owner of the
premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written
instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same
to be vacated.
   B.   Such an instrument shall be approved by the village board in like
manner as plats of subdivisions. The village board may reject any such
instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its streets.
Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or
filed by the village, in the like manner as plats of subdivision; and being
duly recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the
recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the
streets and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such
plat. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-3-15: OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND:
   A.   Description: A subdivision is described as a tract of land which is to
be, or has been, divided into two (2) or more lots or parcels, any of which is
five (5) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or building development, including all public streets, ways for
public service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, or other public
grounds, and all the tracts, parcels or lots and numbering of all such lots, or
parcels by progressive numbers giving their precise dimensions. The term
"subdivision" includes resubdivision and consolidation, and where it is
appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the
land subdivided. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
The plan commission/board of appeals may recommend granting a partial or entire
waiver of the applicability of the subdivision code provisions for any division
of property if the plan commission/board of appeals finds that the
requirements, in whole or in part, are not necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of the village. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord.
05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   B.   Preliminary Consultation Required: Prior to the submission of the
proposed plat of survey required herein, the subdivider shall meet with the
village administrator and zoning administrator for the purpose of minimizing
the risk of objections to or rejection of the prepared plat of survey, and for
the purpose of ascertaining the problems and requirements affecting his
property. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
   C.   Procedure For Approval: The owner or subdivider shall file with the
village administrator ten (10) contact prints of a certified plat of survey
showing the proposed division of such lots, parcels or tracts of land. Ten (10)
prints of the plat of survey shall be forwarded to the plan commission/board of
appeals at least ten (10) days before the next meeting of the plan commission/
board of appeals.
The plan commission/board of appeals shall recommend to the village board,
approval, conditional approval, or rejection of the proposal. The village board
shall be notified in writing of any conditions of approval or the reason for
rejection. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   D.   Requirements For Approval:
      1.   Compliance With Provisions: To the extent reasonably practicable,
the division of land shall comply with the provisions of this title governing
general requirements, design standards and required improvements.
      2.   Survey: The survey shall be performed and the map prepared by a
registered Illinois land surveyor.
      3.   Monuments: All corners shall be monumented as follows:
         a.   All lot corners shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at
least twenty four inches (24") long and one inch (1") in diameter or by round
or square iron bars at least twenty four inches (24") long.
         b.   The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be
monumented in the field by iron pipes at least thirty inches (30") long and one
inch (1") in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least thirty inches
(30") long. These monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the
river or stream lot line with a meander line established not less than twenty
feet (20') back from the bank of the river or stream.
   E.   Certificates And Affidavits:
      1.   Affidavits Required: The survey map shall include the affidavit of
the surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel, typed, lettered or reproduced
legibly, giving a clear and concise description of the land surveyed by
bearings and distances, commencing with some corner marked and established in
the U.S. public land survey or some corner providing reference to a corner
marked and established in the U.S. public land survey. Such affidavit shall
include the statement of the surveyor to the effect that he has fully complied
with the requirements of this section.
      2.   Certificates Required: The certificate of approval of the village
board shall be typed, lettered or reproduced legibly on the face of the survey
map.
   F.   Filing Of The Survey Map: The survey map shall be filed by the village
and recorded with the recorder of deeds of Lake County. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-
1999)
CHAPTER 4
STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION DESIGN
SECTION:
6-4-1: General
6-4-2: Street Standards
6-4-3: Easements
6-4-4: Lots
6-4-5: Building Setback Lines
6-4-6: Parks, School Sites And Public Areas
6-4-7: Natural Area Management
6-4-8: Watershed Development Ordinance
6-4-9: Transportation Demand Management Provisions
6-4-10: Monotony Code Restrictions
6-4-1: GENERAL:
The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent, width,
grade and location of all streets, easements, sites for parks, playgrounds and
schools or other land to be dedicated for public use, shall conform to the
comprehensive plan and zoning map of the village. Approval of design standards
shall be considered on the basis of their relation to existing and platted
streets, reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjacent
land, topographic conditions, runoff of storm water, public convenience and
safety, and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
(Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-4-2: STREET STANDARDS:
   A.   Street Arrangement: Where such is not shown on the comprehensive plan
and/or zoning map, the arrangement of streets within a subdivision shall
either:
      1.   Continuity: Provide for the continuation or projection of existing
principal streets or adjacent areas; or (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
      2.   Conformity With Plan: Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood
approved or adopted by the plan commission/board of appeals to meet a
particular situation where topographic or other conditions make continuance or
conformance to existing streets infeasible. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord.
05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   B.   Street Design: All required street right of way widths, and pavement
widths, curves, gradients and site distances shall be in accordance with the
following:
      1.   Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be avoided.
      2.   Intersections: It must be evidenced that all street intersections
and confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic flow and, in general, be
at or near right angles and in no case shall a street intersect any other
street at less than sixty degrees (60°). An intersection of more than two (2)
streets shall not be permitted. The number of intersections along major streets
shall be held to a minimum and wherever practicable, the distance between such
intersections shall not be less than one thousand three hundred feet (1,300').
      3.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: A cul-de-sac street, in single-family
residential districts, shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') in length, when
designed to have one end permanently closed. Each cul-de-sac street shall have
a terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum right of way diameter of one
hundred twenty feet (120') and a pavement outside diameter of not less than
ninety feet (90').
      4.   Access From Major Streets: Provisions shall be made for vehicular
and pedestrian access to residential property abutting a major street either by
providing: a) a marginal access road, or b) by backing lots to the thoroughfare
and providing access by a collector, minor or cul-de-sac street one lot depth
removed and with a no access strip at least twelve feet (12') wide along the
rear lot line. These standards are established for the purpose of providing
protection for efficient use of the major street for its intended function of
accommodating through traffic. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
      5.   Frontage Roads: Where a subdivision borders on or contains a
highway, the plan commission/board of appeals may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such highway, at distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes
in residential districts, or for commercial purposes in appropriate districts.
Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades and future grade separations. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd.
Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      6.   Street Levels: Street levels shall provide proper relation between
the street and the elevation of the houses to assure positive drainage from the
building to the street. The top of the foundation of homes must be at least six
inches (6") above the level of the street.
   C.   Minimum Standards For Street Design:
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
 
                                       Length   Tangent
          Right Of Pavement Radius Of  Of       Between    Maximum  Minimum  Sight
Street    Way      Width    Horizontal Vertical Horizontal Gradient Gradient Distance
          Width             Curves     Curves   Reverse                      (c)
                                                Curves
Major     100 ft.  54 ft.   500 ft.    200 ft.  200 ft.    5%       0.5%      
                                       (a)
Collector 66 ft.   20 ft.   400 ft.    200 ft.  200 ft.    5%       0.5%      
                                       (a)
Minor     66 ft.   20 ft.   150 ft.    100 ft.  –        8%       0.5%      
                                       (b)
Cul-de-   60 ft.   20 ft.   150 ft.    100 ft.  –        8%       0.5%      
sac                                    (b)
Marginal  60 ft.   20 ft.   400 ft.    200 ft.  100 ft.    8%       0.5%      
access                                 (a)
In        80–100                     200 ft.
business  ft.      54 ft.   500 ft.    (a)      200 ft.    2%       0.5%      
districts
 
(a)   50 feet for each 1 percent algebraic difference of grade but in no case
less than 200 feet except on sags where minimum drainage cannot be attached.
(b)   40 feet for each 1 percent algebraic difference of grade but in no case
less than 100 feet.
(c)   Per Lake County highway department access ordinance.
(Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-4-3: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Easement Design And Location: Utility distribution or transmission
installations serving the subdivision, and when required, storm water
drainageways shall be located in easements as designated on the subdivision
plat of record. They shall be not less than ten feet (10') wide or may be of
greater width if recommended by the village engineer and approved by the board
of trustees. Additional easements at other locations may be recommended for
specific conditions by the village engineer and required by the board of
trustees.
   B.   Continuity Of Easements: Easements shall be designed to provide
continuity.
   C.   Drainage Easements: Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement,
conforming substantially with the areas bordering such watercourse that are
subject to flooding. The easement width shall be determined by the village
engineer.
   D.   Lake, Pond: A plat of subdivision containing a lake, pond or other body
of water shall provide for a minimum fifteen foot (15') easement encircling the
lake, pond or other body of water and terminating at a dedicated street. Such
easement shall be deemed dedicated to the village for inspection and related
purposes. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-4-4: LOTS:
   A.   Configuration Of Lots: The lot size, width, depth, shape and
orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for
the type of development and use contemplated and, in general, lots should be as
nearly rectangular in shape as practicable. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
      1.   Conformance With Zoning Regulations: Width and area of lots shall
conform with lot width and area requirements set forth in the zoning
regulations of the village or that of Lake County in the unincorporated areas
beyond the village limits. Corner lots shall be increased in width by twenty
percent (20%) over the width of typical interior lots, except the board of
trustees may require, when recommended by the plan commission/board of appeals,
a greater lot width to provide for the proper development of intersection
design and traffic safety.
      2.   Nonresidential Lots: Width, area and depth of lots in a
manufacturing or business subdivision shall be as recommended by the plan
commission/board of appeals and approved by the board of trustees. (Ord. 99-O-
791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      3.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines of lots shall be at right angles or
radial to the street line, or substantially so.
   B.   Access To Lots: Each lot within the subdivision must have access to a
public street unless otherwise provided by local ordinance. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-
7-1999)
   C.   Double Frontage Lots: Double/reverse frontage lots are not permitted
except when specifically recommended by the plan commission/board of appeals
and approved by the board of trustees. Double frontage/reverse frontage lots
shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential
development from major streets or highways or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at
least ten feet (10'), and across which there shall be no right of vehicular
access, shall be provided along the rear lot lines of lots abutting such
highways and major thoroughfares. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942,
11-7-2005)
   D.   Lots Abutting Watercourse: Lots abutting upon a watercourse (lake or
pond), drainageway channel or stream shall have an additional depth or width to
provide for the buildable and septic field land areas.
   E.   Preservation Of Natural Features: In the subdividing of any land, due
regard shall be given to the preservation of natural features, such as
woodlands, trees, wetlands, watercourses, historical landmarks and similar
community assets, which, if preserved, would add to the attractiveness and
value of the subdivision, neighborhood or the community as a whole. (Ord. 99-O-
791, 6-7-1999)
6-4-5: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
Building setback lines in all new subdivisions shall conform to the front yard
provisions of the village zoning regulations. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-4-6: PARKS, SCHOOL SITES AND PUBLIC AREAS:
Whenever required by this title or any other ordinance of the village, parks,
school sites and/or other public areas shall be shown on all plans and plats
and shall be of such configuration as to be acceptable to the plan commission/
board of appeals and village board. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-
942, 11-7-2005)
6-4-7: NATURAL AREA MANAGEMENT:
The Kildeer natural area management ordinance, title 7, chapter 8 of this code,
heretofore adopted on January 4, 1995, applies to all applications governed by
this title which involve natural areas. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-4-8: WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE:
The watershed development ordinance as referenced in title 7, chapter 6 of this
code, applies to all matters coming within the terms of this title, except as
may be expressly delimited by that ordinance. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-4-9: TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROVISIONS:
Transportation demand management provisions, title 7, chapter 7 of this code,
apply to all matters coming within the terms of this title. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-
7-1999)
6-4-10: MONOTONY CODE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Definitions.
      1.   Configuration - a combination of project type, elevation, exterior
fenestration (siding or stone), or color package.
      2.   Color Package - a combination of siding, stone, trim/gutter, accent
and roof colors incorporated into the exterior color fenestration of a single
house.
      3.   The words "directly across the street" include any lot or portion
thereof that falls with the lot lines, as extended, of the subject residence
and either lots on both sides of said lot.
   B.   The following shall apply to all homes within a proposed subdivision:
      1.   No house shall have the same configuration that is within two houses
on either side or on any of the three homes most directly across the street
from the subject house. Additionally, the house directly behind a corner
subject house is included in this criteria.
      2.   No house shall have the same color package that is within two houses
on either side or on any of the three homes most directly across the street
from the subject house. Additionally, the house directly behind a corner
subject house is included in this criteria.
      3.     Siding colors shall be approved by the Village. Light colors for
siding are encouraged. Black, dark blue and dark green shall not be approved
for siding.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d54cd01a02ea8953ad3a88fd261627e42b829a53/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2036.png]
 
(Ord. 21-O-013, 5-18-2021)
CHAPTER 5
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
6-5-1: General
6-5-2: Sanitary Sewer System
6-5-3: Stormwater Drainage System Required
6-5-4: General Street Improvements
6-5-5: Frontage Roads
6-5-6: Parkways, Lots And Yards
6-5-7: Street Lighting Improvements
6-5-8: Street Signs
6-5-9: Landscaping
6-5-10: Water Retention Or Detention Facilities
6-5-11: Blasting
6-5-12: Markers
6-5-13: Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control
6-5-14: Inspection Of Surface Improvements
6-5-15: Acceptance Of Required Land Improvements
6-5-1: GENERAL:
   A.   The owner or subdivider shall install storm and sanitary sewers, where
required, street grading and pavement, and public utilities, in accordance with
applicable village ordinances and standards of construction.
   B.   No subdivision of land shall be approved without receiving a statement
signed by the village engineer, certifying that the improvements described in
the subdivider's plans and specifications, together with agreements, meet the
minimum requirements of all ordinances of the village. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-
1999)
6-5-2: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
   A.   Sewer Service Required:
      1.   Sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer service shall be installed to
service all properties being developed within the village, where applicable.
      2.   Customers located within the Lake County Kildeer retail service area
are subject to the Lake County sewer ordinance.
   B.   Approval For Construction: All sanitary sewer systems shall be
constructed in accordance with standards approved by the environmental
protection agency of the state, and Lake County and the village. All sewer
design, plans and specifications shall be submitted to the above agencies for
approval and file.
   C.   Recapture Agreements: Recapture agreements approved by the village
prior to December 2015, are hereby affirmed including provisions for recapture
from future additions to the previously village owned sewer system.
   D.   Delinquent Fees; Liens: In the event that any bill is not satisfied
within sixty (60) days of mailing, such fees shall be deemed and are declared
to be delinquent, and shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which
such bill was issued. The village clerk is hereby authorized and directed to
file sworn statements showing such delinquencies with the office of the
recorder of deeds of Lake County. The village may file an appropriate action in
equity or law to enforce any such lien, and shall be entitled, pursuant to
statute, to an award of reasonable attorney fees incurred.
   E.   Interest On Delinquent Bills: All delinquent bills shall accrue
interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum until satisfied in full.
(Ord. 15-O-022, 12-15-2015)
6-5-3: STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED:
   A.   Drainage System Required: An adequate system of stormwater drainage
shall be constructed and installed consisting of natural watercourses, storm
sewers and other necessary facilities which will drain the subdivision and
protect roadway pavements.
   B.   Storm Drainage Computations:
      1.   Required For Entire Area: Storm sewers, where required, shall be
constructed throughout the entire area contemplated for development. Such storm
sewer shall be connected to adequate outfall. Intercepting storm water
structure shall be provided at intervals approximately four hundred feet (400')
as measured along the center line or as determined by the kind of character and
runoff as approved by the Village Engineer.
      2.   Separate And Independent Systems: Storm sewer and sanitary sewer
shall be separate and independent systems.
      3.   Structural Requirements: Storm sewer shall generally be constructed
of concrete pipe with sufficient strength to develop the structural
requirements necessary for the type of storm sewer to be constructed.
      4.   Capacity: Storm sewer capacity shall be determined by the use of the
rational formula. The intensity (I) factor used shall be a return frequency of
not less than five (5) years. The runoff coefficient (C) factor shall be
determined by the character of the land to be drained in its developed state.
      5.   Grades And Drainage: All street grades, lot and block drainage shall
be established so as to permit positive drainage.
      6.   Prevention Of Flooding: In areas where runoff from storms of greater
intensity than those which the storm sewers are designed for will cause
flooding of adjacent property, one of the following alternate procedures shall
be instituted to preclude the possibility of flooding:
         a.   Storm sewers shall be installed on both sides of a roadway
beneath the center line of the roadside ditch with intercepting storm water
structures as in subsection B1 of this Section.
         b.   Storm sewers shall be designed to provide runoff capacity for
maximum storm of record.
         c.   Contours of land shall be changed by grading to assure positive
drainage.
      7.   Construction Of Detention Ponds: Construction of detention ponds
shall be in accordance with the Village Engineer and the Village requirements.
         A dry flow drainage shall be provided in detention areas.
         Detention areas must be capable of total drainage in not over seventy
two (72) hours.
         Total area of parks with detention ponds shall be not less than five
(5) acres.
      8.   Dry Land Bridge: Where any roadway within the subdivision crosses
ground wherein peat or unstable materials are situated, the Village may require
that the subdivider build a dry land bridge encompassing the roadway as it
crosses such ground, or the subdivider shall remove such peat or unstable
material and replace it with stable solid fill.
      9.   Culverts: To facilitate the flow of surface water along the ditches
as specified in this Section, and to prevent standing pools of water:
         a.   All culverts shall be designed to accommodate a five (5) year
frequency for one hour duration for the total watershed area tributary to the
culvert.
         b.   Culverts shall be placed beneath private driveways and a minimum
of eight inches (8") shall be maintained between the top of the pipe and the
roadway surface. For culverts under dedicated streets and roads a minimum of
twelve inches (12") shall be maintained between the top of the pipe and the
roadway surface. Culverts shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP CLIV).
         c.   Culverts beneath driveways shall be a minimum diameter of twelve
inches (12"). Culverts beneath dedicated streets shall possess a minimum
diameter of fifteen inches (15").
      10.   Ditches:
         a.   All ditch lines shall have a minimum width of six feet (6'). All
ditch lines shall be sodded and pegged, as determined by the Village Engineer.
         b.   All slopes greater than four to one (4:1) shall be sodded and
pegged.
         c.   Sedimentation basins shall be constructed at all points of
discharge. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-5-4: GENERAL STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
All streets within all subdivisions, as defined in section
6-4-2 of this title, shall be improved with a durable hard surfaced roadway in
accordance with the following: (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
   A.   Base Course And Surface Course: The subdivider shall install the
required street improvements utilizing one of the following alternatives:
      1.   The base course shall include a minimum of four inches (4") of
crushed stone (CA-6, grade 8 or 9), four inches (4") of stabilized base course
(BAM or MS = 1700), two inches (2") of binder, area reflective crack control
treatment, and two inches (2") of class I surface; or
      2.   The base course shall consist of a nonwoven geotextile fabric
(minimum grab tensile strength of 215 pounds and a Mullen burst of 360 pounds
per square inch), twelve inches (12") of crushed stone (CA-6, grade 8 or 9),
two inches (2") of binder, area reflective crack control treatment, and two
inches (2") of class I surface.
   Curb and gutter shall be installed. (Ord. 03-O-883, 8-4-2003)
   B.   Standards For Construction: Materials and methods of construction shall
be in compliance with the Illinois "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition.
   C.   Street Improvements:
      1.   The full width of the right of way shall be graded to the required
section.
      2.   The unsuitable subbase material shall be removed and shall be
replaced with stable, compacted material in conformance with generally accepted
engineering practices.
      3.   The centerline grade shall be not less than five-tenths of one
percent (0.5%), and shall not exceed five percent (5%) on major and collector
streets and six percent (6%) on minor streets and cul-de-sac streets or as
determined by the village engineer.
      4.   Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in centerline
gradient occurs, except where the algebraic difference in gradients is one
percent (1%) or less. The length of vertical curve on minor streets shall be
forty feet (40') for each one percent (1%) of algebraic difference of grade,
but in no case shall such length be less than forty feet (40'). The length of
vertical curve on collector streets shall be fifty feet (50') for each one
percent (1%) of algebraic difference of grade, but in no case shall such length
be less than fifty feet (50').
      5.   All pavements shall be designed in accordance with the "Manual Of
Instructions For The Structural Design Of Bituminous Pavements" or the "Manual
For Structural Design Of Portland Cement Concrete Pavements In Illinois" by the
Illinois department of transportation, latest edition. All pavements are to
have stone shoulders at least two feet (2') wide.
The minimum thickness shall be as hereinafter set forth. Design data shall be
submitted to the village with EBR tests and shall provide structural numbers as
set forth in the aforementioned manuals. If the subdivider chooses an alternate
pavement design other than as specified in this section, it must meet the
following minimum structural numbers and must be approved by both the village
engineer and village board:
 
Minor residential streets Dt 3.5
All other streets         Dt 4.0
 
(Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-5-5: FRONTAGE ROADS:
The complete design for frontage roads, including specifications and
designation of trafficways, driving lanes, paving widths, thickness, materials,
etc., shall be submitted to the plan commission/board of appeals for review and
approval prior to the issuance of building permits or the sale or lease of
buildings or land in the planned developments, as defined in chapter 2 of this
title. The minimum number of off street parking spaces shall be in accordance
with the requirements of the zoning regulations of the village. Frontage roads
and parking areas shall be designed in accordance with subsection
6-5-4C5 of this chapter. When a frontage road is to be dedicated to public use,
the specifications shall be in accordance with the minimum width, thickness and
standards of the village. Where more than one owner or lessee are to use the
same private frontage road or parking lot, a trust indenture shall be recorded
before approval of the multi-family or commercial subdivision, as defined in
chapter 2 of this title.
A minimum distance may be required by the commission/board where deemed
necessary between points of ingress and egress where all property to be
subdivided is under one ownership on the effective date hereof. Where property
has frontage on a county, state or federal highway, the spacing and design of
the points of ingress and egress to the major highway shall be subject to
approval of the Lake County department of transportation or the Illinois
department of transportation. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-
7-2005)
6-5-6: PARKWAYS, LOTS AND YARDS:
Parkways shall extend from the curb to the property line. They shall be graded
by the developer with not less than six inches (6") of topsoil and be sodded.
Within six (6) months of the village's authorization for the issuance of
building permits, the parkways of all lots shall be sodded; the remainder of
the lot shall be sodded or seeded. Undeveloped lots shall be watered and mowed
by the developer or owner, whichever is the responsible entity, to maintain the
grass at a maximum height of six inches (6"). (Ord. 03-O-883, 8-4-2003)
6-5-7: STREET LIGHTING IMPROVEMENTS:
Each major street intersection shall be improved with a light standard which
meets specifications for maintenance by Commonwealth Edison. The contract for
service with Commonwealth Edison shall be submitted to the village office prior
to construction. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-5-8: STREET SIGNS:
The developer will arrange with the village for the erection of the requisite
street signs within the subdivision which shall be in conformity with section
7-3-1 of this code. The cost of the street signs and their installation shall
be the responsibility of the subdivider. The subdivider shall also provide
sufficient funds to the village for blank replacement signs calculated on the
basis of one replacement sign for each five (5) signs or fraction thereof
installed within the subdivision. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-5-9: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Tree Survey: The developer shall provide a tree survey prepared by a
recognized arborist or landscape architect. Existing trees shall be preserved,
if possible, as determined by the village engineer, village planner or village
landscape consultant. (Ord. 03-O-883, 8-4-2003)
   B.   Trees Required: Trees newly planted shall be not farther apart than
fifty feet (50') and shall be located no farther than five feet (5') from the
property line in the right of way of individual lots; provided, that trees
proposed for planting shall not be planted if distances of fifty feet (50')
cannot be maintained between such proposed trees and existing trees, and
proposed trees shall be limited to those varieties as recommended by the plan
commission/board of appeals and approved by the village board. (Ord. 03-O-883,
8-4-2003; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      1.   Tree Caliper: Newly planted street trees shall be at least three
inches (3") dbh (diameter at breast height).
      2.   Inspection And Replacement: All planted trees shall be inspected
after a one year period and all dead, dying or diseased trees shall be
replaced. The developer shall provide a replacement guarantee for one
additional year following acceptance of the landscape improvements.
      3.   Prohibited Trees: The planting of the following varieties of trees
within public rights of way shall be prohibited:
Box elder      (Acer negundo)     All varieties
Catalpa        (Catalpa)          All varieties
Chinese elm    (Ulmus parvifulia) All varieties
Mountain ash   (Sorbus)           All varieties
Mulberry       (Morus alba)       In variety
Poplar         (Populus)          All varieties
Soft maple     (Acer dasycarpum)  In variety
Tree of heaven (Ailanthus)        All varieties
Willow         (Salix)            All varieties
 
(Ord. 03-O-883, 8-4-2003)
   C.   Screen Planting Required: Protective screen planting may be required to
secure a reasonably effective physical barrier between residential properties
and adjoining uses to minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound. The
screen planting plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect licensed in the
state and shall meet the approval of the plan commission/board of appeals.
(Ord. 03-O-883, 8-4-2003; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   D.   Reference: See also subsection
4-3-2B of this code.
   E.   Landscape Plans: One set of landscape plans shall be superimposed on an
engineering plan. (Ord. 03-O-883, 8-4-2003)
   F.   Paths: All pathways shall be paved with three inches (3") bituminous
asphalt over eight inches (8") CA6 crushed limestone; the clay base shall be
compacted to minimum ninety five percent (95%) modified proctor prior to the
stone installation; the stone shall be compacted to minimum ninety five percent
(95%) modified proctor prior to asphalt installation. Further specifications
and widths shall be determined by the village engineer dependent upon the
purpose of the path, topography, and soil conditions. The village may approve
alternate materials if deemed appropriate for certain environmental conditions.
(Ord. 04-O-888, 1-5-2004)
6-5-10: WATER RETENTION OR DETENTION FACILITIES:
Retention ponds or reservoirs may be constructed. Such retention facilities
shall be designed to retain a certain water level at all times and may, in
addition to serving as part of the storm water drainage system of the village,
be used for scenic and recreation purposes. Detailed engineering plans and
specifications for retention or detention facilities shall be prepared by the
design engineer for review by the village engineer and plan commission/board of
appeals and approval by the village board. The design of retention or detention
facilities shall be in accordance with the following guidelines: (Ord. 99-O-
791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
   A.   Construction Pollution: There must not be any pollution of any kind
entering the water area during or after construction.
   B.   Access: A plat of subdivision containing a lake, pond or other body of
water shall provide for a fifteen foot (15') easement encircling the lake, pond
or other body of water and terminating at a dedicated street. Such easement
shall be deemed dedicated to the village for inspection and related purposes.
   C.   Control Gate: A mechanical control gate may be used at the outlet pipe.
   D.   Incoming Lines: The ends of all incoming storm sewer lines shall be
below the normal pool elevation and shall be set in a concrete headwall or end
section.
   E.   Bottom Slope; Safety Shelf: The bottom slope of the pool shall be four
to one (4:1) from the maximum flood stage elevation to a point twenty feet
(20') out from the normal pool elevation. A minimum six foot (6') safety shelf
shall be provided.
   F.   Landscaping: The entire area shall be graded and seeded and the soil
shall be stable enough to support mowing equipment and shall be landscaped.
Minimum of five (5) trees, of two and one- half inch (21/2") diameter, shall be
recommended.
   G.   Drainage Control: Storm drainage control shall be retained by the
village.
   H.   Dams And Constructed Walls: All dams and constructed walls shall be
designed by a registered engineer and, if of earth, shall have a maximum slope
of two and five-tenths to one (2.5:1), be constructed of compacted clean earth
fill and have an interior core wall of concrete on sheet steel.
   I.   Embankments: Shaped earth embankments shall have a maximum slope of
four to one (4:1) and shall be compacted to remove all voids exposed by cutting
and shall be cleared of all extraneous material and foliage below the designed
water line. Erosion control fabric may be required by the village engineer.
   J.   Depth: Retention facilities shall maintain a minimum constant water
depth of ten feet (10') over thirty percent (30%) of the surface water area, in
addition to the depth of occasional water detained in the facility in storm
situations.
   K.   Area: Retention and detention facilities smaller in area than three (3)
acres shall not be permitted. Such area shall be measured at the constant water
level.
   L.   Overflow Outlets: Overflow outlets shall be provided as necessary to
keep the water level within a retention facility within its design limits.
Materials and methods of construction for overflow piping shall be the same as
for storm sewer construction as shown in section
6-5-3 of this chapter. Maximum overflow rate shall be designed in accordance
with said section
6-5-3 of this chapter. Overflow spillways shall be of concrete and so
constructed that no erosion of the dam or outfall shall occur.
   M.   Overflow Outfalls: Overflow outfalls shall be as specified in section
6-5-3 of this chapter for storm drainage outfalls.
   N.   Bank Stabilization And Landscaping: All cut embankments, earth dams or
other surfaces shall be seeded or sodded, or in accordance with this section,
to the designed occasional water level of the retention facility. From this
point to the constant water level, sand or gravel may be used. Stabilization
with stone, concrete or other material may be used if specifically approved by
the village board. Trees shall not be planted on or within twenty feet (20') of
any earth dam.
   O.   Drafting Pits/Fire Prevention: Where a retention pond or lake has a
minimum depth of four feet (4'), the subdivider shall install a drafting pit
manhole structure with a suction pipe with the inlet at the middle of the pond.
The manhole drafting pit and outlet shall be installed within the right of way
within the subdivision. The location of and specifications for the manhole
drafting pit and the suction pipe shall be subject to the approval and
direction of the village engineer. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-5-11: BLASTING:
No blasting shall take place in connection with any work in a subdivision until
appropriate village authorities have been notified and the applicable village
ordinances complied with. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-5-12: MARKERS:
Iron pipe or steel bars not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and
twenty four inches (24") long shall be set at all corners of lots and all
street points of tangents. Markers shall be set level with the finished grade.
The subdivider shall replace all or verify the existence of the iron pipes at
all lot corners and all bends in property lines after the completion of all
construction and before final acceptance of the subdivision by the village
board of trustees. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-5-13: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
   A.   Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be required for all
new developments consistent with the recommendations contained in the
"Standards And Specifications For Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control"
published by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, 1987, and the
"Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control"
(the Greenbook) published in 1988.
   B.   The following additional standards shall also apply:
      1.   Erosion and sediment control measures shall be in place as part of
land development process, before grading or disturbance is allowed.
      2.   The area of site disturbance and the time of disturbance shall be
minimized.
      3.   The implementation of soil stabilization measures on disturbed areas
shall be required as early as practicable.
      4.   Wherever reasonably possible, steep slopes and areas adjacent to
natural watercourses shall be avoided, existing natural contours shall be
maintained, and areas of native vegetation shall be retained.
      5.   Drainageways and other areas susceptible to erosion shall be
designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities of
discharge will not create additional erosion.
      6.   Maintenance of all erosion and sediment control practices shall be
performed routinely.
      7.   Construction sites shall be inspected at critical points in the
development process to ensure that measures are being correctly employed and
maintained. In order to obtain inspections, the developer shall notify the
village engineer prior to: stripping and clearing, rough grading, final
grading, and final landscaping. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-5-14: INSPECTION OF SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Inspection Required: All grading, paving, landscaping or other surface
improvements as required by this title shall be inspected during the course of
construction and upon completion by the village engineer.
   B.   Notification Required: During the course of construction of the
improvements, the subdivider shall notify the village forty eight (48) hours
before any required inspection. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-5-15: ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
Upon the completion of construction of all public improvements required by this
title, in conformance with approved engineering plans and specifications, the
design engineer engaged by the subdivider, builder or land developer shall
prepare and submit to the village administrator four (4) sets plus one
reproducible set on Mylar, of as built plans and certification by the village
engineer that all public improvements have been satisfactorily completed in
accordance with the approved engineering plans and specifications. The village
board will enact a resolution accepting said improvements. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-
1999)
CHAPTER 6
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
6-6-1: Organization
6-6-2: Enforcement
6-6-3: Deviations And Exceptions
6-6-4: Record Of Plats
6-6-5: Validity
6-6-6: Appeals
6-6-7: Amendments
6-6-8: Violations And Penalties
6-6-1: ORGANIZATION:
The following offices of the government of the village are concerned with the
administration of this title:
   A.   The Village Board: The village board is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to subdivision control: (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
      1.   Approval or disapproval of all preliminary plans and final plats
referred to it by the plan commission/board of appeals.
      2.   Approval or disapproval of all variations and exceptions after
recommendation by the plan commission/board of appeals.
      3.   Amendment of the regulations of this title when found necessary and
desirable after recommendation by the plan commission/board of appeals. (Ord.
99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      4.   Initiation of appropriate proceedings to enforce the provisions of
this title.
   B.   The Village Administrator: The village administrator shall have the
following duties:
      1.   Collection of applications and plans.
      2.   Administration of regulations of this title.
      3.   Coordination of professional consultants and other agencies.
      4.   Staff liaison to the village board.
   C.   The Village Clerk: The village clerk shall have the following duties:
      1.   Maintain permanent and current records of this subdivision title,
including amendments hereto. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
   D.   The Village Plan Commission/Board Of Appeals: The plan commission/board
of appeals shall have the following duties: (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord.
05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      1.   Review preliminary plats and forward with recommendations to the
village board.
      2.   Review final plats, check their compliance with the preliminary plan
and forward with recommendations to the village board.
      3.   Make all other determinations required by the regulations herein.
   E.   The Village Engineer: The village engineer shall:
      1.   Review all preliminary subdivision plans and make determinations in
the areas of design standards and engineering specifications, as stipulated
herein.
      2.   Review all final subdivision plans and check for compliance with the
preliminary plat.
      3.   Inspect all improvements required by this title both during
construction and after completion to ensure compliance with this title and with
good construction practice, and other inspections as determined by the village
administrator.
   F.   The Village Planner:
      1.   The village planner shall review all preliminary and final
subdivision plans and make recommendations, as stipulated herein, and as
determined by the village administrator.
      2.   The village planner, and/or representatives of the village planner's
office, shall inspect all wetland mitigation actions as required to ensure
compliance with ordinances.
   G.   Conflict Of Interest: Village officials and consultants may not be
retained by a subdivider to perform work in their professional capacities in
any subdivision within the village without the expressed written approval of
the village board. Village officials and consultants shall act in accordance
with title 1, chapter 14 of this code. Any interest in conflict or potentially
in conflict shall be noted in writing to the village board. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-
7-1999)
6-6-2: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Administration: It shall be the duty of the village president and the
village administrator to administer this title and to bring any violations or
lack of compliance herewith to the attention of the village attorney.
   B.   Compliance Required:
      1.   Before Sale Of Lots Or Issuance Of Building Permit: No owner, or
agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision
shall transfer or sell such parcel, nor shall any public official issue a
building permit for the construction of buildings or structures within a
proposed subdivision, before the final plat of said subdivision has been
approved by the village board, in accordance with the provisions of this title,
and filed with the recorder of deeds of Lake County, Illinois. No building
permits shall be issued other than on a lot of record.
      2.   Before Plat Approval: No final plat of subdivision shall be approved
which does not comply with all the provisions of this title.
   C.   Use Of Metes And Bounds Measure Prohibited: The subdivision of any lot
or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds for the purpose of sale,
transfer or lease with the intent of evading this title will not be permitted.
All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements and
regulations contained in this title. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-6-3: DEVIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Hardships: Where the plan commission/board of appeals finds that
extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties regarding the physical
development of land may result from strict compliance with these regulations,
it may recommend deviations or exceptions to the regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that
such deviation or exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent
and purpose of this title; and further provided, the plan commission/board of
appeals shall not recommend deviations or exceptions to the regulations of this
title unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in
each specific case that: (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-
2005)
      1.   Public Welfare Protected: The granting of the deviation will not be
detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other
property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located.
      2.   Unique Conditions: The conditions upon which the request for a
deviation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought
and are not applicable, generally, to other property.
      3.   Particular Physical Conditions: Because of the particular physical
surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property
involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried
out. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
   B.   Conditions: In recommending variations and exceptions, the plan
commission/board of appeals may require such conditions as will, in its
judgment secure substantially the objective of the standards or requirements of
this title.
   C.   Procedure: A petition for any such deviation shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plan is filed for
consideration by the plan commission/board of appeals. The petition shall state
fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the
petitioner.
   D.   Recommendations: Such deviations and exceptions as may be recommended
by the plan commission/board of appeals shall be forwarded to the village board
in writing, substantiating the recommended deviations and/or exceptions. The
village board may approve such deviations or exceptions from the requirements
of this title in specific cases as listed on the final plat, which in its
opinion do not adversely affect the adopted comprehensive plan or the intent
and purpose of this title. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-
2005)
6-6-4: RECORD OF PLATS:
All of such plats of subdivisions, after the same have been submitted and
approved as provided in this title, shall be recorded in the office of the
recorder of Lake County, Illinois, and two (2) copies bearing the document
number shall be filed and kept by the village. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-6-5: VALIDITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is
adjudged to be void, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this title. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
6-6-6: APPEALS:
Any person may appeal within sixty (60) days to the village board of trustees
any final action taken by the plan commission/board of appeals. The board of
trustees shall act as a board of appeals and shall hear and decide appeals from
and review any final order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
plan commission/board of appeals, under this title. The concurring vote of four
(4) members of the board of trustees shall be necessary to reverse any final
order of the plan commission/board of appeals under this title. (Ord. 99-O-791,
6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
6-6-7: AMENDMENTS:
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare, the
village board may from time to time amend the regulations imposed by this
title.
   A.   Authority: The regulations imposed under the authority of this title
may be amended from time to time, by ordinance in accordance with the
applicable statutes of the state. An amendment shall be granted or denied by
the village board of trustees. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999)
   B.   Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the village
board, by the plan commission/board of appeals, other governmental bodies or by
any resident of or owner of property within the jurisdictional limits of this
title. (Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
6-6-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who fails to comply with, or violates any of the provisions of this
title shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each day the violation continues.
Whoever shall sell or offer for sale, lease or offer for lease, while this
title is in effect, any lot or lots within the incorporated limits of the
village, or any resubdivision of any lot therein, or within contiguous
territory and not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
incorporated boundary of the village before a final plat of subdivision has
been recommended for approval by the plan commission/board of appeals and
approved by the village board of trustees, as required by this title, shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) each lot, or part thereof so disposed of, offered for sale or leased.
(Ord. 99-O-791, 6-7-1999; amd. Ord. 05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTIES
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Wage Rates, Public Works Contracts
7-1-1: WAGE RATES, PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS:
To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by the state, county,
city, or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under
contract for public works", approved June 26, 1941 1 , as amended, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other
workers engaged in construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction
of the village is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of
wages for construction work in Lake County area as determined by the department
of labor of the state of Illinois as of June of the current year, a copy of
that determination being incorporated herein by reference. As required by said
act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the department of
labor of the state of Illinois shall supersede the department's June
determination and apply to any and all public works construction undertaken by
the village. The definition of any terms appearing in the ordinance codified
herein which are also used in aforesaid act shall be the same as in said act.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing
rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public
works construction of the village to the extent required by the aforesaid act.
The village clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of the village this determination or any
revisions of such prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination or of
the current revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in effect
shall be attached to all contract specifications.
The village clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and
to any association of employers and to any person or association of employees
who have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workers
whose wages will be affected by such rates.
The village clerk shall promptly file a copy of the ordinance codified herein
with both the secretary of state index division and the department of labor of
the state of Illinois.
The village clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the village a notice of passage of the ordinance codified
herein, and such publication shall constitute notice that the determination is
effective and that this is the determination of the public body. (Ord. 13-O-
005, 6-18-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Certificate Of Approval For Construction Required
7-2-2: Storm Drains
7-2-3: Protection Of Sanitary Sewer System
7-2-4: Discharges Into Watercourses Prohibited
7-2-5: Condition Of Premises
7-2-6: Violations And Penalties
7-2-1: CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL FOR CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED:
All applications for building permits which involve the construction or repair
of any new or existing sewage disposal or treatment facilities or water supply
facilities, including all wells, shall be accompanied by a certificate of
approval of design of said facilities from the Lake County Health Department.
Said certificate of approval shall indicate that the applicant has conformed to
all requirements of the Lake County Health Department which pertain to such
facilities.
All drawings and/or drawings and specifications pertaining to the work shall be
approved by the Lake County Health Department and shall accompany the
application for building permit. No building permit will be issued by the
Building Commissioner until such certificate and approval has been obtained.
The plans and specifications for any sewage disposal treatment facilities
designed to serve ten (10) people or their equivalent shall be designed by a
licensed Illinois engineer or architect who shall affix his seal and signature
to said plans and specifications, and any charges, costs, fees, etc., which may
be incurred by above requirements shall be paid by the applicant and no costs
shall be borne by the Village. (Ord. 59-O-32, 7-20-1959)
7-2-2: STORM DRAINS:
   A.   Drainage Required: Roofs, paved areas, yards, courtyards, and similar
areas shall be drained into a storm sewer system or to an adequate surface
water course.
   B.   Subsoil Drains: Subsoil drains shall not be less than four inches (4")
in diameter and shall be of an approved material. Subsoil drains may discharge
to an area drain or sump. Subsoil sumps do not require venting. Subsoil drains
must connect to the storm sewer or discharge to an adequate surface
watercourse.
   C.   Floor Drains: Floor drains shall not be connected to a storm drain.
(Ord. 90-O-527, 3-5-1990)
7-2-3: PROTECTION OF SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
   A.   Prohibited Discharges: It shall be unlawful to allow or permit any
unpolluted water including, but not limited to, construction drainage, ground
water, cooling water, condensate drains, storm water or surface water, footing
drain tile discharge or downspout discharge water to be discharged, either
directly or indirectly, into any sanitary sewer system situated within the
Village and it shall further be unlawful to install any type of connection or
other device onto a sewer line which would thereby enable any of the above
described types of water to enter a sanitary sewer system situated within the
Village. These provisions apply to all sanitary sewer systems including, but
not limited to, individual systems (septic systems) and those systems
discharging to a centralized treatment system (sewage treatment plant).
   B.   Enforcement:
      1.   Administration: The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized
and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this Section.
      2.   Entry: Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Director of
Public Works, or his duly authorized representatives, may enter at reasonable
times any building, structure or premises in the Village to perform any duty
imposed upon him by this Section.
      3.   Inspection: Any building, structure or premises in the Village
connected to a Village-owned and/or operated sanitary sewer system shall be
inspected on an annual basis to determine compliance with the provisions of
this Section.
      4.   Search Warrant: In the event that the Director of Public Works is
denied access for the purpose of an inspection, then he is authorized and
directed to obtain the requisite search warrant. (Ord. 90-O-527, 3-5-1990)
7-2-4: DISCHARGES INTO WATERCOURSES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any waste or discharge any sewage
effluent into any stream traversing the boundaries of the Village which
contains more than twenty (20) parts per million biological oxygen demand
(BOD). (Ord. 90-O-527, 3-5-1990)
7-2-5: CONDITION OF PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, renting, leasing or occupying any
premises within the Village to permit septic effluent to bubble to the surface
of the ground and/or remain on the surface of the ground. (Ord. 90-O-527, 3-5-
1990)
7-2-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who fails to comply with, or violates the provisions of this Chapter
shall upon conviction be fined as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day upon which a violation occurs or continues. Person shall mean and include
any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or any other legal
entity. (Ord. 90-O-527, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
In addition to the above described fine, any person convicted of an offense
under this Chapter shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the Village
in connection therewith including, but not limited to, the cost of site
inspections, smoke testing, water dyeing, line televising or any other costs
incurred. (Ord. 90-O-527, 3-5-1990)
CHAPTER 3
STREET SIGNS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Street Signs
7-3-1: STREET SIGNS:
Street signs shall be of the following specifications:
   A.   The material of all signs shall be cedar.
   B.   Signs shall be installed on wooden posts of the following size: six
inches by six inches by twelve feet (6" x 6" x 12').
   C.   The posts shall be installed in concrete or sacrete.
   D.   An arm shall be attached to said post in a manner approved by the
Village; the arms shall be of the following size: four inches by four inches by
forty inches (4" x 4" x 40").
   E.   The sign shall be of the following size: thirty inches by eighteen
inches by two inches (30" x 18" x 2").
   F.   Signs, posts and arms shall be stained dark brown.
   G.   The design of said signs shall be as depicted in Figure 1 of this
Section.
   H.   The lettering of said signs shall be three inches (3") in height.
Lettering shall be painted with a white reflective coating.
   I.   Street signs erected by the Illinois Department of Transportation or
the Lake County Highway Department shall be in conformance with their
respective specifications. (Ord. 90-O-548, 9-10-1990)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d54cd01a02ea8953ad3a88fd261627e42b829a53/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1854.gif]
(Ord. 98-O-767, 3-2-1998)
CHAPTER 4
REGULATION OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
SECTION:
7-4-1: Regulation of Public Right of Way
7-4-2: Mailbox Damage
7-4-1: REGULATION OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public street or public right of
way any materials which may be harmful to the pavement thereof or any waste
material, glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons or
property.
   B.   Definitions: For the purpose of this Section of the Code, the following
definitions shall apply:
      PERSON: Means and includes any individual, firm, partnership,
corporation, association or any other legal entity.
      STREET: Any street or road situated within the Village of Kildeer,
including the entire width between the boundary lines of every right of way,
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
   C.   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to install, create, erect
or maintain any fence, structure, devise, landscaping or any other object upon
the public right of way of any street within the Village, unless otherwise
permitted by Village ordinance, required by Federal or State statute, or unless
a permit has been issued therefor by the Village. This prohibition incudes, but
is not limited to: fences, landscape plantings, boulders, stones, rocks, stakes
and other such items.
   D.   Permits: No permit shall be issued for the erection, construction or
maintenance of any structure, devise, landscaping or any other similar object
upon any public right of way, including streets and roads, unless and until the
Village Administrator and Public Works Director determine that:
      1.   The proposed structure or device will not constitute a hazard to
either pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      2.   The proposed structure or device will not have any adverse effects
on surrounding property, both public and private.
      3.   The proposed structure or device will have no other adverse effects.
      4.   The proposed structure or device will not impede any Municipal
functions, such as snow plowing and drainage.
All of the foregoing criteria must be satisfied before a permit can be issued.
   E.   Any and all obstructions or other structures which are in contravention
of the terms of this Section and are already existing shall be removed within
thirty (30) days of the effective date of this Section, or in the alternative,
an appropriate permit secured therefor within thirty (30) days of the effective
date of this Section. Any structures which remain after the thirty (30) day
period shall be subject for prosecution under the terms of this Section.
   F.   Any person violating any provisions of the terms of this Section shall
be fined a sum of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), and a separate offense shall be deemed to have
occurred for each day upon which the offense occurs or continues. (Ord. 89-0-
516, 12-4-89)
7-4-2: MAILBOX DAMAGE:
Snow plowing of the streets by the Village is done for the public good and
mailboxes installed inside the public right of way are to be installed and
maintained in a fashion to absorb the impact of snow coming off the face of a
plow blade. Mailboxes are a homeowner's responsibility and deteriorated and
weakened mailboxes and posts are to be replaced prior to the start of winter.
   A.   Any mailbox or post damaged during Village snow removal operations
through direct contact or snow discharge as determined by the Chief Village
Officer, or his or her designee, shall be repaired, if practical, or
reparations for the damages given, but in no event will an amount exceeding two
hundred dollars ($200.00) be paid to the owner of the mailbox. Mailboxes shall
not be repaired in kind.
   B.   The Village shall not be responsible for any damage caused to any
private property located within the public right of way, including, but not
limited to, landscaping, "invisible fence" wiring, plants shrubs, trees,
lighting, sprinkler systems, hoses, plumbing or any other materials whatsoever,
regardless of the fashion in which the property is damaged (e.g., damage to
vegetation caused by the application of salt).
   C.   Snow plowing is a Village-wide operation performed under difficult
weather conditions and special snow removal operations to accommodate an
individual property owner's driveway or mailbox are not practical. Homeowners
are responsible for providing access to their mailbox and driveway during
winter conditions.
(Ord. 24-O-005, 3-19-2024)
CHAPTER 5
ROAD ACCESS PERMIT
SECTION:
7-5-1: County Highway Access Regulation Ordinance Adopted
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Penalty
7-5-1: COUNTY HIGHWAY ACCESS REGULATION ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3-2, the Lake County Highway
Access Regulation Ordinance heretofore adopted by the Lake County Board on
April 12, 1988, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference; three (3)
copies of which have been on file with the Village Clerk for a period not less
than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this Chapter. (Ord. 90-O-521, 1-
5-1990)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the Highway Access Regulation Ordinance
heretofore adopted by reference in the preceding Section shall have the
following meanings:
   A.   In all instances where the text refers to "County" the same shall mean
"Kildeer".
   B.   In all instances in which the text refers to "County of Lake" the same
shall mean "Village of Kildeer".
   C.   In all instances in which the text refers to "highway" the same shall
mean "road".
   D.   In all instances in which the text refers to "Access Control Officer"
or "County Highway Superintendent" the same shall mean the "Village Engineer".
   E.   In all instances in which the text refers to a "highway, street, or
road" the same shall mean any public road owned, controlled, or regulated by
the Village of Kildeer. (Ord. 90-O-521, 1-5-1990)
7-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the terms of this Chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined a sum not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not
more than the maximum as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day
upon which an offense occurs or continues. For the purposes of this Chapter, a
person shall mean and include an individual, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other legal entity. (Ord. 90-O-521, 1-5-1990; amd. Ord. 95-
O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 6
WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Stormwater Management Regulations
7-6-1: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS:
The Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance, as most recently amended by
the County of Lake on July 11, 2023, is hereby adopted by reference and is in
full force and effect within the Village of Kildeer and is found in its own
compilation.
(Ord. 15-O-018, 10-20-2015; amd. Ord. 23-O-013, 7-18-2023)
CHAPTER 7
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
7-7-1: Traffic Study Required
7-7-2: Employee Traffic Mitigation Plan
7-7-3: Transportation Management Association
7-7-4: Traffic Studies; Projects of Lesser Scope
7-7-1: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
All new developments of one hundred (100) or more dwelling units or, in the
case of nonresidential development, any development which will employ one
hundred (100) or more employees will be required to provide a traffic study
(prepared by a qualified traffic engineer) to establish trips generated,
necessary road improvements, and other information regarding traffic impacts of
the development. (Ord. 92-0-617, 9-2-92)
7-7-2: EMPLOYEE TRAFFIC MITIGATION PLAN:
All new developments of one hundred (100) or more employees will be required to
establish and implement an Employee Traffic Mitigation Plan. The plan will set
forth specific actions by the developer or employer to limit peak hour
vehicular traffic generated by development. These actions might include
staggered work hours, rideshare promotion, full service cafeteria, preferential
parking plan, etc. (Ord. 92-0-617, 9-2-92)
7-7-3: TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION:
Employers are encouraged to join and participate in a transportation management
association i.e. The Transportation Management Association of Central Lake
County, Lake-Cook Transportation Management Association, etc. (Ord. 92-0-617,
9-2-92)
7-7-4: TRAFFIC STUDIES; PROJECTS OF LESSER SCOPE:
Notwithstanding the above, the Village of Kildeer may require traffic studies
for projects of lesser scope. (Ord. 92-0-617, 9-2-92)
CHAPTER 8
NATURAL AREA MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
7-8-1: Purpose And Intent
7-8-2: Definitions
7-8-3: Regulated Development
7-8-4: Review And Approval
7-8-5: Prohibited Activities
7-8-6: Performance Standards
7-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The following guidelines and procedures have been established for the
management of officially designated natural areas. The intent of these
regulations is to:
   A.   Recognize that all officially designated natural areas are unique and
require a management program specifically tailored to the needs of their unique
attributes and setting;
   B.   Establish requirements for documenting the natural character and values
of officially designated natural areas and for the development of ongoing
management programs tailored to the requirements of each site; and
   C.   Require that best management practices be employed on all officially
designated natural areas to ensure the long term preservation and enhancement
of each site and the maximization of recognized functional values. (Ord. 95-O-
680, 1-4-1995)
7-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CONSERVANCY EASEMENT: A legal agreement made by a property owner to restrict
the type and amount of development that may take place on his/her property.
This term shall apply to all easements which provide for the protection of
natural areas.
ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIALIST: An environmental professional with the demonstrated
academic training and/or professional experience necessary to thoroughly and
accurately assess natural area quality and offer recommendations for
management.
MANAGING AGENT: The individual or group responsible for managing an officially
designated natural area, as required by this Chapter.
OFFICIALLY DESIGNATED NATURAL AREAS: Land areas officially designated by the
Village Board as part of the plat/plan approval process, unoccupied by any
structure, other than those used for recreational or agricultural purposes,
exhibiting distinctive natural characteristics, existing and created,
including, but not limited to, fish and wildlife habitat, native vegetation
habitat, water quality enhancement, natural and created flood storage; which
shall be permanently devoted to open space use by, but not limited to,
conservancy easements and covenants running with the land, including citizens
of the Village or a property owners' association comprised of citizens of the
Village as beneficiaries of such conservancy easements and covenants, or
dedicated for such purposes to a Municipal corporation with authority to so use
such land. (Ord. 95-O-680, 1-4-1995)
7-8-3: REGULATED DEVELOPMENT:
The regulations of this Chapter shall apply to all existing and future,
nonagricultural development that contains officially designated natural areas.
Applicable officially designated natural areas shall include, but not be
limited to, wetlands, prairies, flood plains, storm water management areas, and
any other areas of natural value, including those within conservancy easements.
(Ord. 95-O-680, 1-4-1995)
7-8-4: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Submittals: Every applicant for preliminary subdivision and/or planned
development review shall file the following documents with the Village. For
purposes of this Chapter, all of the following documents, taken together, shall
be referred to as the "management documentation", and the term "management
documentation" shall mean each and every one of the following documents:
      1.   Site Evaluation: A site evaluation report prepared by a qualified
environmental specialist to determine the present and potential natural area
values and to identify conditions or problems that require management
attention. These shall include assessments of:
         a.   Site vegetation, including a survey of plant communities on the
site, listing species observed and noting the presence of any threatened or
endangered species and uncommon or unique native plant communities, including
but not limited to prairies, savannas, and mature woodlands;
         b.   Fish and wildlife value, including: a description of habitats and
direct and indirect observation of species utilization; a statement addressing
the presence of threatened or endangered species; and documentation of
completion of the consultation process with the Illinois Department of
Conservation; and
         c.   Surface waters, including the locations and drainage
relationships between and among rivers, streams, ditches, lakes, ponds,
wetlands, etc., along with their associated 100-year flood plains.
      2.   Site Plan: Items listed below shall be included on a site plan, at a
scale not more than 1" = 100', or at a scale otherwise required by the Village:
         a.   Items listed under subsection A1a through 1c, Site Evaluation,
above;
         b.   Existing and proposed site cover;
         c.   Location of FEMA flood plain, if different than associated with
subsection A1c, above;
         d.   Existing and proposed contours; and
         e.   Existing and proposed drainage systems, including natural
drainage features, all discharge points, collection, conveyance and storm water
management facilities; and
      3.   Management Plan: The Management plan shall include, at a minimum,
the following:
         a.   A list of all management commitments, constraints and performance
standards mandates by local, State and Federal permits, and the current status
of each;
         b.   A statement of management objectives specific to the site;
         c.   A detailed discussion of proposed management measures aimed at
achieving stated objectives and meeting management commitments, constraints and
performance standards. Management measures may include, but are not limited to:
manual clearing of undesirable vegetation, selected herbicide treatment,
prescribed burn management, biological controls, active planting of desirable
plant species, installation of habitat structures, stocking of desirable animal
species, control of undesirable animal species, water level controls, erosion
and sediment controls etc.;
         d.   Proposed implementation schedule, itemized by management measure,
including:
            (1)   Detailed schedule for year one;
            (2)   Anticipated schedule for years two (2) through five (5); and
            (3)   Estimated annual cost for implementing proposed management
plan;
         e.   An outline of the proposed program for monitoring management
progress and adjusting the plan as needed in future years.
      4.   Protective Covenants: Protective covenants shall be submitted for
all officially designated natural areas which:
         a.   Indicate that the Village shall be provided with the name,
address and telephone number of the officially designated natural area managing
agent, and any subsequent changes to this information;
         b.   Identify the mechanism for assuring long term financial support
of the management and monitoring program;
         c.   Establish a conservancy easement or deed restriction that
identifies the terms and conditions associated with use of the land.
Restrictions on use of the land must be consistent with the objectives of the
management plan and ensure ongoing projection of the natural integrity of the
site. Except as required to implement the management plan, or with prior
consent of the village, actions prohibited in regulated, officially designated
natural areas shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
            (1)   Filling and dredging;
            (2)   Dumping of ashes, garbage or other unsightly or offensive
material;
            (3)   Buildings or structures;
            (4)   Removal or destruction of trees or plants;
            (5)   Mowing, draining, plowing, mining and the removal of topsoil,
sand, rock, gravel, minerals or other material;
            (6)   Operation of motorized vehicles;
            (7)   Active recreation activities;
            (8)   Grazing or keeping of livestock;
            (9)   Placement of utility lines overhead or within the officially
designated natural area; and
            (10)   Modifications to the hydrology that would allow more water
onto, or drain water away from, the natural area;
         d.   Provide the village, and any other government entities with
jurisdiction, the right to manage the officially designated natural area and
charge costs back to the managing agent in the event required management
practices are not carried out. This section should be followed by a "hold
harmless" clause which states the managing agent would indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the village from all legal actions connected with the property.
      5.   Periodic Status Information: The managing agent shall submit
periodic status information to the village (minimum of once per year),
outlining the current year's management plans and existing site conditions.
Additional information shall be submitted to the village documenting any
immediate corrective action that is necessary and completion of these actions;
and
      6.   Other: The village may require preparation and submittal of other
information determined to be appropriate.
   B.   Approval Required: Every proposed subdivision and/or planned
development which is proposed to include officially designated natural areas
shall require, in advance, review and approval of the management documentation,
pursuant to subsection C of this section. The management documentation, and
each element of it, shall be prepared in compliance with all applicable village
codes and ordinances. (Ord. 95-O-680, 1-4-1995)
   C.   Review Procedure:
      1.   Planned Developments: Unless otherwise allowed by the plan
commission/board of appeals, management documentation shall be considered a
required submittal for applications for preliminary plan approval for planned
developments (including all commercial planned developments), when applicable,
and as such, shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the terms of
title 5, chapter 14, "Planned Developments", of this code.
      2.   Subdivisions Other Than Planned Developments: Unless otherwise
allowed by the plan commission/board of appeals, management documentation shall
be considered a required submittal for applications for preliminary subdivision
plan approval, when applicable, and as such, shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with the terms of title 6, chapter 3, "Procedure For Subdivision
Approval And Development", of this code. (Ord. 95-O-680, 1-4-1995; amd. Ord.
05-O-942, 11-7-2005)
      3.   Existing Developments: Management documentation may be submitted for
village review and approval for existing developments (excluding agricultural
land and nonplatted areas) at the discretion of the managing agent of the
affected natural area. The zoning administrator, or appointed designee, shall,
within three (3) weeks of the receipt of the management documentation, either:
         a.   Approve the management documentation; or
         b.   Provide written documentation to the applicant which fully
indicates why the request for approval of the management documentation has been
denied.
   D.   Standards For Management Documentation Approval: Approval shall be
based upon the village's determination that the management documentation
represents best management practices for the unique attributes and setting of a
specific natural area(s), including findings that the management documentation
is technically sound and consistent with current professional practice; legally
sound, including having met the requirements of all applicable permitting
agencies; and consistent with the comprehensive plan, this code and any other
applicable regulations.
   E.   Inspection: The village shall have the right to inspect officially
designated natural areas or property under easement or restriction at any time
and require immediate remedial action to bring management activities into
compliance with the management report of record. (Ord. 95-O-680, 1-4-1995)
   F.   Notification:
      1.   Initial Notification Of Intent: The village shall receive the
initial notification of intention of any proposed management activity
including, but not limited to, burning or additional planting. Notification
shall be made in writing to the village administrator no less than one week
prior to notification/application to other agencies, adjacent residents, and/or
other interested parties.
      2.   Notification Of Intended Activity Dates: The village shall receive
the notification of any scheduled management activity including, but not
limited to, burning or additional planting. Notification shall be made in
writing to the village administrator no less than three (3) weeks prior to
notification to other agencies, adjacent residents, and/or other interested
parties. The management agency shall provide the village with a copy of
resident/adjacent property notification, accompanied by a list of recipients.
The village may require additional notification or modification of the notice
provided.
      3.   Notification Of Specific Activity Date: The village shall receive
notification of the specific date of any scheduled management activity
including, but not limited to, burning or additional planting. Notification
shall be made in writing by fax to the village administrator no less than forty
eight (48) hours prior to said activity. (Ord. 03-O-863, 1-6-2003)
7-8-5: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
Except as required to implement the management plan, or with prior consent of
the village, activities prohibited in regulated, officially designated natural
areas shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Filling or dredging;
   B.   Dumping of ashes, garbage or other unsightly or offensive material;
   C.   Building of structures;
   D.   Removal or destruction of trees or plants or animal life;
   E.   Mowing, draining, plowing, mining, and the removal of topsoil, sand,
rock, gravel, minerals or other material;
   F.   Operation of motorized vehicles;
   G.   Active recreation activities;
   H.   Grazing or keeping of livestock;
   I.   Placement of utilities lines overhead or within the officially
designated natural area;
   J.   Modifications to the hydrology that would allow more water onto, or
drain water away from the officially designated natural area. (Ord. 95-O-685,
2-6-1995)
7-8-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Year One:
      1.   As built drawings, certified by a professional engineer, shall be
provided to the village demonstrating conformance with the approved grading
plan. These drawings shall include the location, size and elevation of all
water control and conveyance structures.
      2.   Effective erosion and sediment controls shall be installed prior to
initiating earthwork as per the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan
and shall be maintained until adequate vegetative or structural cover is
achieved. Within three (3) months, at least ninety percent (90%) of the slopes,
as measured by aerial cover, shall be vegetated. If the permanent upland
vegetation is not planted with the temporary cover crop, then it should be
planted in the first appropriate growing season. All cover crop species must be
nonpersistent or native and not allelopathic.
      3.   Wetland vegetation shall be planted in the first appropriate growing
season. Water control structures shall be maintained to ensure that the
proposed hydrological regime is maintained.
      4.   All trees and shrubs shall be installed as per approved plans and
specifications.
   B.   Year Two:
      1.   No areas within the upland plant communities may have greater than
one square meter devoid of vegetation, as measured by aerial coverage.
      2.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the species installed in each
upland plant community must be present (alive and apparent) with regular
representation throughout each community.
      3.   At least thirty percent (30%) of the seeded species installed in
wetland areas must be present (alive and apparent).
      4.   At least eighty percent (80%) of the wetland plugs installed must be
present (alive and apparent).
      5.   All trees and shrubs must be alive and in good health and condition,
as per approved plans and planting specifications.
   C.   Year Three:
      1.   No area within the upland plant community shall have greater than
0.25 square meters devoid of vegetation, as measured by aerial coverage.
      2.   None of the three (3) dominant species in any community zones may be
weedy species, including, but not limited to: reed canary grass, Canada
thistle, Kentucky or Canada bluegrass, sweet clover, or burdock.
      3.   At least thirty percent (30%) of the species installed within each
upland community must be present (alive and apparent) with regular
representation throughout the community.
      4.   None of the three (3) dominant plant species in the wetland
communities may be nonnative or weedy, including, but not limited to: reed
canary grass, purple loosestrife, sandbar willow or cattails.
      5.   At least forty percent (40%) of the seeded species installed must be
present (alive and apparent) with at least ninety percent (90%) of the number
of plants installed present.
      6.   At least ninety percent (90%) of the wetland plugs installed must be
present (alive and apparent).
      7.   All trees and shrubs must be alive and well, as per approved plans
and planting specifications.
   D.   Cost Estimate For Natural Areas:
 Item Estimated Cost
   Item              Estimated Cost
1  Excavating         
2  Topsoiling         
3  As built drawings  
4  Erosion control    
5  Sediment control   
6  Prairie seeding    
7  Wetland planting   
8  Trees and shrubs   
9  Monitoring         
10 Management         
 
(Ord. 98-O-775, 7-6-1998)
CHAPTER 9
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-9-1: Purpose And Scope
7-9-2: Definitions
7-9-3: Annual Registration Required
7-9-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
7-9-5: Action On Permit Applications
7-9-6: Effect Of Permit
7-9-7: Revised Permit Drawings
7-9-8: Insurance
7-9-9: Indemnification
7-9-10: Security
7-9-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
7-9-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
7-9-13: General Construction Standards
7-9-14: Traffic Control
7-9-15: Location Of Facilities
7-9-16: Construction Methods And Materials
7-9-17: Vegetation Control
7-9-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
7-9-19: Cleanup And Restoration
7-9-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
7-9-21: Variances
7-9-22: Penalties
7-9-23: Enforcement
7-9-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights of way and the village as a whole.
   B.   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased storm water runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights of way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   C.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of
way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   D.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   E.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   F.   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   G.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   H.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO roadside design
guide.
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the village of Kildeer.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a
right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village director of public works or his or her
designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The village engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
village engineer or director of public works to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to,
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for
the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
7-9-4 and
7-9-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include
any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in
this definition and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
7-9-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end
to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications
act of 1984 (47 USC § 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable
or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to
the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR § 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable
and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Kildeer.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 07-O-995,
10-16-2007)
7-9-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on
January 1 of each year with the director of public works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of
way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section
7-9-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 07-O-
995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village
right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new
facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the village director of public works and obtaining a
permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the
right of way.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
7-9-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section
7-9-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
7-9-21 of this chapter); and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control, the metropolitan water reclamation
district and the county of Lake have been satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the village
director of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village director of public works shall
reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the
village director of public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms
to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules, and regulations, the village director of public works shall issue a
permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty
of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the village director of
public works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in
full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The village
director of public works shall specify the portion of the right of way upon
which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the village director of public works fails to
provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to section
7-9-4 of this chapter, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this
section.
   C.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable
and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village,
provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and
regulations. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
   B.   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   C.   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village
representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall
be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing
special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area
and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners.
   D.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with section
7-9-21 of this chapter. If the village denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
subsections A1 and A2 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and
subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors
shall comply with this section.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to cancel
or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no
event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections
B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to
self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
subsection A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private
self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   G.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois.
(All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.) (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-
2007)
7-9-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Provide a location convenient to the village and within the state of
Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the village director of public works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where
the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the village director
of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee
to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of
the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security
fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection C of this section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-
16-2007)
7-9-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way
to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to
the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of
this section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right
of way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 07-O-995,
10-16-2007)
7-9-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following DOT publications, as amended from time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm.
code § 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the village director of public works shall determine, in the exercise
of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall
be final. If requested, the village director of public works shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation
of a facility in the future. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The village minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
7-9-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the village director of public works determines
that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any
of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the
operation or maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line
and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right of way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right of way line or as near as practicable.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Ill. adm. code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR § 192.707
(1989)).
   D.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way, or other public places.
      2.   All freestanding facilities located within a right of way shall be
located underground to the greatest extent possible, as determined by the
village administrator, or his or her designee, and to the extent that the
village administrator, or his or her designee determines that it is not
technically possible to install any such facilities underground, such
facilities shall be substantially screened from view by landscaping pursuant to
a landscaping plan which shall be approved in advance by the village
administrator, or his or her designee.
      3.   All freestanding facilities within any right of way shall be so
located so as to cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of
such right of way. No freestanding facilities shall be placed within any right
of way in such a manner to interfere with the usual travel on such right of
way, nor shall such facilities limit the visibility of vehicular and/or
pedestrian traffic within such right of way.
The owner of any freestanding facility shall promptly comply with the
reasonable requests of the village administrator, or his or her designee, with
respect to the location and screening of such facilities within any right of
way.
   F.   Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   H.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 07-O-
995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the village
director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or
jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after
boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the village director of public works.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         c.   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
director of public works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under section
7-9-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the director of public works.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                      Minimum Cover
Electric lines                        30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service 18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m) (as
lines                                 determined by village)
Gas or petroleum products             30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                            Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                      protection
Storm sewer or drainage line          Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                      protection
 
(Ord. 15-O-022, 12-15-2015)
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communications lines", and the
national electrical safety code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
         d.   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of
pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 -
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety
standards (49 CFR § 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the director of public works. With the approval of
the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the
right of way without the prior written approval of the village director of
public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval
must be obtained from the village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction
are those set forth in this code.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 . (Ord. 07-O-
995, 10-16-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
7-9-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   B.   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or
upon, the rights of way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within
ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the village director of
public works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not
direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice
of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to
consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by
another utility or person. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the village director of public works. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the village director of public works for good cause shown. (Ord.
07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
village director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection
of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-21: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the village director
of public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The village director of public works
shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this
chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The village director of public
works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the village director of public works may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
   E.   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the village
director of public works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the
right to appeal to the village board, or such other board or commission as it
may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the
village clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The village board shall commence its
consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The village
board shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
7-9-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village
will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No
other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a
utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-
2007)
7-9-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-O-995, 10-16-2007)
CHAPTER 10
SPECIAL EVENTS PERMITS
SECTION:
7-10-1: Special Event Permit Required
7-10-2: Definition
7-10-3: Exceptions
7-10-4: Permit Application Process
7-10-5: Other Fees And Insurance
7-10-6: Penalties
7-10-1: SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any special event held within the corporate limits of the village of Kildeer
shall obtain and comply with a special event permit as set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 14-O-001, 1-21-2014)
7-10-2: DEFINITION:
A "special event" shall be defined as any public or private event held within
the corporate limits of the village, in which it can be reasonably expected
that services will be required beyond those that are regularly provided by the
village, such as additional police services, traffic control, crowd control,
street closures, garbage cleanup, or other municipal services which may be
necessary to service the event. Additionally, those public or private events
that involve musical groups or amplified sound, high intensity lighting,
fireworks, erection of temporary structures on village owned or controlled
property, displays or other activities of such nature that impinges upon any
adjacent public, business or residential areas shall be considered as a special
event. (Ord. 14-O-001, 1-21-2014)
7-10-3: EXCEPTIONS:
Certain exceptions have been made for the following entities:
   A.   Governmental entities shall be exempt from special event permitting;
and
   B.   Educational institutions, approved or authorized by the state of
Illinois, shall be exempt from special event permitting. (Ord. 14-O-001, 1-21-
2014)
7-10-4: PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A.   Applicants for events which require a permit under this chapter shall
apply for said permit on an application form approved by the village
administrator. Permit applications shall be submitted not less than forty five
(45) days prior to the anticipated date of the event. The chief village officer
shall be authorized to establish minimum standards for the conduct of any event
requiring a permit.
   B.   The permit application shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the
proposed location and orientation of the event, and identifying: 1) applicable
occupancy limits; 2) any temporary structures, tents, facilities, generators,
or utility connections anticipated to be utilized; and 3) arrangements for
anticipated attendees, showing all anticipated attendees can be safely
accommodated for the planned activities.
   C.   The applicant shall be responsible for all costs of inspection or
permitting for any inspection or permit which is required under applicable
village code. In addition, all permits shall be subject to review by the
village police chief, who shall be authorized to require additional or
supplemental inspections based upon the nature of the proposed event; the cost
of any such inspections shall be borne by the applicant. The schedule of fees
for any required inspections shall be based upon a current fee established by
ordinance, code, and/or village regulation.
   D.   Upon receipt of a fully completed application, the chief village
officer or designee shall set the permit application on the agenda of the
appropriate village board meeting for consideration. Permits may be rejected
based upon other events known to be occurring within the village during the
year, based upon village staffing needs or if the request is contrary to the
public interest or is incompatible with the goals of the village.
   E.   Once issued, an event permit may be revoked at any time without notice
by the chief village officer or police chief based upon the observation or
identification of any actual or potential threat to public health, welfare,
safety or morals, or any observed violation of this code. If an event permit is
revoked, the applicant shall immediately terminate the event, remove all
attendees of the event, remove all temporary structures utilized for the event,
and return the premises to its pre-event condition. (Ord. 14-O-001, 1-21-2014)
7-10-5: OTHER FEES AND INSURANCE:
   A.   Other Fees And Permits: Applicants must secure and maintain at their
cost, all licenses, permits, or other authorizations necessary to conduct the
special event, and the village must be provided a copy of all such required
licenses, permits or authorizations no later than fifteen (15) days prior to
the beginning of the special event.
   B.   Insurance And Indemnification: Applicants must obtain and maintain, at
their own expense, insurance policies for an amount and coverage as established
by the chief village officer and as provided for in the permit application. All
policies must name the village as the "additional insured". Any other entities
that might be impacted by the event shall also be named as an additional
insured. Applicant must provide the village with proof of the required
insurance not less than ten (10) days before the first day of the event. (Ord.
14-O-001, 1-21-2014)
7-10-6: PENALTIES:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of
up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), per day of any violation. In
addition, violators of this chapter shall be liable for restitution costs to
the village for costs incurred to respond to any unpermitted special event.
(Ord. 14-O-001, 1-21-2014)
CHAPTER 11
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-11-1: Purpose And Scope
7-11-2: Definitions
7-11-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
7-11-4: Dispute Resolution
7-11-5: Indemnification
7-11-6: Insurance
7-11-7: Appeals
7-11-8: Severability
7-11-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (the Act).
   B.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
   C.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws
or regulations. (Ord. 18-O-015, 7-17-2018)
7-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those
codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in
public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
18-O-015, 7-17-2018)
7-11-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection C9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not
subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-of-
way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned
exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
   B.   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the
Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the Village, together with the Village's Short Form
Building Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         d.   The equipment types and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         f.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         g.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      2.   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
         a.   Application Prioritization: The first completed application shall
have priority over applications received by different applicants for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
         b.   Existing Poles Or Structures: An application to collocate a small
wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or
replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the
Village fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after
the submission of a completed application.
            However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
            The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         c.   New Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small wireless
facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails
to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after
the submission of a completed application.
            However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
            The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         d.   Application Denied: The Village shall deny an application which
does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
            If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
            The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
Village denies an application.
            The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village
and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice
of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application
fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty
(30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed
approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days
of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with
applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village's review period.
            The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention
to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
            Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         e.   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment
Agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a Municipal
utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate
on a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the
applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment
Agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving
an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents and information are specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the
applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         b.   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
         If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities
or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
         If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means.
   C.   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
         A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the
type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency's communications equipment.
         Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
         If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
         The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based
on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the
Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy
the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   Certain Facilities And Poles Prohibited: The wireless provider shall
not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part
of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication
worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
         However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
         For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Code Compliance: The wireless provider shall comply with all
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.
      6.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in a Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive
plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
         New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a special use permit in conformance with procedures, terms and
conditions set forth in the zoning regulations, including title 5 of this Code.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground- mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   D.   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights- of-way, for:
         a.   Routine maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with subsection B1d of this section; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   E.   Exceptions: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate
small wireless facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a
franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or
operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject
to this chapter.
   F.   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village
makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
(2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the Village
that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before the
wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this
paragraph.
   G.   Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village
utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the
wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs,
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after
the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent
to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   H.   Abandonment; Sale Or Transfer:
      1.   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
      2.   Sale Or Transfer: A wireless provider shall provide written notice
to the Village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the
jurisdiction of the Village. Such notice shall include the name and contact
information of the new wireless provider. (Ord. 18-O-015, 7-17-2018)
7-11-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Lake County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 18-O-015, 7-17-2018)
7-11-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right- of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability. (Ord. 18-O-015, 7-17-2018)
7-11-6: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
   A.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   B.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
   C.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection
limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements
or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to
the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self- insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 18-O-015, 7-17-2018)
7-11-7: APPEALS:
Any wireless provider aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or
determination, including denial of or conditions established in connection with
a permit, variance, or other approval, made by the Village Engineer under the
provisions of this chapter may seek a review of such order, requirement,
decision or determination by filing a request for review thereof with the
Village Manager, within thirty (30) days after the notification of the order,
requirement, decision or determination. The request for review shall set forth
in detail the basis for the request. The Village Manager shall thereafter
consider the request for review, determine whether the order, requirement,
decision or determination should be affirmed, modified, modified with
conditions, or reversed, and provide a written determination thereof. If such
wireless provider seeks further review of the order, requirement, decision or
determination, such wireless provider shall file a request to appeal the
determination of the Village Manager with the Village Clerk within thirty (30)
days after mailing of the determination by the Village Manager; such appeal
shall be considered by the Board of Trustees based on the relevant facts
available regarding the order, requirement, decision or determination in
question and the materials presented in connection with the request for appeal,
as well as materials presented in connection with the Manager's review provided
under this section. The determination of the Board of Trustees shall be a final
decision for purposes of the Administrative Review Law, 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (Ord. 18-O-015, 7-17-2018)
7-11-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be
given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable. (Ord. 18-O-015,
7-17-2018)
CHAPTER 12
PUBLIC CAMPING
SECTION:
7-12-1: Public Camping As A Nuisance
7-12-2: Regulation Of Public Camping Necessary To Promote Public Health
7-12-3: Public Camping Not Intended Use Of Public Property
7-12-4: Definitions
7-12-5: Public Camping Prohibited
7-12-6: Exceptions To Prohibition
7-12-7: Removal Of Campsite
7-12-8: Disposition And Release Of Personal Property
7-12-9: Penalty; Mitigation
7-12-1: PUBLIC CAMPING AS A NUISANCE:
Public Camping, as the term is defined herein, is hereby declared to be a
nuisance within the Village for the reasons identified in the ordinance
codified herein. (Ord. 24-O-020, 8-20-2024)
7-12-2: REGULATION OF PUBLIC CAMPING NECESSARY TO PROMOTE PUBLIC HEALTH:
In an effort to address the public health concerns identified in the ordinance
codified herein, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Kildeer
hereby declare it necessary or expedient for the promotion of health or the
suppression of diseases, to regulate Public Camping, as that term is defined
herein, within the Village’s corporate limits. (Ord. 24-O-020, 8-20-2024)
7-12-3: PUBLIC CAMPING NOT INTENDED USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Except for those parcels of property specifically designated by the Village in
any subsequent ordinance, the Village hereby declares that none of its property
is permitted nor intended to be used for Public Camping, as the term is defined
herein. (Ord. 24-O-020, 8-20-2024)
7-12-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
 
BEDDING:                  A sleeping bag, or any other material, used for
                          bedding purposes.
                          Any physical space that is not within an established
                          structure, where Bedding or any stove or fire is
                          placed, established or maintained for the purpose of
CAMPSITE:                 maintaining a temporary place to live, whether or not
                          such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to,
                          shack or any other structure, or any vehicle or part
                          thereof.
                          Items which would otherwise constitute Personal
                          Property under the terms of this chapter, but which
                          (i) has no apparent utility or monetary value; (ii)
                          Personal Property which is unsanitary to store or
                          otherwise maintain; (iii) any weapon possessed
EXEMPT PERSONAL PROPERTY: illegally; (iv) drug paraphernalia; (v) items
                          appearing to be stolen or otherwise appearing to be
                          evidence of a crime; (vi) items which the person
                          cannot demonstrate the requisite lawful authority to
                          possess; and, (vii) any items of food which can
                          reasonably be expected to spoil or otherwise perish
                          within the next 30 days.
                          Any item reasonably recognizable as belonging to a
PERSONAL PROPERTY:        person and having apparent utility or monetary value,
                          except for Exempt Personal Property.
                          To cause or participate in the establishment of, or
PUBLIC CAMPING:           the act of remaining in or at, a Campsite. (Ord. 24-
                          O-020, 8-20-2024)
 
7-12-5: PUBLIC CAMPING PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in Public Camping, on a
public sidewalk, street, alley, lane, other public right-of-way, park, bench,
or any other publicly-owned property, nor on or under any bridge or viaduct, at
any time.
   B.   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in Public Camping, in any
pedestrian or vehicular entrance to public or private property abutting a
public right-of-way.
   C.   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in Public Camping, on any
real property owned or otherwise maintained by the Village.
   D.   No person may park a vehicle overnight within the Village for the
purpose of sleeping or otherwise engaging in Public Camping in said vehicle.
   E.   For the purposes of this section, the act of parking or leaving a
vehicle parked for two consecutive hours, and/or remaining within a public
vehicle on any property under the jurisdiction of the Village for the purpose
of Public Camping, for two consecutive hours without permission from the
Village, between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., shall be considered a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 24-O-020, 8-20-2024)
7-12-6: EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITION:
Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a violation to engage in Public
Camping when done (i) in a manner specifically authorized by this Code; (ii)
after a formal declaration of the Village in emergency circumstances; or, (iii)
upon resolution of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Kildeer, the same may exempt a special event from the prohibitions of this
section, if the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Kildeer finds
such exemption to be in the public interest and consistent with the goals and
objectives of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Kildeer,
and with such conditions imposed as the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Kildeer deems necessary. Any conditions imposed will include a
condition requiring that the applicant provide evidence of adequate insurance
coverage and agree to indemnify the Village for any liability, damage or
expense incurred by the Village as a result of the activities of the applicant.
Any findings by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Kildeer
shall specify the exact dates and location covered by the exemption. (Ord. 24-
O-020, 8-20-2024)
7-12-7: REMOVAL OF CAMPSITE:
Removal of a Campsite in violation of this chapter may occur under the
following circumstances:
   A.   Prior to removing a Campsite, the Village shall post a notice, 24-hours
in advance of the removal, unless immediate removal of the Campsite is deemed
to be necessary for one of the reasons in subparagraphs 1-4, below. If such
immediate removal is undertaken, the basis for causing the immediate removal of
such Campsite should be adequately documented by the appropriate person(s).
      1.   immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary to maintain access to
a property;
      2.   immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary to maintain the
sanitary condition of a property;
      3.   immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary because the Campsite
is an obstruction to any public right-of-way; or,
      4.   immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary because the Campsite
poses a risk to the health and safety of the Village and its residents.
   B.   Upon any action pursuant to Section 8.A, above, the person causing such
action to be taken shall inform an appropriate agency delivering social
services to homeless individuals in the Village, of the location of the
Campsite and the person(s) found to be in violation of this chapter, so said
agency may determine whether or not it would be appropriate to offer its
services to the/those person(s).
   C.   If a 24-hour notice has been posted, and the 24-hour notice period has
passed, then the Campsite, as well as all Personal Property thereon, shall be
removed by the appropriate person(s) acting on behalf of the Village.
   D.   No portion of this Section shall be construed to prohibit any person
found to be engaging in Public Camping from removing their Personal Property
from the Campsite; however, such Personal Property that constitutes Exempt
Personal Property and which a reasonably prudent law enforcement officer,
exercising the applicable constitutional standard, would conclude that said
Exempt Personal Property constitutes items appearing to be stolen or otherwise
appearing to be evidence of a crime, and/or items which the person cannot
demonstrate the requisite lawful authority to possess, may be retained and
stored as evidence. (Ord. 24-O-020, 8-20-2024)
7-12-8: DISPOSITION AND RELEASE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY: 
   A.   All Personal Property removed from any Campsite which is not Exempt
Personal Property shall be stored by the appropriate law enforcement agency of
the Village, for a minimum of 30 days, during which time it shall be reasonably
available for and released to an individual confirming ownership.
   B.   All Exempt Personal Property may be disposed of or retained as evidence
by the appropriate law enforcement agency of the Village. (Ord. 24-O-020, 8-20-
2024)
7-12-9: PENALTY; MITIGATION.
   A.   The penalty for any person’s first violation of this chapter within a
rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be $75.
   B.   The penalty for any person’s second violation of this chapter within a
rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be $150.
   C.   The penalty for any person’s third violation of this chapter within a
rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be $350.
   D.   The penalty for any person’s fourth violation of this chapter within a
rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be $500.
   E.   The penalty for any person’s fifth violation of this chapter within a
rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be $750.
   F.   The penalty for any person’s sixth or subsequent violation of this
chapter within a rolling twenty-four (24) month period may be a monetary
penalty of $750 or incarceration for a period not exceeding the maximum time
allowed pursuant to Section 1-2-9 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-
2-9).
   G.   As a substitute for any monetary penalty assessed pursuant to
paragraphs A-F, above, and if consented to by the Village, the penalty assessed
to any person found in violation of this chapter may be that said person must
engage in public service by cleaning the rights-of-way and other public
facilities of the Village for an amount of time that, if the person found to
have violated this chapter was being paid the minimum wage under Illinois law,
the amount paid for that person’s labors would have been equal to the monetary
penalty assessed under this chapter.
   H.   The Village is hereby empowered to exercise all powers afforded to it,
at law or in equity, to collect any fines assessed against a person pursuant to
this chapter, including but not limited to seeking incarceration of said person
for a period of time that conforms with Section 1-2-9 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-9).
   I.   In the imposition of any penalty pursuant to this Section, the penalty
shall be mitigated by whether or not the person immediately removed all
Personal Property and litter, including but not limited to bottles, cans, and
garbage, from the Campsite after the person was informed that the person was in
violation of this chapter.
   J.   A separate offense of this chapter shall be deemed committed on each
day on which a violation occurs or continues.
   K.   In addition to any other remedy provided by law or this chapter, any
person found in violation of this section may be immediately removed from the
premises where the Campsite is located. (Ord. 24-O-020, 8-20-2024)
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Nuisances Prohibited
8-1-2: Noise Control
8-1-3: Nuisances On Public Ways
8-1-4: Nuisance Signs
8-1-5: Penalty
8-1-1: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Noise: It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause
to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise
which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the Village.
   B.   Vicious Animals:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for a person to keep, harbor, or maintain any
vicious animal or animals with vicious propensities in a manner which may or
does endanger the safety of persons or property off his premises or lawfully on
his premises.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to own, harbor, keep or be in charge of any
dog, cat or other animal which has been declared vicious by the local health or
police authorities or to permit such animal to be on a public street or
highway, or upon any premises other than those of the person owning such an
animal or those of a person who has given permission to said owner to keep or
harbor such animal on his premises.
      3.   The owner or harborer of any animal requiring veterinarian,
impounding, licensing, destruction or disposition services as a result of any
violations of this subsection B shall be responsible for all such expenses. Any
such owner or harborer shall reimburse the Village for any expenses incurred by
the Village as a direct result of said violations. (Ord. 95-O-709, 11-6-1995)
   C.   Certain Animals Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to harbor, keep or
raise any live cattle, swine (including potbellied pigs), sheep, goats,
chickens or other livestock fowl anywhere in the Village. (Ord. 18-O-005, 3-20-
2018)
8-1-2: NOISE CONTROL:
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not
be deemed to be exclusive:
   A.   Horns Or Signaling Devices: The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public
place in the Village, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any
such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding
of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use
of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of
any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of
any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
   B.   Radios, Instruments, Etc.: The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound
in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring
inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient
hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The
operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between
the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. in such
a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the
building, structure or vehicle on which it is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
   C.   Commercial Advertising: The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the
purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to
any building or structure.
   D.   Noisy Animals: The keeping of any animal which by causing frequent or
long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the
vicinity. (Ord. 73-O-187, 6-7-1973)
   E.   Construction Or Demolition Activities: The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on
weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a permit from the Building Commissioner, which
permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days or less while
the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for a period of three
(3) days or less while the emergency continues. If the Building Commissioner
should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the
erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of
streets and highways within the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M., and if he shall further determine that loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission
for such work to be done within the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M., upon application being made at the time the permit for the
work is awarded or during the progress of the work. In this subsection, the
term "weekdays" shall mean Monday through Friday, inclusive.
   F.   Loud Appliances Or Equipment: The operation of any pile driver, steam
shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance,
the use of which is accompanied by loud or unusual noise, between the hours of
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays. In this
subsection, the term "weekdays" shall mean Monday through Friday, inclusive.
   G.   Open Air Discharges:
      1.   Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationery internal combustion machine, motor boat or motor
vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent
loud or explosive noises therefrom.
      2.   Defect In Vehicle Or Load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
   H.   Heavy Equipment:
      1.   Hours Prohibited: The operation of trucks, tractors, front-end
loaders and such other similar heavy equipment between the hours of six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. weekdays or any time on the weekends
or holidays, in any place within the Village in which a majority of the
buildings within a radius of one thousand feet (1,000') are used exclusively
for residential purposes. In this subsection the term "weekdays" shall mean
Monday through Friday, inclusive, the term "weekend" shall mean Saturday and
Sunday and the term "holiday" shall be any day as defined or fixed in any
statute now or hereafter in force in the State.
      2.   Exception By Permit: Provided, however, that any person, firm or
corporation may make written application to the Village Board of Trustees for
the issuance of a permit to operate such equipment during said prohibited time.
         a.   Said permit shall be authorized or denied by the Village Board in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter and the regulations
and conditions of the Code.
         b.   The application for a special equipment operating permit shall be
acted upon by the Village Board after a public hearing has been held by the
Village Board or a committee designated by the Village Board, following due
notice to all adjacent property owners within three hundred feet (300').
Evidence of notice shall be: 1) certified return receipt, or 2) individual
signed copy of notification.
      3.   Initiation: An application for a special equipment operating permit
may be made by any person, or by an office, department, board, bureau or
commission requesting or intending to request a building permit.
      4.   Processing:
         a.   An application for a special equipment operating permit, in such
form and accompanied by such information as shall be established from time to
time by the Building Commissioner, shall be filed with the Village and
thereafter processed in the manner prescribed heretofore for applications.
         b.   The village board or its designated committee shall hold the
public hearing and forward its determinations in written form to the building
commissioner within ten (10) days following the date of public hearing on each
application, unless it is withdrawn by the applicant.
      5.   Evidence Of Necessity: The applicant shall provide to the hearing
body evidence as to the necessity for such a permit. The evidence submitted
must demonstrate the hardship the applicant will suffer if the permit is not
issued.
      6.   Statement Of Hours: In each application, the applicant shall state
the exact hours and days for which the permit is requested.
      7.   Minimizing Effects: The applicant must demonstrate what measures
will be taken to alleviate or minimize the effect, if any, issuance of the
permit will have on adjacent properties. (Ord. 94-O-668, 8-1-1994)
   I.   Commercial Planned Developments:
      1.   Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful to pick up or
deliver any goods, produce, merchandise, or refuse from a business established
in a commercial planned development between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      2.   The owner of any commercial planned development shall post signs
detailing such prohibition at all delivery areas of the commercial planned
development, as directed by the Kildeer police department.
      3.   The pick up or delivery of any goods or products required by
emergency services for the immediate protection of building contents, or for
the structural integrity of the building infrastructure, or any of its
occupancies are exempt from this provision provided that prior notification of
such a condition has been made to the village of Kildeer. (Ord. 02-O-862, 10-7-
2002)
8-1-3: NUISANCES ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to throw, leave, place or deposit or to permit to
be deposited any glass, tacks, nails, building materials or any articles or
debris on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the village.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to permit, cause or allow any mud, dirt or other
earthen materials to fall from, be thrown from or laid down by, tires or from
other parts of motor vehicles or construction equipment on any public street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place in the village.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to permit, cause or allow any grass, rubbish,
trees, branches, construction materials or excavation materials to be dumped or
deposited in any public street, alley or sidewalk or other public place in the
village. (Ord. 73-O-187, 6-7-1973)
8-1-4: NUISANCE SIGNS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to place or cause to be
placed any sign or other advertising or attention getting device on any public
right of way in the village, or on any pole, post or structure on any public
right of way in the village, unless specifically authorized as provided in
title 5, chapter 20 of this code.
   B.   The village shall remove any such nuisance signs at the expense of the
owner. (Ord. 06-O-983, 12-11-2006)
   C.   Penalties for the violation of any provision of this section shall be
as set forth in section
1-22-2 of this code. (Ord. 07-O-1000, 12-5-2007)
8-1-5: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as set forth in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 73-O-187, 6-7-1973; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE, REFUSE, RECYCLING AND LANDSCAPE WASTE
SECTION:
8-2-1: Compliance With Exclusive Contract
8-2-2: Recycling Mandatory
8-2-3: Removal Of Recyclables By Scavengers
8-2-4: Yard Waste And Composting
8-2-5: Dumping And Accumulation Of Garbage Or Refuse
8-2-6: Penalty
8-2-1: COMPLIANCE WITH EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT:
All residents within the Village shall comply with all applicable provisions of
a certain contract dated 2018 and entitled "Municipal Solid Waste, Recycling
and Landscape Waste Agreement" between the Village of Kildeer and Waste
Management of Illinois, Inc., and any extensions or amendments thereto. Said
contract, as well as any extensions and amendments are on file at the Village
office.
   A.   All garbage, refuse, recyclables and landscape waste will be picked up
on Wednesday beginning six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M.; when a holiday falls on
Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday, materials will be picked up on Thursday.
   B.   No garbage, refuse, recyclables and/or landscape waste, or any refuse,
whether or not in the proper container, shall be placed on any portions of any
public or private road or right-of-way earlier than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of
the night preceding pick up. Any such material placed for pick up earlier is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and subject to enforcement and
penalty.
   C.   All solid waste materials (excluding recyclables and landscape waste)
may be deposited for collection in conventional trash containers. In the
alternative, residents may lease or purchase wheeled carts via the contracted
hauler.
   D.   No garbage, refuse, recyclables and/or landscape waste, or any
container used therefor, shall remain on any portions of any public or private
road or right-of-way later than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of the night following
pick up. Any such material placed for pick up earlier but not removed is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and subject to enforcement and penalty. (Ord.
18-O-020, 9-18-2018)
8-2-2: RECYCLING MANDATORY:
Solid waste recycling of recyclables (newspaper, mixed paper, aluminum, metal
cans, glass, various plastics) is mandatory. All Kildeer property owners must
contract for solid waste removal, including recyclables, with Kildeer's
contracted hauler. All solid waste recyclables, excluding compost materials,
shall be deposited for collection in approved recycling bins provided through
the hauler. (Ord. 96-O-736, 12-2-1996)
8-2-3: REMOVAL OF RECYCLABLES BY SCAVENGERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the contracted hauler to remove
any recyclable materials from the approved bins. "Recyclable materials" shall
mean and include newspaper, mixed paper, aluminum, metal cans, glass, various
plastics, or any other matter which can be sold for recycling purposes. (Ord.
96-O-736, 12-2-1996)
8-2-4: YARD WASTE AND COMPOSTING:
"Yard waste" is defined, but not limited to, grass clippings, leaves, mulch,
branches, twigs, shrubs or trees. Village residents are strongly encouraged to
maintain their yards in an ecologically sound manner. They are encouraged to
compost all compost materials on their homesites. They are equally encouraged,
if they engage landscape contractors, to require that all yard waste, such as
grass clippings be composted on or off site. Residents may also arrange for
seasonal pick up of yard waste through the Village's contract hauler on a cost
per sticker basis. Yard waste should be bundled or deposited in appropriate
containers or bags. It is unlawful to commingle yard waste and compost
materials with other solid waste materials. (Ord. 96-O-736, 12-2-1996)
8-2-5: DUMPING AND ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE OR REFUSE:
   A.   Dumping: It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit, or to
aid, abet, assist, advise, encourage or permit the dumping or depositing of any
garbage, refuse, junk, yard waste, or residential, commercial or industrial
waste or obnoxious debris upon any land within the Village.
   B.   Accumulation: It shall be unlawful for any owner, and also any person
in possession or control, of any land in the Village to permit or maintain the
existence thereon of the accumulation of any garbage, refuse, junk, yard waste,
or residential, commercial or industrial waste or obnoxious debris, or to
permit said land to become or remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to
the public health in any way. (Ord. 96-O-736, 12-2-1996)
8-2-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than the maximum as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
90-O-518, 1-2-1990; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995; Ord. 96-O-736, 12-2-1996)
"Person", for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean and include any
individual, corporation, association, partnership, or any other legal entity.
(Ord. 90-O-518, 1-2-1990; amd. Ord. 96-O-736, 12-2-1996)
CHAPTER 3
RESTAURANTS AND FOOD STORES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: License Required
8-3-3: License Fee
8-3-4: Revocation Of License
8-3-5: Health Permit
8-3-6: Inspection Of Premises
8-3-7: Penalty
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter (except as otherwise provided herein with respect to food vending
machines):
FOOD AND DRINK: Any cooked or uncooked article of food, drink, condiment,
confection or any other substance, liquid or solid, including ice, used or
intended to be used for human consumption.
FOOD STORE: Any grocery store or any place where food or drink is prepared,
stored or offered for sale or sold.
HEALTH OFFICER: The Lake County health department.
RESTAURANT: Restaurant, coffee shop, and all other eating or drinking
establishments, as well as kitchens or other places in which food or drink is
prepared for sale elsewhere. (Ord. 05-O-936, 6-6-2005)
8-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Application, Contents:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate the
business of food dispenser without first having obtained a license to do so.
      2.   Written application therefor, verified under oath, shall be filed
with the village clerk.
      3.   The village administrator shall cause an investigation to be made by
the Lake County health department and other officers and employees to determine
whether the applicant complies with the requirements of all applicable laws and
village ordinances, as well as the rules and regulations of the Lake County
health department.
      4.   If the foregoing investigation shows proper sanitary conditions and
compliance, the village administrator shall issue a license to the applicant
upon payment of the license fee provided therefor.
   B.   Expiration Date: Such food dispenser's license, as required by the
preceding subsection, shall not be transferable and shall expire on June 30 of
the year for which the same is issued.
   C.   Posting Of License: Every person licensed as a food dispenser shall
immediately post the license upon the store door or window where such business
is authorized to be conducted. (Ord. 05-O-936, 6-6-2005)
8-3-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for a "restaurant" or "food store", as defined in
section
8-3-1 of this chapter, shall be as follows:
 
Food store having:
   1,000 square feet or less of retail floor space$ 500.00
   More than 1,000 square feet of retail floor spa1,000.00
Restaurant seating:
   50 or fewer persons                            500.00
   51 persons or more                             1,000.00
 
(Ord. 05-O-943, 7-5-2005)
8-3-4: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The village president may revoke a food dispenser's license at any time by
notice in writing whenever it shall appear that the licensee has failed to
maintain proper sanitary conditions and compliance with all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations of the village or the Lake County health
department. (Ord. 05-O-936, 6-6-2005)
8-3-5: HEALTH PERMIT:
The operator of a restaurant or food store in the village shall hold license
from the village of Kildeer, subject to a permit from the Lake County health
department. Only persons who comply with the requirements of this chapter shall
be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. Such a permit may be
temporarily suspended by the Lake County health department upon the violation
by the holder of any of the terms of this chapter or revoked after an
opportunity for a hearing by the Lake County health department upon serious or
repeated violation. Application for such permit shall be made in conformity
with the provisions of subsection
8-3-2A2 of this chapter. Upon receipt of such application, the Lake County
health department shall investigate or cause to be investigated the place of
business described in such application and the vehicles, methods and equipment
intended to be used by such applicant. (Ord. 05-O-936, 6-6-2005)
8-3-6: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The Lake County health department is hereby authorized to inspect every food
establishment located or operating within the village. One copy of the report
of such inspection shall be given to the operator of the food establishment,
and another copy shall be filed with the village. The person operating the food
establishment shall, upon request of the Lake County health department, permit
the examination and copying of all records of food and drink purchases and
sales. (Ord. 05-O-936, 6-6-2005)
8-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as set forth
in section
1-4-1 of this code, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have occurred on
each day on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 05-O-936, 6-6-2005)
CHAPTER 4
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Rules And Regulations
8-4-3: Permits
8-4-4: Repairs Or Major Alterations To Septic Field
8-4-5: Soil Suitability
8-4-6: Workers To Be Licensed
8-4-7: Inspections
8-4-8: State And County Requirements
8-4-9: Fees And Costs
8-4-10: Occupancy Permits
8-4-11: Exposure Of Sewage
8-4-12: Unsuitable Soils
8-4-13: Permit Denial; Hearing
8-4-14: Failure Of Facilities; Notice To Village
8-4-15: Penalties
8-4-16: Interpretation, Purposes And Conflict
8-4-17: Rules, Regulations And Tables
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVED: Approved by the Lake County Health Department.
BEDROOM: Any room, whatever named, which is suitable to be used regularly as a
bedroom, including den, library or study.
CHEMICAL TOILET: A toilet structure equipped with a watertight impervious
container which receives waste discharged through a hopper, seat, urinal or
similar device and into which container may be placed disinfecting or
deodorizing chemicals.
HEALTH OFFICER: The Director of the Lake County Health Department or his
authorized representative.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM: A sewage disposal system other than a public
system which receives either human excreta or liquid waste, or both, from one
or more premises. Included within the scope of this definition are septic
tanks, soil absorption systems, privies, chemical toilets and mechanical sewage
treatment systems, up to one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons per day flow
rate.
PERMIT: A written permit issued by the Health Officer permitting the
construction of an individual sewage disposal system under this Chapter.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, club, corporation, association, partnership,
company, organization or political subdivision.
SEASONAL WATER TABLE: A perched layer of water in the upper soil profile due to
the slow run-off or depressional position in the landscape.
SEEPAGE PIT: A covered pit with open lining through which the septic or treated
effluent may seep or leach into the surrounding porous soil.
SOIL DESCRIPTION: A description of soil as described in the Lake County Soil
Survey, Report No. 88.
VILLAGE: The Village of Kildeer.
WATER CARRIAGE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM: A system utilizing running water to
carry fecal solids and other wastes from a dwelling or building to the sewage
treatment device.
WATER TABLE: The upper limit of the sand or gravelly soils saturated with water
in which a well could be constructed to supply water for human consumption.
8-4-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Health Officer of the Village, in order to protect the health and safety of
the people of the Village and of the general public, is authorized and directed
to promulgate rules and regulations establishing minimum standards governing
the design, construction, installation and operation of individual sewage
disposal systems. Such rules and regulations shall become effective upon
approval of the Village Board and shall be filed with the Village Clerk as a
public record.
   A.   Rule I: The Village Board hereby adopts Rule I entitled "Individual
Sewage Disposal System Rules and Regulations", as set forth in Section
8-4-17 of this Chapter.
   B.   Rule II: The Village Board hereby adopts Rule II entitled "Subdivision
Soil Test", as set forth in Section
8-4-17 of this Chapter.
   C.   Table II: The Village Board hereby adopts Table II entitled "Use of
Soils to Determine Suitability and Construction Details for Installing
Subsurface Seepage Field", as set forth in Section
8-4-17 of this Chapter.
8-4-3: PERMITS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or make major
alterations to individual sewage disposal systems within the Village unless he
holds a valid permit issued by the Health Officer in the name of such person
for the specific construction or major alteration proposed. The permit issued
by the Health Officer is in addition to the building permit required and must
be obtained prior to application for the building permit for the construction
or major alteration proposed. (Ord. 80-O-301, 6-5-80)
   B.   All applications for permits granted under the provisions of this
Chapter shall be made to the Health Officer who, within a reasonable period of
time after the receipt of an application for a permit and adequate review of
the application, shall issue a permit upon compliance by the applicant with the
provisions of this Chapter and any regulations adopted hereunder. The Health
Officer or his authorized representative shall act upon all applications within
fifteen (15) days of receipt thereof.
The Health Officer may refuse to grant a permit for the construction of an
individual sewage disposal system where a public sewer is available. A sewer
shall be deemed available when a public sewer line is in place within any
street, alley, right of way or easement that adjoins or abuts the premises for
which the permit is requested, or when the improvement to be served is located
within a reasonable distance of a public sewer to which a connection is
practical and is permitted by the controlling authority for the sewer. A
reasonable distance for the purposes of this provision shall be deemed to be
not greater than three hundred feet (300') for a single-family residence and
not greater than one thousand feet (1,000') for a commercial establishment or
multi-family dwelling.
The construction or utilization of an individual sewage disposal system is
hereby prohibited within any subdivision or planned unit development which is
designed to be served or is actually served by a private sewage treatment plant
facility. (Ord. 84-O-389, 5-7-84)
   C.   Applications for permits shall be in writing on forms furnished by the
Village Clerk and shall be signed by the applicant. No property shall be
improved in excess of its capacity to properly absorb sewage effluents. Said
permit to construct is valid for a period of eighteen (18) months from date of
issuance. If construction has not started within this period, the permit is
void.
   D.   A permit shall not issue until the applicant files a copy of the septic
plans as approved by the Lake County Health Department with the Zoning
Administrator or the Building Inspector. All applications for permits shall be
accompanied by a septic field plan approved by the Health Officer and the Lake
County Health Department. No changes in the proposed septic plans shall be
allowed unless and until reviewed and approved by the Health Officer and the
Lake County Health Department and the Building Inspector.
8-4-4: REPAIRS OR MAJOR ALTERATIONS TO SEPTIC FIELD:
A permit shall be required for repairs or substantive alterations to individual
sewage disposal systems. An application shall be made as otherwise set forth in
Section
8-4-3 of this Chapter. An individual sewage disposal system repair plan must be
submitted to and receive the approval of the Lake County Health Department and
to the Health Officer prior to the issuance of the permit.
8-4-5: SOIL SUITABILITY:
All individual sewage disposal systems will be designed as to the soil type
that is identified by the two (2) borings that will be done in the seepage
field area. The soil type will be designated by that soil that most closely
represents the typical soil profile as described in the Lake County Soil
Survey. The Illinois Agricultural Experiment Station Soil Report No. 88. All
soils must have a minimum of six inches (6") of permeable soil between the
bottom of the trench and the mottled subsoil, and also must be protected so
that the seasonal high water table will not rise closer than two feet (2')
below the bottom of the seepage trench.
8-4-6: WORKERS TO BE LICENSED:
   A.   Licensed Contractor: Every individual sewage disposal contractor
working in the Village shall have a valid license from the State of Illinois
and be registered with the Lake County Health Department. No contractor shall
work in the Village unless he is licensed and registered. At the request of the
Health Officer, but not more often than once per year, the contractor or an
employee representative of the contractor shall successfully complete a course
in individual sewage disposal conducted by the Lake County Health Department.
   B.   Licensed Pumper: Every individual sewage disposal pumper working in the
Village shall have a valid license from the State of Illinois and be registered
with the Lake County Health Department.
8-4-7: INSPECTIONS:
No individual sewage disposal system shall be used until it has been inspected
and approved by the Lake County Health Department.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections
as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this Chapter and the
rules and regulations hereunder. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant
of any property to give the Health Officer free access to the property at
reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspections as are necessary to
determine compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder.
8-4-8: STATE AND COUNTY REQUIREMENTS:
Compliance with this Chapter does not release the applicant from compliance
with all pertinent Illinois Statutes and Lake County ordinances and regulations
governing individual sewage disposal systems.
8-4-9: FEES AND COSTS:
Fees and costs shall be charged according to the current fee schedule adopted
by the Village.
8-4-10: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
No occupancy permit shall issue for a residential or commercial structure
unless and until the owner or the owner's contractor shall file with the Health
Officer and the Lake County Health Department a set of as-built plans for the
individual sewage disposal system which shall accurately indicate the actual
location of all the system components.
8-4-11: EXPOSURE OF SEWAGE:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged untreated sewage, the
effluent from any septic tank, disposal field, mechanical treatment plant or
the contents of a privy vault or chemical toilet directly or indirectly to any
stream, ditch, storm sewer, field tile, ground surface or abandoned well, or
maintain or operate an individual sewage disposal system in such a manner that
it becomes offensive, dangerous or prejudicial to the public health.
8-4-12: UNSUITABLE SOILS:
If the application for an individual sewage disposal system permit has been
denied because the soil is identified as unsuitable or for other reasons, the
applicant may present a plan for specialized sewage disposal system that
overcomes the limitation of the lot.
8-4-13: PERMIT DENIAL; HEARING:
If the Health Officer refuses to issue a permit for construction or major
alteration of an individual sewage disposal system, the applicant for the
permit may file in the office of the Village Clerk a written request for a
hearing; the hearing shall be conducted by the Village Board within thirty (30)
days of said request. (Ord. 80-O-301, 6-5-1980)
8-4-14: FAILURE OF FACILITIES; NOTICE TO VILLAGE:
It shall be the duty of any operator, owner, lessee, and all other parties in
possession of a private sewer treatment plant facility within the Village to
give written notice to the Village by delivering the same to the Village Clerk
whenever any of the following occurs:
   A.   The sewer treatment plant facility becomes nonoperational for a period
in excess of two (2) hours.
   B.   It is determined that the sewer treatment plant facility is not
functioning or probably is not functioning in accordance with established
standards promulgated by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency and all standards of any and all
governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the construction or operation of
private sewer treatment plant facilities.
The failure to give notice as set forth in this Section to the Village by any
operator, lessor, lessee, or other party in possession of sewer treatment plan
facilities shall be considered a violation of this Section. (Ord. 80-O-308, 11-
6-1980)
Any person, or other legal entity, which violates any provisions of this
Section shall be fined a sum as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have occurred for
each day in which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 80-O-308, 11-6-1980;
amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
8-4-15: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates this Chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by the
Village or who violates any determination or order of the Health Officer under
this Chapter shall be fined a sum not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than the maximum as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code per occurrence; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day that a violation occurs. The Village Attorney shall
bring such action in the name of the Village and may, in addition to other
remedies provided in this Chapter, bring an action for an injunction to
restrain such violation, or to enjoin the operation of any such establishment.
(Ord. 80-O-301, 6-5-1980; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
8-4-16: INTERPRETATION, PURPOSES AND CONFLICT:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish minimum standards for the promotion
of public health, safety and general welfare of the citizenry of the Village.
In the event that there are standards presently existing in any other Village
ordinances which impose stricter standards than those included herein, the
stricter standards shall prevail. In addition, in the event the Village Board
adopts ordinances subsequent hereto which contain more stringent standards than
those included herein, the more stringent standards shall prevail. It is the
intention of the Village Board that this Chapter shall not repeal, either
expressly or by operation of law, any and all other ordinances presently in
effect. (Ord. 80-O-301, 6-5-1980)
8-4-17: RULES, REGULATIONS AND TABLES:
RULE I
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM RULES AND REGULATIONS
Every individual sewage disposal system shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the minimum standards as specified in the following
regulations: (Ord. 80-O-301, 6-5-1980)
Regulation A. Septic Tank Capacity
      1.   The minimum capacity for a residence shall be 1,500 gallons. The
septic tank must consist of 2 compartments. An additional 250 gallon capacity
shall be required for each bedroom in excess of 4. An additional 500 gallons of
capacity shall be required for a residence in which a garbage disposal is to be
installed.
      2.   For building other than residence, tank capacity shall be at least
750 gallons. With flows between 500 and 1,500 gallons per day, a capacity of
11/2 days' sewage flow is required. With flows greater than 1,500 gallons per
day, the volume shall be 1,125 gallons plus 75 percent of the daily sewage
flow.
      3.   Flow Rate. See Table I.
Regulation B. Septic Tank Construction
      1.   If a tank lid is buried more than 24 inches below the ground
surface, manholes to a point 8 inches below ground surface level shall be
installed over the ports. Inspection ports shall have a minimum of 8 inches;
manholes shall have a minimum dimension of 20 inches. If tank is more than 24
inches deep, all cover and inspection ports must be made watertight.
If the tank cover is cast monolithically with the sides of the tank, a manhole
with a minimum dimension of 20 inches shall be provided. This manhole may be
used as an inspection port if it is located over a baffle or a T.
      2.   Location: Septic tanks shall be located in accordance with the table
listed in Item C-35 of these specifications.
      3.   All septic tanks must have approval number of the State Department
of Public Health, and must be constructed of either poured cement concrete or
precast concrete. (Ord. 82-O-342, 4-14-82)
Regulation C. Sewer and Seepage Field Construction
      1.   Sewer lines shall be firmly sealed at all connections with the
septic tank and distribution or drop boxes. (Ord. 80-O-301, 6-5-80)
      2.   Sewer lines and the line from the tank to the distribution or drop
boxes shall be constructed of cast iron pipe with lead and okum joints. (Ord.
82-O-342, 4-14-82)
      3.   Sewer lines shall be 4 inch inside diameter or larger.
      4.   Drop box, drop T, pressure or serial distribution shall be used
where the fall of the ground surface in the field exceeds approximately 6
inches.
      5.   Distribution boxes, when used, shall be constructed of concrete of
good quality with inlet at least 2 inches above outlets and outlets at least 1
inch above bottom. The box shall have a removable cover. The end of the lines
must be tied together. (Ord. 80-O-301, 6-5-80)
      6.   Minimum width of trench   24 inches.
(Ord. 82-O-342, 4-14-82)
      7.   Maximum width of trench   36 inches.
      8.   Seepage trenches shall be cut level. Trenches shall not be excavated
when the soil is so wet as to smear easily. (Ord. 80-O-301, 6-5-80)
      9.   Minimum distance between trenches (center to center) - 3 times
trench width, except that the absolute minimum shall be 9 feet. (Ord. 82-O-342,
4-14-82)
      10.   Maximum length of each tile line   100 feet.
      11.   Minimum depth of gravel or stone under tile   6 inches.
      12.   Minimum depth of gravel or stone over tile   2 inches.
      13.   Trench fill shall be crushed stone or gravel. Stone or gravel shall
be free of dust, sand, clay or fine material. Fill may vary from 1/2 to 1 1/
2 inch in size. Fill must be uniformly spread and level.
      14.   Upper halves of clay tile joints are to be covered with asphalt
treated paper.
      15.   After placing rock or gravel over tile, cover same with untreated
building paper or straw and backfill trench with a minimum of 6 inches of soil
solidly tamped.
      16.   Slope of seepage lines   level.
      17.   Minimum inside diameter of tile   4 inches.
      18.   Minimum space between tiles   1/4 inch.
      19.   Maximum space between tiles   1/2 inch.
      20.   Maximum depth of trench (see Table II as to soil type). (Ord. 80-O-
301, 6-5-80)
      21.   Piping in the seepage field shall be limited to perforated plastic
pipe. Joints shall be minimized in that full lengths of pipe shall be utilized
whenever possible. (Ord. 82-O-342, 4-14-82)
      22.   All trenches shall be backfilled as soon after inspection as
practicable. Adequate precaution shall be taken to protect the septic tank,
sewage disposal field, drop boxes and tile lines. (Ord. 80-O-301, 6-5-80)
      23.   The minimum total bottom area of seepage trench per bedroom and
bedroom additions shall be determined by the soil type that is identified by
the 2 borings that are done in the proposed seepage field area. Table II
designates the suitability and construction details for each soil type based on
controlled percolation tests, permeability tests, and clay content of the
subsoil. In no event, however, shall the septic field consist of less than
1,000 lineal feet for a residential use. An additional 200 lineal feet shall be
required for each bedroom in excess of 4 bedrooms. (Ord. 82-O-342, 4-14-82)
      24.   For system other than single-family residences, use Table I to
determine design sewage flow. Table I does not allow for wastes from garbage
grinders and automatic washing machines. Discharge from these appliances calls
for extra capacity of 20% and 40%, respectively, over the calculated absorption
area values. Use Table II to calculate square feet required. No septic system
designed for more than 1,500 gallons per day is allowed in severe soils.
      25.   The seepage field area may not be cut or filled unless shown on the
plan approved by the Lake County Health Department.
      26.   Garages, driveways, patios, swimming pools and like structures and
improvements shall not be placed on seepage field or reserve area.
      27.   Gas lines, electric line and underground trenching shall not be
installed in seepage field area or reserve seepage area.
      28.   No work shall be covered before it has been inspected and approved
by a representative of the Lake County Health Department.
      29.   No system shall be put into use before it has been inspected and
approved by the Lake County Health Department.
      30.   Subsurface seepage fields or seepage pits shall not be constructed
in an area where the water is less than 4 feet below the trench or pit at all
times. Seasonal water table must be lowered to 2 feet below the seepage trench
by approved drainage.
      31.   Septic tanks and seepage fields shall be located at least 50 feet
from the shores of lakes or streams and at least 10 feet from an open ditch,
bank of stream, road cuts, edge of fill, farm tile or other clear water drains.
      32.   No in-ground swimming pool may be constructed within 20 feet of the
seepage field or reserve seepage field area.
      33.   Laundry wastes and other liquid basement wastes, except as noted,
must be discharged to the treatment system. Where it is necessary to pump such
wastes to the system, a separate leakproof sump and pump shall be provided for
such purpose exclusively.
      34.   Drainage from foundation footing drains, water softener, air
conditioner, humidifier, downspouts, and other clear waterdrains shall not be
discharged to the sewage disposal system or above the septic field area.
      35.   Location: The individual units of the sewage disposal system shall
be located in accordance with the following table. The distances shown are
minimum:
 
Disposal System Well Or Buried Water Service Or Dwelling Or Other
Component       Suction Line   Pressure Supply  Structure         Property Line
                               Line
Building sewer  25" (1)        10'              –               –
                50' (2)
Septic tank     50'            10'              10'               10'
Soil absorption 75'            25'              20'               10'
field
Seepage pit     100'           25'              30'               20'
 
            (1)   Sewer shall be cast iron with mechanical or leaded joints.
            (2)   Sewer pipe with watertight joints.
Regulation D. Seepage Pits
Seepage pits are a less desirable method of disposal than an absorption field
and they shall only be used where there is no likelihood of contaminating
underground waters, where it is not possible to construct an absorption field,
and only when soil types are suitable for this use. The bottom of seepage pit
must be located at least 4 feet above the ground water table. The following are
the minimum requirements governing seepage pit construction:
      1.   Absorption area requirements are listed in Item C-27 of these Design
Specifications.
      2.   Soil Series 93, 323, 325, 327, 696, 698 and 706 can be used for
seepage pits if soil is sandy at 2 feet below the bottom of the proposed pit.
      3.   In determining the available absorption area per pit, the effective
absorption area of the seepage pit shall be the gross vertical wall area of
previous strata; the bottom area shall not be included.
      4.   Seepage pits shall be separated by a distance equal to 3 times the
diameter of the largest pit as measured between the near walls of adjacent
pits. The area of the lot shall be large enough to maintain this distance
between pits while still allowing room for additional pits if the original
design should prove inadequate.
      5.   Location: The location of seepage pits shall comply with the table
shown in Regulation C, Item 35.
      6.   Pit Construction: All seepage pits shall be lined with masonry,
unmortared below the inlet and mortared above, this lining shall be carried to
within 12 inches of the ground surface and capped with a reinforced concrete
cover designed for a dead load of 150 pounds per square foot and provided with
a manhole and watertight cover. On larger diameter pits the lining above the
inlet may be corbeled to reduce the size and span of the pit cover.
An annular space of approximately 6 inches shall be provided between the lining
and the pit wall; this space shall be filled with clean gravel or crushed stone
ranging in size from 1/2 inch to 2 1/2 inches.
Regulation E. Unsuitable Soils
When an application for on-site sewage disposal permit has been denied because
the soil on the lot is verified by the Health Officer as unsuitable for use for
subsurface seepage field, the Health Officer shall not issue a permit for the
construction of an individual sewage disposal system unless an individual plan
that provides for overcoming the limiting conditions, without violating any
local or County ordinance or regulation, or State law, has been submitted and
approved by the Department.
Regulation F. Privies
      1.   No new privy will be permitted for any premises having a domestic
water supply under pressure; where an existing privy on such premises fails or
requires replacement, it shall be replaced only by a water carriage system,
when such system can be expected to function satisfactorily, as determined by
the provisions of this Chapter.
      2.   Every privy shall be built, repaired and maintained to be in
accordance with the requirements of the Illinois State Department of Public
Health Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code 4.005, a copy of which
shall be on file in the office of the Lake County Health Department.
      3.   Every privy shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and be
maintained insect and rodent proof.
Regulation G. Application for Permit
Before a septic system may be installed, an application, drawn to scale showing
all details of the system, must be submitted and approved by the Lake County
Health Department.
TABLE I - QUANTITIES OF SEWAGE FLOWS
Type Of Establishment Gallons Per Person Per Day (Unless Otherwise Noted)
Type Of Establishment                       Gallons Per Person Per Day (Unless
                                            Otherwise Noted)
Airports (per passenger)                 5
Bathhouses and swimming pools            10
Bowling alley with bar (per alley)       225
Camps:
Campground with central comfort stations  35
With flush toilets, no showers           25
Construction camps (semi-permanent)      50
Day camps (no meals served)              15
Resort camps (night and day) with limited   50
plumbing   
Luxury camps                             100
Church - per seating                     2
Churches and part-time assembly halls    7.5
Country clubs (per resident member)      100
Country clubs (per nonresident member       25
present)   
Dwellings:
Boarding houses                          50
additional for nonresident borders       10
Luxury residences and estates            150
Multiple-family dwellings (apartments)   75
Rooming houses                           40
Factories (gallons per person, per shift,   35
exclusive of industrial wastes)   
Hospitals (per bed space)                250+
Hotels with private baths (2 persons per    60
room)   
Hotels without private baths             50
Institutions other than hospitals (per bed  125
space)   
Laundries, self-service (gallons per wash,  50
i.e., per customer)   
Mobile home parks (per space)            250
Motels with bath, toilet and kitchen wastes 50
(per bed space)   
Motels (per bed space)                   40
Picnic parks (toilet wastes only) (per      5
picnicker)   
Picnic parks with bathhouses, showers and   10
flush toilets   
Restaurants, paper service, per seat     25
Restaurants, other, per seat             35-125
Restaurants, additional for bars and        2
cocktail lounges   
Schools:
Boarding                                 100
Day, without gyms, cafeterias or showers  15
Day, with gyms, cafeterias and showers   25
Day, with cafeteria, but without gyms or    20
showers   
Service stations, per island             400
Stores, per toilet room                  400
Swimming pools and bathhouses            10
Tavern, per seat                         20
Theaters:
Movie (per auditorium seat)              5
Drive-in (per car space)                 5
Travel trailer parks without individual     50
water and sewer hook-ups (per space)   
Travel trailer parks with individual water  100
and sewer hook-ups (per space)   
Workers:
Construction (at semi-permanent camps)   50
Day, at schools and offices (per shift)  �15
 
Other facilities (unlisted) - water meter reading may be used with a 25%
increase allowed for range of variations.
RULE II. SUBDIVISION SOIL TESTS
The adequacy of proposed subdivision sites utilizing individual soil absorption
sewage disposal systems shall be determined from the results of the soil type
that is identified by the required borings on the proposed lot. The soil type
shall be designated by the soil properties that most closely represent the
typical soil profile as described in the Lake County Soil Survey, the Illinois
Agricultural Experiment Station Soil Report No. 88. All soils must have a
minimum of 6 inches of permeable soil between the bottom of the trench and the
mottled subsoil, and also must be protected so that the seasonal high water
table will not rise closer than 2 feet below the bottom of the trenches.
Every lot served by an individual sewage disposal system shall have a suitable
area equivalent to 2 times the minimum requirement of the Lake County Health
Department as to soil type and type of development.
SECTION I
1.1 Number and Location of Test Holes: Sufficient borings to a minimum depth of
4 feet shall be made in the proposed field area. The number and location of
test holes shall be determined by the Lake County Health Department. The
borings shall be left open until inspected and evaluated by the Department.
1.2 Reporting of Results: The location of the boring shall be shown on the
engineering plat of subdivision. A detailed soil description showing the
different depth of each change of color and texture, as to the U.S. Department
of Agriculture textural classification, is required. This information is to be
furnished by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor, sanitarian
licensed to practice in Illinois, or a trained soil tester or soil scientist.
1.3 Suitable Lots: A minimum of 70% of the lots in any proposed subdivision or
unit of a proposed subdivision utilizing individual soil absorption sewage
disposal systems shall meet the requirements of this Chapter.
1.4 Unsuitable Lots: All unsuitable lots must be recorded on the final plat. If
more than 30% are unsuitable at the time of their evaluation, a sufficient
number of unsuitable lots must be upgraded so that 70% of the total lots are
suitable for individual sewage disposal installation. An engineering solution
must be submitted and approved for each of the remainder of the lots. This
information is to be furnished by a registered professional engineer licensed
to practice in Illinois.
TABLE II
LAKE COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT
Division of Environmental Health
USE OF SOILS TO DETERMINE SUITABILITY AND CONSTRUCTION DETAILS FOR INSTALLING
SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE FIELDS
The Soil Survey, Lake County, Illinois, prepared by the Soil Conservation
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, provides detailed information about
the soils of Lake County. The table on the following pages is based on these
data and establishes the criteria to be used in determining the suitability of
specific soils for use and details for constructing and sizing subsurface
seepage fields. Field confirmation of soil type is required. It is possible
that the locations of the line on the soil map separating 2 differing types is
not precise and small areas of a differing soil type may exist within a larger
area shown on the map to be uniform.
Special Requirements. Special construction requirements are required in order
to overcome specific limitations or the slight difference in soil series.
Size of seepage field, square feet, bottom area of trench, is determined by the
controlled percolation rate and the number of bedrooms in the dwellings or the
average daily flow in other structures.
Maximum trench depths are specified for certain soils that are underlain with
dense clay or are subject to seasonal high water tables. The bottom of the
trench must be 6 inches above the slow permeable subsoil indicated by the
mottled coloring.
Curtain drains are required in certain soils when ground water seasonally rises
close to the surface. They are used to intercept the lateral movement of ground
water above the seepage field. Tile is installed about 3 feet deep, backfilled
close to the surface with gravel and discharges to a suitable lower point such
as a road ditch. The drain may not be closer than 10 feet to a seepage line and
the final 10 feet must be of one-piece construction.
Subsurface Drainage: Soils having seasonal high water table will be drained in
accordance with the "Drainage Guide for Illinois", U.S. Department of
Agriculture, AENG 881, or other recommended drainage standards.
Filling: Suitable fill may be placed on certain soils in order to level off a
low area or in order to raise the system a suitable height above the seasonal
high water table or slow permeable subsoil.
Unsuitable Soils: Soils with very severe limitations are unsuitable for use of
subsurface seepage fields under the existing conditions. Septic tanks and drain
fields will not be considered on these soils except on an individual basis
where an engineering plan that provides specific solutions for the limiting
conditions has been submitted.
(Chart is on file with the village.)
CHAPTER 5
RESTAURANT REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Hours Of Operation
8-5-3: Prohibition
8-5-4: Exception
8-5-5: Separability
8-5-6: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 3 of this Code.
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CUSTOMER: Any person physically on the premises of the restaurant who is not an
employee or owner of the restaurant.
EMPLOYEE: Any individual who performs labor or other services at the restaurant
for either wages or salary.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or any other
legal entity.
RESTAURANT: Any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe,
luncheonette, sandwich stand, soda fountain, or any other place which serves
food for public consumption. (Ord. 83-O-356, 2-7-1983)
8-5-2: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No restaurant shall be open for business nor serve any customers between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. (Ord. 83-O-356,
2-7-1983)
8-5-3: PROHIBITION:
No person shall be allowed within any restaurant premises during the hours in
which the restaurant, by the terms of this Chapter, cannot be open to the
public, unless said person is an employee or owner of the restaurant. (Ord. 83-
O-356, 2-7-1983)
8-5-4: EXCEPTION:
This Chapter shall not apply to any restaurant situated within the Village
which has a valid liquor license to serve alcoholic beverages in conjunction
with the restaurant operation. (Ord. 83-O-356, 2-7-1983)
8-5-5: SEPARABILITY:
It is the intention of the Village that this Chapter and every provision
thereof shall be considered separable and the invalidity of any section,
clause, provision, or a part or portion of any section, clause or provision of
this Chapter shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this
Chapter. (Ord. 83-O-356, 2-7-1983)
8-5-6: PENALTY:
Any person who fails to comply with or violates any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be subject to a fine as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day upon which the violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 83-O-356, 2-7-1983;
amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 6
SEWER TAP-ON FEES
(Rep. by Ord. 15-O-022, 12-15-2015)
CHAPTER 7
SEWER USER FEES
(Rep. by Ord. 15-O-022, 12-15-2015)
CHAPTER 8
DISEASE AND INFESTATION OF TREES
SECTION:
8-8-1: Infested Or Diseased Trees Declared A Public Nuisance
8-8-2: Bark, Firewood And Other Breeding Places Declared A Public Nuisance
8-8-3: Enforcement By Village Department Of Public Works
8-8-4: Removal Of Infected Trees/Firewood
8-8-1: INFESTED OR DISEASED TREES DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-11 through 11-20-13,
trees of all species and varieties that are determined by laboratory analysis
and/or field inspection to be diseased or infested are hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, and shall be removed and disposed of in an acceptable manner
within ten (10) days following notification of the discovery of such
infestation. This includes, but is not limited to, infestations of the insects
commonly known as European elm bark beetle (Dutch elm disease) or emerald ash
borer. (Ord. 06-O-975, 10-2-2006)
8-8-2: BARK, FIREWOOD AND OTHER BREEDING PLACES DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Trees or parts thereof in a dead or dying condition that may serve as a
breeding place for the European elm bark beetle or the emerald ash borer or
other diseases or infestations, are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and
it shall be unlawful for the person, firm or corporation owning property
whereon the same is situated to possess or keep the same. (Ord. 06-O-975, 10-2-
2006)
8-8-3: ENFORCEMENT BY VILLAGE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The department of public works, using a certified arborist, is charged with
enforcement of this chapter, and to that end, may enter upon private property
at all reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting trees thereon, and may
remove such specimens as are required for purposes of analysis to determine
whether or not the same are infected. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to prevent the village department of public works or its
representative from entering on private property for purposes of carrying out
its duties hereunder, or to interfere with such village department of public
works or its representative in the lawful performance of its duties. (Ord. 06-
O-975, 10-2-2006)
8-8-4: REMOVAL OF INFECTED TREES/FIREWOOD:
The director of public works shall serve notice on the owner of premises
containing infected trees or firewood, said notice to be in conformance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-12. The notice shall be served by registered
mail or personally on the person to whom was sent the tax bill for general
taxes on said property for the last preceding year and the notice shall be
delivered or sent not less than thirty (30) days prior to the removal of the
tree(s). In the event the tree or firewood is not removed within said thirty
(30) day period, the village shall proceed to remove the tree(s) or firewood,
charge the cost to the owner, and in the event of nonpayment, file a lien
against the property in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-
12. In the event a tree is particularly infectious because of its proximity to
other elm or ash trees or because of the time of year the disease is
discovered, then the notice shall be five (5) days instead of thirty (30) days.
The department of public works shall determine when the conditions exist
warranting the imposition of the shorter notice period based on the foregoing
standards. (Ord. 06-O-975, 10-2-2006)
CHAPTER 9
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
SECTION:
8-9-1: Definitions
8-9-2: Sale To Minors Prohibited
8-9-3: Sale By Minors Prohibited
8-9-4: Purchase By Minors Prohibited
8-9-5: Possession By Minors Prohibited
8-9-6: Free Distribution Prohibited
8-9-7: Sales Prohibited In Certain Locations
8-9-8: Responsibility For Agency Or Employee
8-9-9: Penalty
8-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings
herein ascribed to them:
MINOR: A person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any item, product, or substance containing tobacco leaf,
including, without limitation, cigarettes, cigars, snuff, pipe tobacco, chewing
tobacco, and dipping tobacco. (Ord. 95-O-695, 5-1-1995)
8-9-2: SALE TO MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, offer to sell, offer to
give away, or deliver any tobacco product to a minor. It also shall be unlawful
for any person to cause or allow any minor to purchase any tobacco product
within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 95-O-695, 5-1-1995)
8-9-3: SALE BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any minor to sell any tobacco product within the
corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 95-O-695, 5-1-1995)
8-9-4: PURCHASE BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase any tobacco product within the
corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 95-O-695, 5-1-1995)
8-9-5: POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any tobacco product within the
corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 95-O-695, 5-1-1995)
8-9-6: FREE DISTRIBUTION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, give away, or deliver any
tobacco product free of charge to any person on any public right of way or any
village owned property for the purpose of advertising or promoting any tobacco
product. (Ord. 95-O-695, 5-1-1995)
8-9-7: SALES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, offer to sell, offer to
give away, or deliver any tobacco product within one hundred feet (100') of the
property of any school or the property on which a building is located and used
for education or recreational purposes or programs involving minors. (Ord. 95-
O-695, 5-1-1995)
8-9-8: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENCY OR EMPLOYEE:
Every act constituting a violation of this chapter by an agency or employee of
any person shall be deemed and held to be the act of such person, and such
person shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act had been done by
such person personally. (Ord. 95-O-695, 5-1-1995)
8-9-9: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. (Ord. 95-O-695, 5-1-1995)
CHAPTER 10
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
8-10-1: Incorporation Of Provisions
8-10-2: Local Burning Restrictions
8-10-1: INCORPORATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Fire Code: The 2009 International Fire Code, chapter 3, section 307 is
hereby expressly incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein. Copies
of said provisions are available for purchase or inspection at the Village Hall
during normal business hours. (Ord. 17-O-005, 4-18-2017, eff. 4-18-2017)
8-10-2: LOCAL BURNING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Open Burning Prohibited:
      1.   Defined: "Open burning" is defined as the burning of any materials
where smoke and fumes are emitted directly into the air without passing through
a chimney or duct. It shall be unlawful to burn paper, wood, garbage, leaves,
landscape debris, building construction or demolition debris, or any other
combustible material in open fires or in metal containers, except as provided
below.
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   Exceptions that do not require a permit/permission are limited
to: fireplaces, bonfires or recreational fires with specific restrictions, open
flame cooking devices such as cookers, barbecues, and outdoor warming stoves
such as chimeneas. Such burning shall use only seasoned firewood, charcoal,
natural gas, or LPG gas and shall not extend outside of the fire pit, fireplace
or open flame cooking device. Recreational fires, bonfires and fire pits shall
be limited in size to three feet (3') in diameter and two feet (2') in height.
Open flame cooking devices shall be a manufactured cooking device used for the
preparation of food. Outdoor fireplaces, chimeneas and/or fire pits shall be a
manufactured container or structure that holds fire at the base of a chimney or
hearth, is constructed of stone, brick, steel or other noncombustible
materials, and is provided with a screen or a spark arrestor above the fire.
(Ord. 08-O-1020A, 8-19-2008, eff. 11-1-2008)
         b.   Exception for open burning of landscape debris only (excluding
leaves and grass clippings) requires a permit/permission for: 1) wooded
residential lots of one (1) acre or more, 2) recognized range management, or 3)
wildlife management practices. Excepted burning shall be limited to the dates
of April 15 through May 30 and October 15 through November 30, from seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to dusk. These exceptions require notification/permission
from the Village. Application should be made in advance during working hours at
the Village Hall. The Village of Kildeer may prohibit or order the
extinguishment of any open burning which creates or adds to a hazardous or
objectionable situation.
         c.   Guidelines for exceptions:
            (1)   Open burning shall be constantly attended by an adult of
eighteen (18) years of age or older, until the fire is extinguished.
            (2)   A fire extinguisher, water supply, or other extinguishing
material must be available.
            (3)   Open burning shall not be permitted less than fifty feet
(50') from any structure or overhang (including houses, sheds, trees, power
lines, trellises, balconies or decks), except for open flame cooking devices.
            (4)   Burning is prohibited when wind speed exceeds twenty (20)
miles per hour.
Additional safety guidelines are available through the appropriate rural fire
protection district. In general, the fire district boundary line runs
perpendicular to South Krueger Road and on a visually straight line from East
Cuba Road south to Rand Road. The area west of these boundary lines are served
by the Lake Zurich Rural Fire Protection District which should be contacted at
(847)540-5073. The area east of these boundary lines are served by the Long
Grove Fire protection district which should be contacted at (847)634-3143.
(Ord. 10-O-010, 3-2-2010, eff. 3-2-2010)
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be fined one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
the second offense, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for every subsequent
offense. (Ord. 08-O-1020A, 8-19-2008, eff. 11-1-2008)
CHAPTER 11
SEWER SERVICE
(Rep. by Ord. 15-O-022, 12-15-2015)
CHAPTER 12
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
SECTION:
8-12-1: Adoption By Reference
8-12-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The village of Kildeer hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the Lake
Zurich rural fire protection district's "spiller pays" ordinance as attached
and marked as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein, and any future
amendments. (Ord. 11-O-017, 8-16-2011)
CHAPTER 13
MOSQUITO CONTROL
SECTION:
8-13-1: Findings And Determinations
8-13-2: Mosquito Control Program
8-13-3: Right Of Entry And Program Implementation
8-13-4: Notice Of Program To Be Provided
8-13-5: Refusal To Allow Entry
8-13-6: Penalty For Violation
8-13-1: FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS:
It is hereby found that certain mosquito borne diseases, including West Nile
virus and St. Louis encephalitis, are a serious public health concern. In order
to protect the public health it is necessary that the village provide and
administer a program to control mosquito borne diseases. (Ord. 03-O-874, 5-5-
2003)
8-13-2: MOSQUITO CONTROL PROGRAM:
The village shall, at all times verified by the center for disease control,
provide a program for control of mosquito borne diseases. Said program may
include: survey and mapping, surveillance and monitoring, larval control, and
adult control as necessary. Any such program shall be administered by an
independent contractor hired by the village and having expertise in mosquito
control. (Ord. 03-O-874, 5-5-2003)
8-13-3: RIGHT OF ENTRY AND PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION:
The officers, agents, employees and independent contractor hired by the village
are hereby authorized and directed to enter on and upon private property for
the sole purpose of survey, mapping, surveillance, monitoring, larval control,
and/or adult control as necessary for the interest of public health. (Ord. 03-
O-874, 5-5-2003)
8-13-4: NOTICE OF PROGRAM TO BE PROVIDED:
The independent contractor will provide information to the village for
distribution via website, newsletter and other means. Said information will
include the contractor's phone number and the manner in which residents may
request exclusion from any such program. However, in the interest of public
health, a resident's ability to be excluded from any such program may be
denied. (Ord. 03-O-874, 5-5-2003)
8-13-5: REFUSAL TO ALLOW ENTRY:
Any owner or occupant of private property who refuses to allow the village's
officers, agents, employees and independent contractor to enter on and upon
such private property for the sole purpose of carrying out the program(s)
stated in the information provided by the village shall be in violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 03-O-874, 5-5-2003)
8-13-6: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall
be convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 03-O-874, 5-5-2003)
CHAPTER 14
WEEDS
SECTION:
8-14-1: Definition
8-14-2: Weed Cutting Required
8-14-3: Violations And Penalties
8-14-1: DEFINITION:
"Weeds" as used in this chapter shall include the following: burdock, ragweed
(giant), ragweed (common), thistle, cockleburr, jimpson, blue vervain, common
milkweed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambsquarter,
wild lettuce, curled dock, smart weeds (all varieties), poison hemlock and wild
hemp, and all other weeds of a like kind, and all other plant materials in an
untended or uncultivated state and including any noxious weeds on private
property, as defined by 505 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 19-O-004, 6-18-
2019)
8-14-2: WEED CUTTING REQUIRED:
Every owner of real estate within the Village shall cut weeds on their property
at all such times as may be necessary so that such weeds shall not exceed eight
inches (8") in height. (Ord. 19-O-004, 6-18-2019)
8-14-3: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who fails to comply with, or violates the provisions of this chapter
shall upon conviction be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day upon which a violation occurs or continues. Person shall mean and include
any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or any other legal
entity.
In addition to the above described fine, any person convicted of an offense
under this chapter shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the Village
in connection therewith including, but not limited to, the cost of site
inspections or any other costs incurred. (Ord. 19-O-004, 6-18-2019)
CHAPTER 15
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
SECTION:
8-15-1: Definitions
8-15-2: Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
8-15-3: Public Nuisance Declared
8-15-4: Violations
8-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
                                        A cultivation center, craft grower,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             processing organization, infuser
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, dispensing organization
                                        or transporting organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
                                        Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may be
                                        amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, transport and
                                        perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                        to licensed cannabis business
                                        establishments, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ORGANIZATION:                           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
                                        seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        Any person, firm, corporation,
                                        association, club, society or other
PERSON:                                 organization, including any owner,
                                        manager, proprietor, employee,
                                        volunteer or agent. (Ord. 19-O-016, 11-
                                        19-2019)
 
8-15-2: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
The following Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments are prohibited in the
Village of Kildeer. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be
operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation within the Village of Kildeer
of any of the following:
   Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower.
   Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center.
   Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
   Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser.
   Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor.
   Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporte. (Ord. 19-O-016,
11-19-2019)
8-15-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited Cannabis Business Establishment within the Village
in violation of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord. 19-O-
016, 11-19-2019)
8-15-4: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this Chapter may be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 4, Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 19-O-016, 11-19-2019)
TITLE 9
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
9-1-1: Department Created
9-1-2: Chief Of Police
9-1-3: Rules And Regulations
9-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a police department for the village, which shall
consist of the chief of police, and such other officers as from time to time
authorized by the village board. (Ord. 90-O-558, 12-3-1990)
9-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Appointment, Term: The chief of police shall be appointed by the
village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and
shall serve at the discretion and pleasure of the village president.
   B.   Rank: The chief of police shall be the head of the department, and have
supervision over all officers and members thereof.
   C.   Residency Exemption: The chief of police need not be a resident of the
village.
   D.   Duties: The duties of the chief of police are set forth in the police
department rules and regulations of the village, as adopted and approved by
this chapter, and as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 90-O-558, 12-3-
1990)
9-1-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The board of trustees shall adopt rules and regulations. These rules shall
apply to all members of the department.
The "Rules and Regulations, Kildeer Police Department, Kildeer, Illinois" dated
December 3, 1990, a copy of which is on file in the office of the village
clerk, is made a part hereof by reference, setting forth the rules and
regulations. Said rules and regulations may be amended from time to time. (Ord.
MM-O-806A, 7-3-2000)
CHAPTER 2
VANDALISM; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
9-2-1: Background
9-2-2: Definitions
9-2-3: Offenses
9-2-4: Penalty
9-2-5: Liability Of Parent Or Legal Guardian Of Minor Offender
9-2-1: BACKGROUND:
Acts of vandalism resulting in damage to real or personal property within the
Village pose a threat to the value of property and the welfare of residents. It
is in the best interests of the Village that such acts be prosecuted by the
Village as a local offense; that penalties therefor be imposed which are
related to the nature of the act and the type of offender; and that the parents
or legal guardians of minors found guilty of such acts be held responsible for
any monetary penalty or order of restitution or reparation imposed. The
diligent pursuit of such interests will tend to increase parental supervision
of minors and reduce the incidence of juvenile vandalism, thus advancing the
welfare of residents of the Village. (Ord. 77-O-242, 2-3-1977)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CONDITIONAL DISCHARGE: An action taken by the court which allows removal of the
conviction from the record of an individual if certain conditions are met.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: Shall include a person appointed guardian, or given custody of
a minor by any court of record, but does not include a person appointed
guardian, or given custody of a minor under the "Illinois Juvenile Court Act" 1
.
MINOR: A person who has attained eleven (11) years of age but who has not yet
reached nineteen (19) years of age.
PERSON: Shall include any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Shall include any real estate including improvements thereon, and
tangible personalty. (Ord. 77-O-242, 2-3-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
9-2-3: OFFENSES:
Within the corporate limits of the Village no person shall:
   A.   Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without
his consent; or
   B.   Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over any
motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof of another
person without his consent. (Ord. 77-O-242, 2-3-1977)
9-2-4: PENALTY:
Every person found guilty of an offense shall be subject to either or both the
following penalties: (Ord. 77-O-242, 2-3-1977)
   A.   A fine not in excess of the maximum as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 77-O-242, 2-3-1977; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
   B.   A period of conditional discharge not to exceed one year.
      1.   The conditions of a conditional discharge shall include that the
defendant:
         a.   Not violate any criminal statute or quasi-criminal ordinance of
any jurisdiction; and
         b.   Report to and appear in person before such person or agency as
directed by the court.
      2.   The conditions of conditional discharge may, in addition, require
that the defendant:
         a.   Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training;
         b.   Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or treatment for drug
addiction or alcoholism;
         c.   Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual
loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss; and
         d.   If a minor, to reside with his parent or in a foster home; attend
school; attend a nonresidential program for youth; or contribute to his own
support at home or in a foster home.
      3.   When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition for a
conditional discharge, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of
payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at
any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of conditional
discharge may impose an additional period of not more than two (2) years. Only
the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such conditional
period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence,
including the authority to modify or enlarge the original conditions and to
revoke the penalty of conditional discharge if the conditions of payment are
violated during such additional period.
      4.   When a petition is filed charging a violation of a condition imposed
for conditional discharge, the court:
         a.   May order a summons to the offender to appear; or order a warrant
for the offender's arrest where there is danger of his fleeing the jurisdiction
or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to answer a
summons. The issuance of such warrant or summons shall stay the sentence of
conditional discharge until the final determination of the charge, and the term
of conditional discharge shall not run so long as the offender has not answered
the summons, or warrant.
         b.   Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may
admit the offender to bail pending the hearing.
         c.   Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of
confrontation, cross-examination and representation by counsel. The Village has
the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the
preponderance of the evidence.
         d.   Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for failure to comply
with conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations upon the
offender unless such failure is due to his wilful refusal to pay.
         e.   May modify the conditions of a conditional discharge on motion of
the Village or on its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice
to all parties and a hearing.
      5.   If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any
time prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may continue the
offender on the existing period, with or without modifying or enlarging the
conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the time of
the initial penalty.
      6.   A judgment revoking probation or conditional discharge is a final
appealable order.
9-2-5: LIABILITY OF PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN OF MINOR OFFENDER:
The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such
parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said
minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the
knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this
Chapter, upon the occurrence of the events described in subsections A, B and C
below:
   A.   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or Statute
prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property,
or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or
Statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
   B.   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from a
representative of the Village; and
   C.   If at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set
forth in subsection B above, said minor is either adjudicated to be in
violation of any ordinance, law or Statute, as described in subsection A above,
or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or
Statute as described in subsection A above.
The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who is residing with
such parent or legal guardian when found to have failed to exercise proper
parental responsibility as per the terms of this Chapter, shall be liable for
any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon said
minor for violation of the instant ordinance; provided that said minor has not
paid said fine or made restitution or reparation within the time prescribed by
the court. (Ord. 77-O-242, 2-3-77)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Discharge Of Weapons
9-3-1: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun within the
village limits; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to a duly
authorized police officer while engaged in the discharge of his duties. For the
purposes of this section, "gun" shall mean and include any rifle, pistol,
shotgun, firearm, BB gun, pellet gun, or any other instrument which discharges
a projectile, such as a bullet or pellet.
   B.   Any person who violates the terms of this section shall, upon
conviction, be fined a sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each discharge shall
be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 91-O-590, 9-4-1991)
CHAPTER 4
OBSCENITY
SECTION:
9-4-1: Definitions
9-4-2: Obscenity Prohibited
9-4-3: Interpretation Of Evidence
9-4-4: Affirmative Defense
9-4-5: Minors
9-4-6: Public Display Of Explicit Sexual Material Prohibited
9-4-7: Severability
9-4-8: Penalty
9-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
DISTRIBUTE: To transfer possession or make available for viewing by any other
person, whether or not consideration passes.
EXPLICITLY SEXUAL MATERIAL: Any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or
other representation of a sexual nature which is harmful and obscene to
children.
KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of or having reason to or a belief or
reasonable grounds for belief which warrants, indicates or suggests further
inspection or inquiry or both of the character and content of any material
described herein.
OBSCENE: An item shall be deemed to be obscene if the average person using
contemporary adult community standards would find that the work, taken as a
whole, appeals to the prurient interest, and describes in a patently offensive
way sexual conduct and the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political, or scientific value.
Obscenity may encompass, but not be limited to, the depiction of the following
acts, which meet the definition above, between humans, between animals, and/or
between humans and animals:
   A.   Masturbation.
   B.   Oral genital acts.
   C.   Oral or manual genital or breast stimulation.
   D.   Rape.
   E.   Voyeurism.
   F.   Flagellation.
   G.   Cunnilingus.
   H.   Fellatio.
   I.   Homosexual acts or lesbian acts.
   J.   Transvestisms.
   K.   Sodomy; incest.
   L.   Bestiality.
   M.   Anal sex, buggery; pederasty.
   N.   Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual, simulated or animated.
   O.   Lewd exhibition of genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva or female breast
nipples.
   P.   Sexual stimulation or penetration with an artificial sexual device.
   Q.   Oral copulation.
   R.   Torture in the context of a sexual encounter.
   S.   Sadomasochism, real or simulated.
   T.   The inflicting, or simulated depiction thereof, of bodily harm on
another during the course of a sexual encounter.
   U.   Distortion of the genitals manually or by graphic artistry.
   V.   Depiction of any imminent abnormal sexual activity.
   W.   Any artificial human penis or vagina or device primarily designed
physically to stimulate genitals, or any description, advertisement or offer to
sell such device.
   X.   Excretory functions.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other
legal entity.
PUBLIC DISPLAY: Material that is visible on a billboard, viewing screen,
theater, marquee, newsstand, display rack, window, showcase, display case or
other similar display area that is visible from a public street, sidewalk,
park, or any other public place or from the property of others. For purposes of
this Section "other public place" means any premises which is for the time made
public by the assemblage of people including, but not limited to, hotels,
motels, taverns, restaurants, theaters, meeting rooms of social, fraternal, or
religious organizations. (Ord. 97-O-743, 3-6-1997)
9-4-2: OBSCENITY PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit obscenity which shall mean and
include any act in which a person with knowledge of the nature or content
thereof or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would
have disclosed the nature or content thereof:
   A.   Sells, delivers or provides or offers or agrees to sell, deliver, or
provide any obscene writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene; or
   B.   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance, or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
   C.   Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise makes available anything obscene; or
   D.   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of
his body for gain; or
   E.   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with
intent to disseminate it in violation of this Chapter or of the penal laws or
regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
   F.   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or
held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene. (Ord. 82-O-353,
10-4-1982)
9-4-3: INTERPRETATION OF EVIDENCE:
Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults, except that it
shall be judged with reference to children or other specially susceptible
audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the circumstances
of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to such audience.
In any prosecution for an offense under this Chapter, evidence shall be
admissible to show:
   A.   The character of the audience for which the material was designed or
for which it was directed.
   B.   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary
adults or a special audience, and what effect if any, it would probably have on
the behavior of such people.
   C.   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of the
material, or absence thereof.
   D.   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
Village.
   E.   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or
other promotion of the materials.
   F.   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator. (Ord. 82-O-
353, 10-4-1982)
9-4-4: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination:
   A.   Was not for gain and was made to personal associations in private
setting other than children under eighteen (18) years of age.
   B.   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special
justification for possession of such material. (Ord. 82-O-353, 10-4-1982)
9-4-5: MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly distribute to or send or cause to be
sent to, or exhibit to, or offer to distribute or exhibit any obscene material
to a child. For the purpose of this Section, a "child" shall be defined to be a
person under eighteen (18) years of age.
It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person under eighteen (18)
years of age to falsely state, either orally or in writing, that he is not
under the age of eighteen (18) years or who presents or offers to any person
any evidence of age and identity which is false or not actually his own for the
purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing, or otherwise procuring or attempting
to procure or view any obscene material.
Nothing in Section
9-4-4 of this Chapter shall prohibit any public library or accredited
educational institution from circulating obscene materials to any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years provided such circulation was with parental
consent and was for a legitimate scientific or educational purpose. (Ord. 82-O-
353, 10-4-1982)
9-4-6: PUBLIC DISPLAY OF EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL PROHIBITED:
It is the purpose of this Section to prohibit the public display of explicit
sexual material to protect children from exposure to such materials. It shall
be unlawful for any person to publicly display explicit sexual material or
advertisements therefor or fail to remove any such material or advertisement
placed upon real property in the person's possession and control. Violations of
this Section shall include, but not be limited to, explicit sexual films at
outdoor movie theaters, even though located on private property; obvious
display of magazines, periodicals, books, newspapers on any rack, stand or
counter which contain explicit sexual pictures harmful and obscene to children.
Nothing in this Section shall prohibit any public library or accredited
educational institution from allowing access to materials to any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years, provided such access was with parental consent
or provided such material is to be used for a legitimate scientific or
educational purpose. (Ord. 97-O-743, 3-6-1997)
9-4-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter shall
be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this Chapter, which shall continue in full force and
effect, and to this end the provisions of this Chapter are hereby declared to
be severable. (Ord. 82-O-353, 10-4-1982)
9-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation, association, or other legal entity violating any
of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), nor more than the maximum as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and each day that such violation shall
occur or continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 82-O-
353, 10-4-1982; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 5
TRESPASS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definitions
9-5-2: Trespasses Prohibited
9-5-3: Severability
9-5-4: Penalty
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, association, or any other
legal entity.
TRESPASS: A. An entry upon any premises or any part thereof of another
including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to said premises or at any point or approach or entry; or
   B.   An entry upon the premises or any part thereof of another in violation
of any notice, warning, or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or
occupant thereof; or
   C.   A failure or refusal to depart from any premises of another after being
requested either orally or in writing to leave by any owner or occupant
thereof. (Ord. 83-O-362, 6-6-1983)
9-5-2: TRESPASSES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within the Village
upon either public or private property. (Ord. 83-O-362, 6-6-1983)
9-5-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this Chapter shall be held
invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other provisions of
this Chapter. (Ord. 83-O-362, 6-6-1983)
9-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined a sum as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense committed. (Ord. 83-O-362, 6-6-1983; amd.
Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 6
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Purpose
9-6-2: Definitions
9-6-3: Permit Required
9-6-4: Permit Application Procedure
9-6-4-5: Existing Connections
9-6-5: Exemption
9-6-6: Service Charges For False Alarms
9-6-7: Maintenance Of Records
9-6-8: Disconnection
9-6-9: Disconnection Notice
9-6-10: Reconnection Procedure
9-6-11: Testing Of Equipment
9-6-12: Reservation Of Rights
9-6-13: Nondirect Alarm Provisions
9-6-14: Avoidance Of Prosecution
9-6-15: Penalty
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to encourage proper maintenance of alarm
systems to eliminate false alarms due to negligence on the part of the owners
and to thereby provide better service in those instances in which there exists
legitimate needs for an emergency police response. (Ord. 83-O-367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment device(s) designed to signal the
presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police or fire
personnel are expected to respond; and, for the purposes of this definition,
includes internal premises systems in which an audible signal emits sounds or
flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises.
DIRECT ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system which utilizes a telephone line which has
as its sole use the transmission of an alarm signal to a central receiving
facility operated and maintained by or on behalf of the village.
FALSE ALARM: A false alarm shall be deemed to have occurred when a Kildeer
police unit responds to a direct alarm or to a call for assistance based on an
alarm activated to another third party when the chief of police determines that
said alarm was caused by a mechanical failure of the system, neglect of the
owner to keep the system working properly, or careless use of the system. It
shall not be considered a false alarm in the event that the chief of police is
unable to determine that the reason for activation of the alarm is attributed
to the mechanical failure of the system, neglect of the owner to keep the
system working properly, or to the owner's careless use of the system.
NONDIRECT ALARM SYSTEM: Any alarm system, including, but not limited to, a
direct dialing system, which is not a direct alarm system.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or any other
legal entity. (Ord. 83-O-367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall connect or suffer or permit a direct alarm connection from any
building, place, or premises to a receiving station owned or operated by or on
behalf of the village without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Kildeer police department. (Ord. 83-O-367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-4: PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   No permit shall be issued except upon written application to the chief
of police.
   B.   Said application shall be in the form prescribed by the chief of
police. Said application shall include language to the effect that the
applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the village for any failure of
service or any damages that might result from the installation or operation of
the alarm system.
   C.   An applicant shall certify that alarm system maintenance will be
provided and be available twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per
week. (Ord. 83-O-367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-4-5: EXISTING CONNECTIONS:
Those individuals who presently have a direct alarm connection to a village
facility shall procure a permit as above described on or before August 1, 1983.
In the event that said individuals do not procure said permit within said time,
then in that event, said individuals shall be subject to termination of the
connection privilege upon seven (7) days' written notice from the village
police department. (Ord. 83-O-367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-5: EXEMPTION:
The preceding sections of this chapter shall not apply to the installation and
operation of any nondirect alarm system which is not connected directly to a
receiving station owned, operated, and maintained by or on behalf of the
village police department. The village recommends that any alarm system
installed by an owner conform to the most recent specifications of the American
National Standards Institute, Underwriter Laboratory, or equivalent
specifications of an approved rating bureau. (Ord. 83-O-367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-6: SERVICE CHARGES FOR FALSE ALARMS:
Any person who fails to maintain or secure proper maintenance for his alarm
system shall pay a service charge for false alarms resulting therefrom. An
individual who has a direct alarm connection to a receiving station owned,
operated, and maintained by or on behalf of the Village shall pay a service
charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) each for the fourth and fifth false
alarm in any calendar year; and the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the sixth
and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the seventh false alarm in the same
calendar year. In the event that a person has eight (8) or more false alarms
within a twenty-four (24) month period, the service charge for each additional
false alarm shall be the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus the amount of the
last assessed service charge. (Ord. 83-O-367, 7-12-1983; amd. Ord. 21-O-004, 3-
16-2021)
9-6-7: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
The chief of police shall maintain accurate records of all false alarms as well
as all activated alarms. The chief of police shall give written notice to any
owner who experiences two (2) false alarms in a calendar year. Said notice
shall notify the owner that the owner shall be subject to service charges for
each false alarm commencing with a fourth false alarm in any calendar year.
(Ord. 83-O-367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-8: DISCONNECTION:
The village police department may revoke any permit heretofore issued and/or
disconnect any direct alarm system connection of any owner in any of the
following events:
   A.   The owner fails to pay any service charges assessed within thirty (30)
days of invoice.
   B.   The owner fails to obtain a permit for a direct alarm system connection
as required by the terms of this chapter.
   C.   The chief of police determines that the owner's alarm system is
unreliable and/or not properly maintained. For the purpose of this section, the
chief of police may make such a determination in the event that the police
department receives more than ten (10) false alarms in any calendar year. (Ord.
83-O-367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-9: DISCONNECTION NOTICE:
In the event that the chief of police determines to disconnect any direct alarm
connection for any of the reasons set forth in the preceding section, then in
that event, the chief of police shall give written notice thereof to the owner
and provide said owner with seven (7) days to cure the defect, if possible. At
the conclusion of the seven (7) day period, in the event that the chief of
police determines that the owner has not cured said defect, then in that event,
the chief of police may cause said disconnection to occur. (Ord. 83-O-367, 7-
12-1983)
9-6-10: RECONNECTION PROCEDURE:
In the event that an owner has had his system terminated as a direct alarm
system to the village facilities pursuant to the terms of this chapter, the
owner can reapply for a permit by paying a reapplication fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and by providing sufficient documentation to establish that
his alarm system will fully comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord.
83-O-367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-11: TESTING OF EQUIPMENT:
No direct alarm system shall be tested or demonstrated without the owner having
thereto obtained the permission of the village police department. (Ord. 83-O-
367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-12: RESERVATION OF RIGHTS:
The village reserves the right at any time to discontinue the service of
providing monitoring of any and all alarm systems after written notice to that
effect. The village is under no obligation to supply this service to any
person. (Ord. 83-O-367, 7-12-1983)
9-6-13: NONDIRECT ALARM PROVISIONS:
It is hereby declared unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any owner of
a nondirect alarm system to allow more than two (2) false alarms from that
system in any calendar year. The owner of a nondirect alarm system, which has
more than two (2) false alarms in any calendar year, shall be fined a sum as
set forth in section
1-22-2 of this code for each false alarm thereafter, commencing with the third
false alarm in a calendar year. (Ord. 04-O-889, 1-6-2004)
9-6-14: AVOIDANCE OF PROSECUTION:
The owner of a nondirect alarm system, which has more than two (2) false alarms
in a calendar year, may avoid prosecution for violating this chapter as
follows: (Ord. 04-O-889, 1-6-2004)
   A.   Within five (5) days from the issuance of a notice of violation,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, by paying to the village in care of
the police clerk at 21911 Quentin Road, Kildeer, Illinois, the sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each violation if the notice is for a third and/or fourth
false alarm in any calendar year, and the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each violation if the notice is for a fifth through tenth false alarm in the
same calendar year, and the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
violation if the notice is for the eleventh violation or more.
   B.   Within fifteen (15) days from the issuance of a notice of violation,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, by paying to the village in care of
the police clerk at 21911 Quentin Road, Kildeer, Illinois, the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation if the notice is for a third and/
or fourth false alarm in any calendar year, and the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each violation if the notice is for a fifth through tenth false
alarm in the same calendar year, and the sum of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each violation if the notice is for the eleventh violation or
more.
   C.   Within twenty five (25) days from the issuance of a notice of
violation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, by paying to the village
in care of the police clerk at 21911 Quentin Road, Kildeer, Illinois, the sum
of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each violation if the notice is for
a third and/or fourth false alarm in any calendar year, and the sum of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each violation if the notice is for a fifth
through tenth false alarm in the same calendar year, and the sum of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation if the notice is for the eleventh
violation or more. (Ord. 04-O-889, 1-6-2004; amd. Ord. 08-O-1011, 3-18-2008)
In the event that the owner of the nondirect alarm system does not pay the
required sum within the initial five (5) day period, as hereabove provided, the
police clerk shall send notice that the fine has not been received within the
prescribed five (5) day period, and that, therefore, the fine has escalated as
described above, which must be paid to avoid prosecution within thirty (30)
days of said notice. All remittances of fines as provided herein may be made by
check, money order, cash, or cashier's check, and must be accompanied by a
signed plea of guilty and a waiver of hearing. (Ord. 04-O-889, 1-6-2004)
9-6-15: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined,
upon conviction, a sum as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each and every offense, and each day that such offense
continues or occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. (Ord.
83-O-367, 7-12-1983; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 7
THEFT PROHIBITED
SECTION:
9-7-1: Definitions
9-7-2: Theft
9-7-3: Prima Facie Evidence; Theft by Lessee
9-7-4: Theft of Lost or Mislaid Property
9-7-5: Theft of Labor or Services or Use of Property
9-7-6: Offender's Interest in Property
9-7-7: Penalty
9-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Property: "Property" means anything of value. Property includes real
estate, money, commercial instruments, admission or transportation tickets,
written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of
value, labor, or services, or otherwise of value to the owner; things growing
on, affixed to, or found on land, or part of or affixed to any building;
electricity, gas and water; birds, animals and fish, which ordinarily are kept
in a state of confinement; food and drink; samples, cultures, micro-organisms,
specimens, records, recordings, documents, blueprints, drawings, maps, and
whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs, computer programs or data,
prototypes, or models thereof, or any other articles, materials, devices,
substances, and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs, prototypes,
or models thereof which constitute, represent, evidence, reflect or record a
secret scientific, technical, merchandising, production or management
information, design, process, procedures, formula, invention, or improvement.
   B.   Owner: "Owner" means a person, other than the offender, who has
possession of or any other interest in the property involved, even though such
interest or possession is unlawful, and without whose consent the offender has
no authority to exert control over the property.
   C.   Permanent Deprivation: To "permanently deprive" means to:
      1.   Defeat all recovery of the property by the owner; or
      2.   Deprive the owner permanently of the beneficial use of the property;
or
      3.   Retain the property with intent to restore it to the owner only if
the owner purchases or leases it back, or pays a reward or other compensation
for its return;or
      4.   Sell, give, pledge, or otherwise transfer any interest in the
property or subject it to the claim of a person other than the owner.
   D.   Deception: "Deception" means knowingly to:
      1.   Create or confirm another's impression which is false and which the
offender does not believe to be true; or
      2.   Fail to correct a false impression which the offender previously has
created or confirmed; or
      3.   Prevent another from acquiring information pertinent to the
disposition of the property involved; or
      4.   Sell or otherwise transfer or encumber property, failing to disclose
a lien, adverse claim, or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of the
property, whether such impediment is or is not valid, or is or is not a matter
of official record; or
      5.   Promise performance which the offender does not intend to perform or
knows will not be performed. Failure to perform standing alone is not evidence
that the offender did not intend to perform.
   E.   Threat: A menace, however communicated, to:
      1.   Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person
or on property; or
      2.   Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or
      3.   Commit any criminal offense; or
      4.   Accuse any person of a criminal offense; or
      5.   Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
      6.   Harm the credit or business repute of any person; or
      7.   Reveal any information sought to be concealed by the person
threatened; or
      8.   Take action as an official against anyone or anything, or withhold
official action, or cause such action or withholding; or
      9.   Bring about or continue to strike, boycott or other similar
collective action if the property is not demanded or received for the benefit
of the group which he purports to represent; or
      10.   Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or information
with respect to another's legal claim or defense; or
      11.   Inflict any other harm which would not benefit the offender.
   F.   Stolen Property: Property over which control has been obtained by
theft.
   G.   Obtain: Obtain means:
      1.   In relation to property, to bring about a transfer of interest or
possession, whether to the offender or to another, and
      2.   In relation to labor or services, to secure the performance thereof.
   H.   Obtains Control: The phase "obtains or exerts control" over property,
includes but is not limited to the taking, carrying away, or the sale,
conveyance, or transfer of title to, or interest in, or possession of property.
   I.   Value: The "value" of property consisting of any commercial instrument
or any written instrument representing or embodying rights concerning anything
of value, labor, or services or otherwise of value to the owner shall be:
      1.   The "market value" of such instrument if such instrument is
negotiable and has a market value; and
      2.   The "actual value" of such instrument if such instrument is not
negotiable or is otherwise without a market value. For the purpose of
establishing such "actual value", the interest or any owner or owners entitled
to part or all of the property represented by such instrument, may be shown,
even if another "owner" may be named in the complaint, information or
indictment.
9-7-2: THEFT:
A person commits theft when he knowingly:
   A.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
   B.   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
   C.   Obtains by theft control over property of the owner; or
   D.   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to
believe that the property was stolen, and
      1.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or
      2.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such a manner
as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
      3.   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
9-7-3: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE; THEFT BY LESSEE:
It shall be prima facie evidence that a person "knowingly obtains or exerts
unauthorized control over property of the owner" when a lessee of the personal
property of another fails to return it to the owner within thirty (30) days
after written demand from the owner for its return. A notice in writing, given
after the expiration of the leasing agreement, addressed and mailed, by
registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by him and shown on the
leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand.
9-7-4: THEFT OF LOST OR MISLAID PROPERTY:
A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft when
he:
   A.   Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of, or
learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner, and
   B.   Fails to take reasonable measure to restore the property to the owner,
and
   C.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property.
9-7-5: THEFT OF LABOR OR SERVICES OR USE OF PROPERTY:
A person commits theft when he obtains the temporary use of property, labor or
services of another which are available only for hire, by means of threat or
deception of knowing that such use is without the consent of the person
providing the property, labor or services.
A person commits theft when after renting or leasing a motor vehicle, or any
other type of personal property exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) in
value, under an agreement in writing which provides for the return of the
vehicle or other personal property to a particular place at a particular time,
he without good cause wilfully fails to return the vehicle or other personal
property to that place within the time specified, and is thereafter served or
sent a written demand mailed to the last known address, made by certified mail
return receipt requested, to return such vehicle or other personal property
within seven (7) days from the mailing of the written demand, and who without
good cause wilfully fails to return the vehicle or any other personal property
to any place of business of the lessor within such period. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-
7-1983)
9-7-6: OFFENDER'S INTEREST IN PROPERTY:
It is no defense to a charge of theft of property that the offender has an
interest therein, when the owner also has an interest to which the offender is
not entitled.
Where the property involved is that of the offender's spouse, no prosecution
for theft may be maintained unless the parties were not living together as man
and wife and were living in separate abodes at the time of the alleged theft.
(Ord. 83-O-370, 11-7-1983)
9-7-7: PENALTY:
The acts of theft, theft by lessee, theft of lost or mislaid property, and
theft of labor or services or use of property are hereby prohibited. Any person
who commits an offense of theft, theft by lessee, theft of lost or mislaid
property, or theft of labor or services or use of property shall, upon
conviction, be fined a sum as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-7-1983; amd. Ord. 95-O-
707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 8
DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY
SECTION:
9-8-1: Criminal Damage To Property
9-8-2: Trespass To Vehicles
9-8-3: Penalty
9-8-1: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
Any of the following acts are hereby declared to be criminal damage to property
and are hereby prohibited:
   A.   Knowingly damaging any property of another without his consent; or
   B.   Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damaging property of another;
or
   C.   Knowingly starting a fire on the land of another without his consent;
or
   D.   Knowingly injuring a domestic animal of another without his consent; or
   E.   Knowingly depositing on the land or in the building of another, without
his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intending to interfere with the use by another of the land or building;
   F.   Knowingly damaging the property of another without his consent by
defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging such property by the use of paint or
any other similar substance. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-7-1983)
9-8-2: TRESPASS TO VEHICLES:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to knowingly and without
authority enter any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, or any part thereof, of
another without his consent. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-7-1983)
9-8-3: PENALTY:
Any person who commits the offense of criminal damage to property or trespass
to vehicles shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-7-1983; amd. Ord. 95-O-
707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 9
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS
SECTION:
9-9-1: Disorderly Conduct
9-9-2: Assault
9-9-3: Battery
9-9-4: Reckless Conduct Prohibited
9-9-5: Fireworks Prohibited
9-9-6: Littering Prohibited
9-9-7: Interference With Peace Officers
9-9-8: Public Indecency
9-9-9: Curfew Hours For Minors
9-9-9-1: Possession Of Alcoholic Beverages By Minors
9-9-9-2: Possession Of Cannabis
9-9-9-3: Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia
9-9-10: Penalty
9-9-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
No person shall engage in disorderly conduct within the village. Any of the
following acts shall constitute disorderly conduct:
   A.   Doing any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
   B.   Transmitting in any manner to the fire department of the city, town,
village, or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time
of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that
such fire exists;
   C.   Transmitting in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that
a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such a place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such a bomb or explosive
is concealed in such a place;
   D.   Transmitting in any manner to a peace officer, public officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing
that such an offense has been committed;
   E.   Entering upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looking into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it;
   F.   Engaging in or aiding or abetting any fight, quarrel or other
disturbance;
   G.   Disturbing any religious service, funeral, public or private meeting,
place of amusement or assembly of persons;
   H.   Being intoxicated in a public place or in any other place to the
annoyance and disturbance of other persons;
   I.   Resisting or obstructing the performance of one known to be a police
officer, or any authorized act within the police officer's official capacity;
   J.   Attempting to assist any person in custody of police to escape or
furnishing any weapon, drugs, liquor to any such person;
   K.   Assembling with one or more persons for the purpose of using force or
violence to disturb the public peace;
   L.   Failing to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known to be a
peace officer;
   M.   Damaging or defacing trees, bushes, gardens, fences, windows, signs,
buildings, monuments or vehicles or engaging in any act of vandalism;
   N.   Abusing, beating or cruelly injuring any animal;
   O.   Knowingly possessing cannabis, which includes marijuana, hashish and
other substances which are identified as including any part of the plant
Cannabis sativa and the person is under the age of twenty-one (21).
   P.   Knowingly possessing cannabis as provided in Section
9-9-9-2 (B). (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-7-1983; amd. Ord. 20-O-001, 1-21-2020)
9-9-2: ASSAULT:
The offense of assault is hereby prohibited. A person commits an offense of
assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places
another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-
7-1983)
9-9-3: BATTERY:
The offense of battery is hereby prohibited. A person commits an offense of
battery if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification, and by
any means:
   A.   Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
   B.   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-7-1983)
9-9-4: RECKLESS CONDUCT PROHIBITED:
The offense of reckless conduct is hereby prohibited. A person who causes
bodily harm to, or endangers the bodily safety of an individual by any means,
commits reckless conduct if he performs recklessly the acts which cause the
harm or endangers safety, whether they otherwise are lawful or unlawful. (Ord.
83-O-370, 11-7-1983)
9-9-5: FIREWORKS PROHIBITED:
No person shall possess, offer for sale, sell, expose for sale or use or
explode fireworks within the village, provided, however, that the village board
of trustees may grant a permit for the explosion of fireworks for a public
display under such conditions as it deems appropriate in accordance with 425
Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/2.
For the purposes of this section, the term "fireworks" shall have the meaning
ascribed to it in 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-7-
1983)
9-9-6: LITTERING PROHIBITED:
The offense of littering is hereby prohibited. For the purposes of this
section, the term "litter" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 415
Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/3. No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw,
discard, leave, cause or commit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing,
discarding or leaving of litter upon any public or private property within this
village, or upon or into any river, lake, pond or other stream or body of water
within this village unless:
   A.   The property has been designated by the state or any of its agencies,
political subdivisions, units of local government or school districts for the
disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that property in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the pollution control
board;
   B.   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended by
the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of
litter;
   C.   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property
or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession,
or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant
and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, or a
fire hazard;
   D.   The person is acting under the direction of proper public officials
during special cleanup days; or
   E.   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency situation
where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly disposes of
such litter when the emergency situation no longer exists.
No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which the
person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as to
constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be blown
or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of another
person. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-7-1983)
9-9-7: INTERFERENCE WITH PEACE OFFICERS:
Interference with peace officers is hereby prohibited. A person commits the
offense of interference with a peace officer when he knowingly resists or
otherwise obstructs the performance by one known to the person to be a peace
officer of any authorized act within his official capacity. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-
7-1983)
9-9-8: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
The offense of public indecency is hereby prohibited. A person commits the
offense of public indecency if he is of the age of seventeen (17) years or
older and he performs any of the following acts in a public place:
   A.   An act of sexual intercourse; or
   B.   An act of devious sexual conduct; or
   C.   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy
the sexual desire of the person; or
   D.   A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either sex.
A public place, for the purposes of this section, means any place where the
conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-
7-1983)
9-9-9: CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS:
   A.   Definitions: Whenever used in this section:
    CURFEW HOURS: Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day; and
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on any Friday or Saturday and until six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. of the following day.
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN: A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of
a minor; or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
   OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT: A person who is: a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of
another person; or at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
   REMAIN: To linger or stay; or fail to leave premises when requested to do so
by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.
   B.   Offenses:
      1.   A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours.
      2.   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew
hours.
      3.   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
   C.   Defenses:
      1.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section
that the minor was:
         a.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
         b.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         c.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         d.   Involved in an emergency;
         e.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a unit of government, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the minor;
         f.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly;
         g.   Is married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under
the emancipation of mature minors act, as amended.
      2.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B3 of this section
that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   D.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
subsection C of this section is present. (Ord. 04-O-899, 4-5-2004)
9-9-9-1: POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY MINORS:
   A.   Prohibited: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years may
purchase, receive, accept, have in his possession or control, or imbibe any
alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this section alcoholic beverages shall
mean and include any alcoholic beverage as defined in an act relating to
alcoholic liquors approved January 21, 1934, as amended 1 .
   B.   Permitting Violation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
suffer, permit, or allow the violation of the provisions of the preceding
section in any motor vehicle, conveyance, house, apartment, room, shed, yard,
or area of which such person is the owner, lessee, permittee, bailee, or legal
possessor or occupier thereof.
   C.   Exceptions: Nothing contained herein shall be applicable to persons
under the age of twenty one (21) years:
      1.   Participating in a religious ceremony.
      2.   In the presence of and with the approval of their parent or legal
guardian in the privacy of a home. (Ord. 88-O-478, 7-11-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
9-9-9-2: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS:
   A.   Cannabis defined. The term "cannabis" as used within this Code shall
mean and include marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified
as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including derivatives
or subspecies, such as indicia, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or
not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivates, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however "cannabis" does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it), fiber,
oil, cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination. "Cannabis" does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act. "Cannabis" also includes concentrate
and cannabis-infused products.
   B.   Cannabis possession.
      1.   It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person who is
twenty-one (21) years of age or older to knowingly possess cannabis, as defined
in Section
9-9-1,
9-9-9-2(A), in excess of the following quantities:
         a.   Thirty (30) grams of cannabis flower;
         b.   No more than five hundred (500) milligrams of THC contained in
cannabis-infused product;
         c.   Five (5) grams of cannabis concentrate; and
      2.   The possession limits found in subsections (A) of this Section are
to be considered cumulative.
      3.   No person shall knowingly obtain, seek to obtain, or possess an
amount of cannabis from a dispensing organization or craft grower that would
cause him or her to exceed the possession limit under the Section, including
cannabis that is cultivated by a person under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.) or obtained under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et. seq.).
      4.   For registered qualifying patients, any cannabis produced by
cannabis plants grown under subsection (b) of Section 10-5 of the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, shall be allowed provided that any amount of cannabis
produced in excess of 30 grams of raw cannabis or its equivalent must remain
secured within the residence or residential property in which it was grown.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to possess any amount of cannabis and any person under the age of twenty-
one (21) with cannabis in his or her possession is guilty of a civil law
violation except when otherwise authorized by law.
      6.   It shall be unlawful for any person, regardless of age, to possess
cannabis:
         a.   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         b.   On the grounds of any preschool or primary secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         c.   In any correctional facility;
         d.   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving;
         e.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
         f.   In any public place; or
         g.   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under twenty-one
(21) years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
      7.   It shall be unlawful for any person, regardless of age, to:
         a.   Smoke cannabis in any place where smoking is prohibited under the
Smoke Free Illinois Act;
         b.   Operate, navigate, or be in actual physical control of any motor
vehicle, aircraft, or motorboat while using or under the influence of cannabis
in violation of Section 11-501 or 11-502.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
         c.   Facilitate the use of cannabis by any person who is not allowed
to use cannabis under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         d.   Transfer cannabis to any person contrary to the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act;
         e.   As a parent or guardian to knowingly permit his or her residence
or any other private property under his or her control, or any vehicle under
his or her control to permit the consumption of cannabis by a person under
twenty-one (21) years of age.
As used in this Section, "public place" means any place where a person could
reasonably be expected to be observed by others. "Public place" includes all
parts of buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the State or a unit
of local government. "Public place" does not include a private residence unless
the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or
other similar social service care on the premises. (Ord. 02-O-852, 6-3-2002;
amd. Ord. 20-O-001, 1-21-2020)
9-9-9-3: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Possession of Drug Paraphernalia: Except as otherwise provided in the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.) or the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.), it shall be
unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance as defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. and
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
   B.   Manufacture, Sale or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia: Except as
otherwise provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et
seq.) or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/
1 et seq.), it is unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, offer for sale,
display, furnish, deliver, possess with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia,
knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will
be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance as defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. and 720 ILCS
570/100 et seq.
   C.   Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia: Except as otherwise provided in
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.) or the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.), it
is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or
other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in
part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia. (Ord. 02-O-852, 6-3-2002; amd. Ord. 20-O-001, 1-21-2020)
9-9-10: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined a sum as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 83-O-370, 11-7-1983; amd. Ord. 95-O-
707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 10
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
9-10-1: Incorporation Of Provisions
9-10-1: INCORPORATION OF PROVISIONS:
The Lake County Board of Health Ordinance, article X, Animal/Rabies Control,
approved as amended by the Lake County Board of Health, January 10, 1995 is
hereby expressly incorporated in the Village Code as if fully set forth herein.
Copies of said Animal Control Ordinance are available for purchase or
inspection at the Village Office during normal business hours.
   A.   Vicious Animals: Reference is hereby made to subsection
8-1-1B of this Code. (Ord. 95-O-709, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 11
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED
SECTION:
9-11-1: Findings
9-11-2: Definitions
9-11-3: Prohibition In Public Places, Places Of Employment And Governmental
Vehicles
9-11-4: Posting Of Signs; Removal Of Ashtrays
9-11-5: Smoking Prohibited In Dormitories
9-11-6: Designation Of Other Nonsmoking Areas
9-11-7: Exemptions
9-11-8: Violations
9-11-9: Injunctions
9-11-10: Discrimination
9-11-11: Entrances, Exits, Windows And Ventilation Intakes
9-11-1: FINDINGS:
The village hereby adopts the findings of the Illinois general assembly as set
forth in 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 82/5. (Ord. 08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
9-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following items shall have the following
meanings:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten percent
(10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
"Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her
services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, or
b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies
and corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer
that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course
of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of
employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in section
9-11-11 of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows
that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference rooms and classrooms;
break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home
based business, unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult
care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of
employment".
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: a) has been in active and
continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to January 1, 2008,
whether incorporated or not, b) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building
or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, c) is
operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political,
benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and d) only sells
alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this
definition, "private club" means an organization that is managed by a board of
directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an
annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its
activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal
income tax as a club under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the
public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in
part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, or any other public
entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a
minimum distance, as set forth in section
9-11-11 of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows
that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited. A "public place" does not include a private residence unless the
private residence is used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, or other
similar social service care on the premises. A "public place" includes, but is
not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial
establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls,
public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums,
enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools,
exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming
facilities, all village owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and
vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the state or state subcontract,
healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service
establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas,
public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars,
taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel,
resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation
that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT:
   A.   An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops,
cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that
gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and
   B.   A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the
restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty
percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or
herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning
tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco
department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment
with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any
kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other
lighted smoking equipment. (Ord. 08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
9-11-3: PROHIBITION IN PUBLIC PLACES, PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT AND GOVERNMENTAL
VEHICLES:
No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment or within
fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No
person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the village.
Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless
specifically exempted by section
9-11-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
9-11-4: POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS:
   A.   "No Smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol, consisting
of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each
public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this
chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that
place.
   B.   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly
stating that smoking is prohibited.
   C.   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited
by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control
of the area. (Ord. 08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
9-11-5: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN DORMITORIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is prohibited in
any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping
rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways, of a
building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and
operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of higher
education. (Ord. 08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
9-11-6: DESIGNATION OF OTHER NONSMOKING AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any employer, owner,
occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public
place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of a public place
or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is
also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall
conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in
subsections
9-11-4A and B of this chapter. (Ord. 08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
9-11-7: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is allowed in the
following areas:
   A.   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a childcare,
adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based business open to
the public.
   B.   Retail tobacco stores as defined in section
9-11-2 of this chapter prior to January 1, 2008. The retail tobacco store shall
annually file with the Kildeer village clerk, by January 31 of each year,
including 2008, an affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income derived
from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes
and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories.
Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after the effective date hereof
may only qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding structure
occupied solely by the business and smoke from the business does not migrate
into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
   C.   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
   D.   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may
be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking
or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional
nonsmoking rooms. (Ord. 08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
9-11-8: VIOLATIONS:
A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who violates
section
9-11-3 of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to this section. Each day that a
violation occurs is a separate violation.
A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under section
9-11-3 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount that is not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or
place of employment that violates section
9-11-3 of this chapter shall be fined: a) not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for the first violation, b) not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within one year after the first
violation, and c) not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
for each additional violation within one year after the first violation. (Ord.
08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
9-11-9: INJUNCTIONS:
The village may institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin violations
of this chapter which take place within the village's corporate boundaries.
(Ord. 08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
9-11-10: DISCRIMINATION:
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the
exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
9-11-11: ENTRANCES, EXITS, WINDOWS AND VENTILATION INTAKES:
Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter so as to ensure
that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open
windows, or other means. (Ord. 08-O-1002, 2-4-2008)
CHAPTER 12
REGULATION OF UNSCHEDULED BUS STOPS
SECTION:
9-12-1: Definitions
9-12-2: No Unscheduled Bus Stops
9-12-3: Application
9-12-4: Application Approval
9-12-5: Violations
9-12-6: Penalties
9-12-7: Seizure And Impoundment Of Bus
9-12-8: Administrative Tow Hearing
9-12-9: Requirements For Recovery Of A Seized And Impounded Bus
9-12-10: Posting Fee
9-12-11: Disposition Of An Unclaimed Bus
9-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
stated in this Section:
 
                             A request for approval to make a bus stop in the
APPLICATION:                 Village of Kildeer on a form to be provided by the
                             Village's Police Department that meets all the
                             requirements of this Chapter 9-12.
                             A written notice signed by the Chief of the Police
APPROVAL:                    Department or his designee which approves an
                             Application submitted in conformance with this
                             Chapter 9-12.
                             Any type of motor vehicle that is designed to
                             carry, or is actually carrying, more than ten (10)
                             individuals. For the purposes of this Chapter, Bus
                             shall not include a bus operated by a School
BUS:                         District, Park District, organizations
                             representing sporting events or other scheduled
                             events in the Village, or unit of local government
                             created pursuant to the Illinois Compiled
                             Statutes, which is transporting passengers to
                             locations and/or events in the Village.
CHIEF:                       The Chief of the Village's Police Department.
                             Bus service that operates trips involving the
                             dropping off of passengers in the Village on a
REGULARLY SCHEDULED SERVICE: predictable and recurring basis, following a
                             schedule that is published in advance and
                             available to the general public, and provides
                             service in exchange for paying a fare.
                             Any location in the Village of Kildeer where
                             individuals are dropped off by a Bus that is not
UNSCHEDULED BUS STOP:        providing regularly scheduled service and not
                             operating pursuant to the written approval of the
                             Chief pursuant to this Chapter 9-12.
 
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
9-12-2: NO UNSCHEDULED BUS STOPS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner, operator, or driver of
any Bus to make an Unscheduled Bus Stop for the purpose of dropping off
passengers in the Village of Kildeer.
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
9-12-3: APPLICATION:
The owner, operator, or driver of any Bus that is not providing Regularly
Scheduled Service that desires to make a Bus stop to drop off passengers in the
Village of Kildeer shall file an Application with the Chief using a form to be
prepared by the Chief. The completed Application and all required information
shall be submitted to the Chief at least five (5) calendar days prior to the
date of the proposed drop-off date. The Application shall include and provide
the following information:
   A.   The full name, full address, email address, and telephone numbers of
the Owner, Operator, and Driver of the Bus. The mobile phone number of the
driver of the Bus shall also be provided.
   B.   The full name, full address, email address, mobile and land-line
telephone numbers of the entity or individuals that has either directed, paid
for, or financed the transport of persons to be dropped off in the Village of
Kildeer by the Bus.
   C.   The full name of all persons that are proposed to be dropped off in the
Village of Kildeer along with copies of ID's for said persons to the extent
such ID's exist or are in the possession of the passengers. Such ID's must be
issued by a government that is recognized by the United States government and
the dates of validity must include the present date.
   D.   Background checks of all persons eighteen (18) years of age and older
that are proposed to be dropped off in the Village of Kildeer.
   E.   The name, address, or location in the Village of Kildeer at which the
Bus proposes to drop off passengers.
   F.   The date and time at which the Bus passengers will be dropped off in
the Village of Kildeer which shall be from eight o’clock (8:00) a. m. to five
o’clock (5:00) p.m. on a Monday through Friday, excluding any holidays.
   G.   The name and address of all locations from which the passengers are
being picked -up for transport to the Village of Kildeer.
   H.   The full name, full address, email address, mobile and land -line
telephone numbers of all entities or individuals that shall be present in the
Village of Kildeer to meet the Bus and receive the passengers when they are
dropped off.
   I.   A detailed plan identifying how the individuals being dropped off will
be cared for, housed, and fed, either temporarily or permanently, upon being
dropped off in the Village of Kildeer. The plan shall include the full names,
full addresses, email addresses, and landline and mobile telephone numbers of
all persons that will be present at the date and time of the drop-off and
responsible for the care, housing and feeding of the passengers. The plan shall
be signed by the entity that agrees to be responsible for the care of the
individuals and at least one additional individual that will be present to
receive the passengers and responsible for their care. The entity and the
individual that will be present to receive the passengers and be responsible
for their care shall each by their signature certify that they will be
responsible for providing the actions detailed in the plan.
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
9-12-4: APPLICATION APPROVAL:
Upon receipt of an Application pursuant to this Chapter 9-12, the Chief shall
review same and undertake a review of the information contained in the
Application to verify its truth and authenticity. If the Application is not
complete, the Chief shall, in writing, advise the Applicant of the additional
items needed to complete the Application. If within four (4) calendar days
after receiving a completed Application, the Chief, provided he/she has not
received any information that the Application is false or untrue in any manner,
shall inform the Applicant that the Application is approved or disapproved, in
the sole discretion of the Chief which shall be exercised considering the
totality of the circumstances including, but not limited to, the best interests
and safety and welfare of the residents of the Village for the stated location.
The Chief shall further provide a telephone number to the Applicant or driver
to coordinate the arrival of the bus in the Village of Kildeer. The Chief is
hereby authorized to promulgate rules pertaining to the administration of this
Chapter as needed to maintain the public health and welfare. All promulgated
rules shall be published and available in pamphlet form to any applicant.
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
9-12-5: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a violation of this Chapter 9-12 for any individual or entity to
violate any of the terms of this Chapter 9-12 and/or engage in the following
actions:
   A.   The submission of an Application that is false or untrue in any manner.
   B.   The failure of any entity or individual that is responsible for the
care, housing, or feeding of any passengers dropped-off in the Village of
Kildeer to implement or perform the detailed plan pursuant to the terms of an
approved Application.
   C.   Making an Unscheduled Bus Stop in the Village of Kildeer.
   D.   Initiating any Bus transportation to the Village of Kildeer that
requires the approval of the Bus stop location without submitting an
Application or failing to obtain approval of an Application as required by this
Chapter 9-12.
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
9-12-6: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of, any of
the provisions of this Chapter 9-12, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) per
passenger nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per passenger for each
offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each
day upon which said person shall continue any such violation, or permit any
such violation to exist after notification thereof. The Village at its
discretion may enforce this Chapter 9-12 by:
   A.   A quasi-criminal action seeking the payment of a monetary penalty
adjudicated under the Village's Administrative adjudication system; or
   B.   An action seeking monetary and injunctive relief, including but not
limited to any costs and expenses incurred by the Village as a result of any
violation of this Chapter, filed in the Circuit Court of Lake County or any
other Court having jurisdiction over the violator.
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
9-12-7: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF BUS:
Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that a violation of Chapter 9-
12 has occurred the Bus is subject to seizure and impoundment in addition to
any other monetary penalty or other remedy that may be pursued. The police
officer shall, in the exercise of discretion, provide for the towing of the Bus
to a facility approved by the Police Department. Any police officer shall have
the authority to refuse to allow any and all passengers from disembarking the
bus and shall escort the bus out of our corporate limits.
Upon the towing of a Bus, the police officer shall notify or make a reasonable
attempt to notify the owner of record, lessee, person claiming to be the owner
or lessee, or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle
owner' s right to request an administrative hearing.
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
9-12-8: ADMINISTRATIVE TOW HEARING:
Within five (5) business days after a Bus is seized and impounded, the Village
shall notify, by personal service, first class mail, or certified mail, the
owner of record, lessee, and any lienholder of recorder of the owner's right to
request a hearing to determine whether a violation of this Chapter 9-12
actually occurred. The name and address of the person to whom a vehicle is
registered as shown on the records of the State in which the vehicle is
registered shall be conclusive evidence of the name and address of the owner of
record of the vehicle, unless the owner of record gave the Village actual
written notice of a different name or address.
In order to obtain a hearing, the owner of record must file a written request
for a hearing with the Village Clerk or the Police Department no later than ten
(10) business days after the date the notice was mailed. The hearing date must
be scheduled for a date that is no more than fifteen (15) business days after a
request for a hearing has been filed. The person requesting the hearing shall
be given at least five (5) business days' notice of the date of the hearing.
The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed in accordance
with this Code's Administrative Hearing Procedures. The owner of the Bus shall
have the right to be represented by an attorney; the right to notice of the
charges causing the seizure and impoundment of the Bus; the right to present
witness and documentary evidence; and the right to cross-examine all witnesses.
If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines, by a preponderance of
evidence, that a violation of this Chapter 9-12 has occurred involving the
seized and impounded Bus, then the hearing officer shall enter an order finding
the owner of record of the vehicle liable to the Village for the administrative
fees of seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00), which shall be in addition
to any other penalties, fines and remedy sought. If, after a hearing, the
hearing officer does not determine, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
the vehicle was used in violation of Chapter 9-12 of this Code, the hearing
officer shall enter an order finding for the owner and ordering the return of
the vehicle.
If the owner of record fails to request a hearing on the seizure and
impoundment of the Bus in a timely manner or fails to appear at the hearing,
the owner of record shall be deemed to have waived the owner' s right to a
hearing, and the hearing officer may enter a default order in favor of the
Village in the amount of the administrative fees. However, if the owner of
record pays such penalty and the vehicle is returned to the owner, no default
order need be entered if the owner is informed of his or her right to a hearing
and signs a written waiver, in which case, an order of liability shall be
deemed to have been made when the Village receives the written waiver.
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
9-12-9: REQUIREMENTS FOR RECOVERY OF A SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED BUS:
A vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter shall remain impounded until:
   A.   The administrative fees of seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) is
paid to the Village and all applicable towing and impound fees are paid to the
towing agent, in which case, the owner of record shall be given possession of
the Bus; or
   B.   The Bus is deemed abandoned, in which case, it shall be disposed of in
the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned vehicles.
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
9-12-10: POSTING FEE:
If a fee in the amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) is posted with
the Police Department, the impounded Bus shall be released to the owner of
record, and the owner of the Bus shall still be liable to the towing agent for
any applicable towing fees. If, after an Administrative Hearing on the seizure
and impoundment of the Bus, it is determined that the Bus was used in violation
of Chapter 9-12 the posted fee shall be forfeited to the Village; however, if a
violation of Chapter 9-12 is not proven by a preponderance of the evidence, the
fee will be returned to the person posting the fee. All money posted pursuant
to this chapter shall be held by the Village until the hearing officer issues a
decision or, if there is a judicial review, until a final order is entered in
the judicial proceeding in which review is sought.
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
9-12-11: DISPOSITION OF AN UNCLAIMED BUS:
Any Bus that is not reclaimed or is not subject to judicial review within
thirty-five (35) days after the administrative hearing officer issues a final
written decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of as an unclaimed
vehicle as provided by law.
(Ord. 24-O-002, 1-16-2024)
TITLE 10
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
VEHICLE LICENSES
(Rep. by Ord. 11-O-005, 2-1-2011, eff. 2-1-2011)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Speed Limits
10-2-2: Stop Intersections
10-2-3: Intersections
10-2-4: Signs Erected
10-2-5: Vehicle Weights; Road Closings (Rep. by Ord. 03-O-865, 2-10-2003)
10-2-6: Weight Limitations On Village Roads
10-2-6-1: Certain Vehicles Excepted
10-2-6-2: Special Permit For Excess Weight, Application
10-2-6-3: Officers To Weigh Vehicles
10-2-6-4: Penalty
10-2-7: Truck Restrictions
10-2-7-1: Restricted Routes
10-2-7-2: Exemptions To Restricted Routes
10-2-7-3: Violations
10-2-7-4: Severability
10-2-8: Aggressive Driving
10-2-9: Administrative Adjudication Of Vehicular Regulation And Automated
Traffic Law Enforcement System Violations
10-2-9-1: Purpose; Definitions
10-2-9-2: Adoption
10-2-9-3: Code
10-2-9-4: Administrative Composition
10-2-9-5: Procedure
10-2-9-6: Administrative Hearings
10-2-9-7: Additional Notices
10-2-9-8: Defenses
10-2-9-9: Final Determination Of Liability
10-2-9-10: Administrative Review
10-2-9-11: Nonresident Procedures
10-2-9-12: Schedule Of Fines And Penalties
10-2-9-13: Certified Report And Contesting Certified Report
10-2-9-14: Immobilization; Towing And Impoundment
10-2-9-15: Immobilization, Towing And Impoundment Of Vehicles; Eligibility
10-2-9-16: Judicial Review
10-2-9-17: Debt To Village
10-2-9-18: Judgment
10-2-9-19: Impact On Other Administrative Adjudication Systems
10-2-1: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle of any
kind upon any road within a residential area within the village at a speed
greater than twenty (20) miles per hour. The term "motor vehicle" as used
herein shall have the definition ascribed in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(Ord. 02-O-860, 10-7-2002)
   B.   The maximum speed limit for vehicular travel on West Cuba Road on that
portion thereof lying between Rand Road and Quentin Road is hereby established
to be twenty five (25) miles per hour.
   C.   The maximum speed limit for vehicular travel on East Cuba Road, from
Quentin Road to the territorial limits of the village, is hereby established to
be twenty five (25) miles per hour.
   D.   The maximum speed limit for vehicular travel on Long Grove Road, from
Route 12 to the eastern territorial limits of the village, is hereby
established to be twenty five (25) miles per hour. (Ord. 01-O-834, 7-2-2001)
   E.   The maximum speed limit for vehicular travel on South Krueger Road from
Illinois Route 22 to East Cuba Road, is hereby established to be twenty five
(25) miles per hour. (Ord. 02-O-860, 10-7-2002)
10-2-2: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a motor vehicle to fail to stop before
proceeding onto any of the following streets:
Amberly Drive going northerly at Long Grove Road.
Andover Road at the intersection of Andover Road and Middleton Drive.
Andover Road going northerly at Brandon Road.
Andover Road going northerly onto Exeter Road.
Andover Road going southerly at Brandon Road.
Andover Road going southerly onto Exeter Road.
Andover Road going westerly onto Hickory Hill Drive.
Boschome Drive onto Quentin Road.
Brandon Road onto Andover Road.
Buffalo Run going northerly onto Willow Drive.
Buffalo Run going southerly at Long Grove Road.
Buffalo Run going southerly onto Willow Drive.
Cambridge Drive going southerly at West Cuba Road.
Cliffside Drive onto Buffalo Run.
Creekside Drive at South Krueger Road.
East Chestnut Ridge Road onto Cuba Road.
East Cuba Road going easterly at South Krueger Road.
East Cuba Road going westerly at South Krueger Road.
Eleanor Court onto South Krueger Road.
Eleanor Lane onto Krueger Road.
Exeter Road going westerly onto Andover Road.
Exeter Road going westerly onto Middleton Drive.
Foxtail Drive going northerly onto Illinois Route 22.
Greenwood Drive going westerly onto Quentin Road.
Grove Drive going northerly at Valley Road.
Grove Drive going southerly at Valley Road.
Hampton Court onto Hickory Hill Drive.
Hawthorne Lane onto East Chestnut Ridge Road.
Heather Court going southerly at Long Grove Road.
Hickory Hill Drive onto Cuba Road.
Hidden Valley Road going westerly onto Quentin Road.
Highwood Road onto White Pine Road.
Hilandale Lane going northerly at Illinois Route 22.
Kirkley going northerly at Long Grove Road.
Lakeridge Court onto East Cuba Road.
Lexington Lane onto Middleton Drive.
Little Pond onto White Pine Road.
Long Meadows Drive going northerly at Long Grove Road.
Meadow Lark Drive at East Cuba Road.
Middleton Drive going southerly at Long Grove Road.
Pine Lake Circle going easterly at Quentin Road.
Plumwood Drive going northerly onto Long Grove Road.
Prairie Creek Lane onto East Cuba Road.
Providence Drive at Illinois Route 22.
Rebecca Lane onto Eleanor Lane.
Ruth Court onto Eleanor Lane.
South Krueger Road going northerly at Illinois Route 22.
South Krueger Road going southerly at East Cuba Road.
Stoneybrook Court going southerly onto West Cuba Road.
Tall Oaks Court onto Tall Oaks Drive.
Tall Oaks Drive onto East Cuba Road.
Tall Oaks Drive onto High Ridge Drive.
Thornridge Drive going easterly onto Cambridge Drive.
Thornridge Drive going westerly onto Cambridge Drive.
Tree Road going westerly at Highwood Road.
Tree Road onto White Pine Road.
Valley Road going westerly at Grove Drive.
Valley Road onto Long Grove Road.
Weatherstone Road going northerly at Long Grove Road.
West Chestnut Ridge Road onto Cuba Road.
West Cuba Road going easterly at Stoneybrook Court.
West Cuba Road going westerly at Stoneybrook Court.
White Pine Road going easterly at Quentin Road.
White Pine Road going northwesterly at Little Pond.
White Pine Road going southwesterly at Little Pond.
White Pine Road onto Chestnut Ridge Road West.
Willow Drive onto Buffalo Run.
Wooded Ridge going northerly at U.S. 12.
York Court onto Buffalo Run.
Yorkshire Road going easterly on South Krueger Road.
Yorkshire Road going westerly at South Krueger Road. (Ord. 75-O-211, 11-6-1975;
amd. Ord. 77-O-255, 12-1-1977; Ord. 87-O-460, 12-7-1987; Ord. 90-O-537, 5-7-
1990; Ord. 94-O-662, 6-6-1994; Ord. 95-O-703, 8-7-1995; Ord. 97-O-759, 11-3-
1997; Ord. 03-O-868, 2-10-2003; Ord. 03-O-871, 3-3-2003; Ord. 03-O-886, 11-3-
2003; Ord. 04-O-925, 12-6-2004; Ord. 07-O-988, 4-5-2007)
10-2-3: INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   Yield Intersections: It shall be unlawful for any driver of a motor
vehicle to fail to yield the right of way to any motor vehicle when said driver
is proceeding onto any of the following streets:
      Elder Court eastbound onto White Pine Road.
      Morningdove Court eastbound onto Meadow Lark Drive.
      South Boschome Circle Drive going south onto Boschome Drive. (Ord. 08-O-
1029, 12-8-2008)
   B.   No Left Turn Intersections: It shall be unlawful for any driver of a
motor vehicle to make a left turn at any of the following intersections:
      South Quentin Road to eastbound Boschome Drive (Monday through Friday, 7:
00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M., except for authorized vehicles). (Ord. 04-O-893, 3-1-
2004)
   C.   No Right Turn Intersections: It shall be unlawful for any driver of a
motor vehicle to make a right turn at any of the following intersections:
      Eastbound East Cuba Road to southbound Hickory Hill Drive (Monday through
Friday, 6:30 A.M. to 9:00 A.M., except for authorized vehicles).
      Northbound Quentin Road to eastbound Greenwood Drive (Monday through
Friday, 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M., except for authorized vehicles).
   D.   No U-Turn Intersections: It shall be unlawful for any driver of a motor
vehicle to make a U-turn at any of the following intersections:
      At or within two hundred feet (200') of the intersection of Quentin Road
and White Pine Road. (Ord. 07-O-985, 1-2-2007)
10-2-4: SIGNS ERECTED:
Appropriate signs shall be erected as provided by state statute at the
appropriate places to give notice to motorists of the above regulations. Every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the street of the intersection or in the event there is no
crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or in the event there is
none, then at the point nearest the intersected road before entering the
intersection. (Ord. 67-O-123, 2-2-1967; amd. Ord. 75-O-211, 11-6-1975)
10-2-5: VEHICLE WEIGHTS; ROAD CLOSINGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 03-O-865, 2-10-2003)
10-2-6: WEIGHT LIMITATIONS ON VILLAGE ROADS:
No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires shall be
operated, unladen or with load, when the gross weight on the road surface
through any axle thereof exceeds eight thousand (8,000) pounds, upon any street
or highway within the village, except those roads under the jurisdiction and
control of the Lake County highway department, the township road commissioner,
or the Illinois department of transportation. (Ord. 12-O-017, 9-18-2012)
10-2-6-1: CERTAIN VEHICLES EXCEPTED:
The provisions of this section
10-2-6 shall not apply to the following vehicles:
   A.   Emergency fire apparatus.
   B.   Equipment for snow and ice removal operations which are owned, operated
by or under contract with any governmental body while performing such
operations within the village.
   C.   School buses.
   D.   Public utility vehicles, as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/15-100.
   E.   Trucks used exclusively for garbage or refuse disposal and equipped
with self-compactors or industrial roll-off hoists and roll-off containers and
vehicles used exclusively for the collection of rendering materials when such
truck is picking up refuse, garbage or rendering material within the village.
   F.   Any other truck that has a valid bill of lading for a delivery or pick
up within the village, and it is reasonably necessary to utilize village roads
to get to or from the point of pick up or delivery; provided, however, that
this exception shall not apply to any vehicle which exceeds the weight limits
established in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111(a) and (b).
   G.   A combination of vehicles including a tow truck and disabled or towed
vehicle or combination of vehicles, provided that neither the disabled vehicle
nor any vehicle being towed shall exceed the weight limits under this section
10-2-6. (Ord. 90-O-547, 9-10-1990)
10-2-6-2: SPECIAL PERMIT FOR EXCESS WEIGHT, APPLICATION:
The village administrator or director of public works may issue a permit for
the traversing of village roads for a vehicle that would otherwise be
prohibited by the terms of this section
10-2-6 subject to the following criteria:
   A.   It is reasonably necessary for the vehicle to traverse village roads.
   B.   There is no reasonable alternative utilizing other vehicles or other
routes.
   C.   Good cause has been shown by the applicant.
   D.   The village is reasonably satisfied that the requested route and load
will not unduly damage or harm village roads or constitute a danger to the
health, safety, and welfare of the village and its citizens.
   E.   The load consists of an object which cannot reasonably be dismantled or
disassembled.
The permit, if issued, shall prescribe a precise route. It shall be for a
specific duration. It shall not be assignable. The permit fee shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 90-O-547, 9-10-1990)
10-2-6-3: OFFICERS TO WEIGH VEHICLES:
Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and
load is unlawful shall require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of
the same by either means of portable or stationary scales. If such scales are
not available at the place where such vehicle is stopped, the police officer
shall require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest available scale that
has been tested and approved by the Illinois department of agriculture. (Ord.
90-O-547, 9-10-1990)
10-2-6-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation of this section
10-2-6 including, but not limited to, a maximum axle or gross limit shall be
fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) and subsequent convictions by the same
person, firm, or corporation within a period of one year after the date of the
first offense, shall be fined in an amount not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 12-O-021, 11-
13-2012)
10-2-7: TRUCK RESTRICTIONS:
The purpose of this section
10-2-7 is to restrict truck traffic in the village of Kildeer to the maximum
extent possible to the system of state and county highways in order to enhance
safety and to promote the efficient movement of vehicles while preserving the
integrity of the residential communities. (Ord. 04-O-912, 9-9-2004)
10-2-7-1: RESTRICTED ROUTES:
   A.   Trucks, truck tractors, truck and trailer combinations or truck tractor
and semitrailer combinations over eight feet (8') in width, over thirty feet
(30') in length, or over thirty two thousand (32,000) pounds' registered gross
weight, and all vehicles transporting radioactive or hazardous cargo, shall be
restricted to the state or county highway system; provided, when such locations
are not immediately adjacent to a state or county highway, vehicles described
in this section
10-2-7 shall use the shortest and most direct route between the nearest highway
route and such departure or destination location, and such vehicles may not use
village streets restricted under this section
10-2-7, except when traveling directly between such locations and the nearest
highway or authorized truck route.
   B.   The local authority enacting any such ordinance or resolution shall
erect or cause to be erected and maintained signs designating "NO THRU TRUCKS"
at each end of that portion of any street affected thereby or at the entrance
to a subdivision, and the provisions of this section
10-2-7 shall not be effective unless and until such signs are erected and
maintained.
   C.   Village streets restricted under these provisions are:
      1.   West Cuba Road from Quentin Road to Rand Road/U.S. Route 12.
      2.   East Cuba Road from Quentin Road to South Kreuger Road. (Ord. 04-O-
912, 9-9-2004; amd. Ord. 21-O-011, 4-20-2021)
10-2-7-2: EXEMPTIONS TO RESTRICTED ROUTES:
The following vehicles shall be exempt from the restrictions set forth in
section
10-2-7-1 of this chapter:
Authorized emergency vehicles.
Public works, snowplows, and other street maintenance vehicles while in the
performance of their prescribed duties within the village of Kildeer.
School buses and other vehicles of public transportation.
Solid waste or refuse haulers while operating on scheduled routes within the
village.
Vehicles of public utility companies while operating on utility infrastructure
within the village of Kildeer. (Ord. 04-O-912, 9-9-2004)
10-2-7-3: VIOLATIONS:
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of this section
10-2-7, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such
violation and either may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm, or
corporation convicted of any such violation shall be fined for the first or
second conviction an amount as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code, and for the third and subsequent convictions by the same
person, firm, or corporation within a period of one year after the date of the
first offense, not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 04-O-912, 9-9-2004)
10-2-7-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this section
10-2-7 or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
remainder of this section
10-2-7, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances,
is not affected. (Ord. 04-O-912, 9-9-2004)
10-2-8: AGGRESSIVE DRIVING:
   A.   Offense Committed: A driver or operator of a motor vehicle other than
an authorized emergency vehicle, commits the offense of aggressive driving
when, in the course of operating a motor vehicle upon a street or highway, that
driver's actions include at least three (3) of the following driving behaviors,
either singly, or in combination:
      1.   Rapid acceleration.
      2.   Rapid braking.
      3.   Squealing tires as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
505.
      4.   Improper overtaking on right as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-704.
      5.   Improper overtaking on left as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-703 or 5/11-705.
      6.   Following too closely as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-710.
      7.   Excessive speed as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
601.
      8.   Two (2) or more successive lane changes within one thousand feet
(1,000').
      9.   Improper lane usage as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-700 et al.
      10.   Sounding the horn as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
12-601.
      11.   Flashing the headlights as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/12-212.
   B.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      2.   Any person convicted of a violation of this section, where such
driving actions resulted in property damage shall be fined not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      3.   Any person convicted of a violation of this section, where such
driving actions resulted in bodily injury to any individual shall be fined not
less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). (Ord. 03-O-886, 11-3-2003)
10-2-9: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR REGULATION AND AUTOMATED
TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM VIOLATIONS:
10-2-9-1: PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS:
   A.   The stated purpose of this section
10-2-9 is to provide for the fair and efficient enforcement of municipal
regulations through the administrative adjudication of automated traffic law
violations and violations of village ordinances regulating the standing and
parking of vehicles, the condition and use of vehicle equipment within the
village borders, and establishing a schedule of uniform fines and penalties,
and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
(Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-2009; amd. Ord. 11-O-005, 2-1-2011, eff. 2-1-2011)
   B.   For purposes of this section
10-2-9:
    AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: A device within the village of
Kildeer with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a
red light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an
intersection against a steady or flashing red light signal in violation of
section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code or a similar provision of this
code.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION: A violation described in section 11-208.6
of the Illinois vehicle code.
   DETERMINATION NOTICE: A notice of final determination of an automated
traffic law violation liability issued pursuant to section 11-208.3 or 11-208.6
of the vehicle code and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   DISREGARDING A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: A failure to stop and remain stopped
before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as provided for in
section 11-306 of the vehicle code.
   NO TURN ON RED: Where the motor vehicle comes to a complete stop and does
not enter the intersection as defined by section 1-132 of the Illinois vehicle
code, during the cycle of the red signal indication unless one or more
pedestrians are present, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past a stop
line or crosswalk where a driver is required to stop, as specified in
subsection (c) of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code or this section
10-2-9.
   RECORDED IMAGES: Images showing the time, date and location of an automated
traffic law violation produced or otherwise recorded by an automated traffic
law enforcement system on: 1) two (2) or more photographs, 2) two (2) or more
microphotographs, 3) two (2) or more electronic images, or 4) a video recording
showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the
recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor
vehicle.
   SECRETARY: The Illinois secretary of state.
   SUSPENSION NOTICE: A notice of impending driver's license suspension issued
pursuant to section 11-208.3 or 11-208.6 of the vehicle code and pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
   SYSTEM: Individually, an automated traffic law enforcement system or,
collectively, automated traffic law enforcement systems established in the
village pursuant to this chapter.
   VEHICLE COMPLIANCE VIOLATION: The violation of any regulation governing the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle or governing the display of village
licenses or stickers.
   VILLAGE: The village of Kildeer, Lake County, Illinois.
   VIOLATION NOTICE: An automated traffic law violation notice issued pursuant
to sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the Illinois vehicle code and pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-2009; amd. Ord. 10-O-015,
11-2-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
10-2-9-2: ADOPTION:
To accomplish the foregoing purpose, sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the
Illinois vehicle code 1  are hereby adopted in their current form and as they
may be amended from time to time for adjudication of vehicular regulation and
automated traffic law violations to the extent permitted by the Illinois
constitution. (Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3, 5/11-208.6 et seq.
10-2-9-3: CODE:
As used in this section
10-2-9, unless the context requires otherwise:
   A.   "Code" means any offense under the Illinois vehicle code (adopted by
the village under chapter 5 of this title) or a similar offense that is a
traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for a
reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 .
   B.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a vehicle to disregard a
traffic control device or turn on red in violation of section 11-306 of the
Illinois vehicle code. All violations must be reviewed and approved by a law
enforcement officer of the village. (Ord. 10-O-015, 11-2-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
 
Notes
1 2. 625 ILCS 5/6-204.
10-2-9-4: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The system of administrative adjudication of the foregoing ordinance violations
shall provide for a hearing officer, traffic compliance administrator and
hearing room personnel, with the power, authority and limitations as are
hereinafter set forth:
   A.   Hearing Officer: The hearing officer is hereby authorized and directed
to:
      1.   Preside over administrative hearings, as the adjudicator;
      2.   Administer oaths;
      3.   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production
of relevant papers or documentation;
      4.   Assess fines and penalties for any ordinance violation;
      5.   Make final determination of:
         a.   Vehicular standing and/or parking regulation violations
liability, vehicle compliance violations, vehicle sticker liability or any
other ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated pursuant to this section
10-2-9.
         b.   Validity of notice of impending impoundment.
         c.   Validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension.
         d.   Automated traffic law enforcement violation.
      6.   Provide for the accurate recordation of all administrative
adjudication hearings.
   B.   Traffic Compliance Administrator: For purposes of this section
10-2-9, the traffic compliance administrator, who shall be appointed by the
village president, is hereby authorized and directed to:
      1.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing, parking and compliance and automated traffic law regulation
violations;
      2.   Adopt, distribute and process parking and compliance and automated
traffic law violation notices and other notices as may be required under this
section
10-2-9 or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this
section
10-2-9;
      3.   Collect money paid as fines and/or penalties for violations of
parking and compliance ordinances and automated traffic law violations;
      4.   Certify copies of final determinations of standing and/or parking
regulation violation liability, vehicle compliance violation liability, vehicle
sticker violation liability and automated traffic law violation liability or
any other ordinance violation liability adjudicated pursuant to this section
10-2-9, and any factual reports verifying the final determination of any
violation liability which was issued in accordance with this section
10-2-9 or the laws of the state, including 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
208.3, as from time to time amended;
      5.   Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
section
10-2-9 as hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
6-306.5;
      6.   Review any final determination of vehicular standing and/or parking
regulation violation liability, vehicle compliance violation liability,
automated traffic law enforcement violation liability, validity of notices of
impending impoundment or validity of notice of impending driver's license
suspension, in an administrative review capacity in accordance with the
provisions of this section
10-2-9;
      7.   Review any final determination of any vehicle sticker violation or
any other ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this section
10-2-9;
      8.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created;
      9.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the
circuit court of Lake County or selecting or appointing an individual or agency
to act on behalf of the village in filing complaints seeking judgments for
unpaid fines or penalties and pursuit of all postjudgment remedies available by
current law;
      10.   Select or appoint an individual, agency or firm to tow and impound
vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this section
10-2-9 as hereinafter set forth.
   C.   System Coordinator: The system coordinator is hereby authorized and
directed to operate and maintain the computer programs for the administrative
adjudication system created, on a day to day basis, including, but not limited
to:
      1.   Input of violation notice information.
      2.   Establishing court dates and notice dates.
      3.   Record fine and penalty assessment and payments.
      4.   Issue payment receipts.
      5.   Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination
of liability, issue notice of impending impoundment, issue notice of impending
driver's license suspension, as directed by the traffic compliance
administrator, in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
      6.   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearance at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
   D.   Hearing Room Personnel: Hearing room personnel shall be qualified full
time police officers who are authorized and directed to:
      1.   Maintain hearing room decorum.
      2.   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the circuit court.
      3.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and
as directed by the hearing officer or traffic compliance administrator.
   E.   Appointments: The corporate authorities of the village shall jointly
appoint the foregoing positions, except the traffic compliance administrator
who shall be appointed by the village president. One person may hold and
fulfill the requirements of one or more of the above stated positions.
   F.   Compensation: Authorization for compensation for a hearing officer
shall be made by the president and board of trustees through the village's
annual budget process. Compensation shall be determined by the village
administrator with approved budget limitations.
   G.   Independent Contractor: A hearing officer shall be employed as an
independent contractor of the village and shall not be considered an employee
of the village. A hearing officer may be removed with or without cause by the
corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 2009-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-5: PROCEDURE:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicle standing or parking
regulation violation, vehicle compliance violation, vehicle sticker violation,
automated traffic law enforcement violation or any other ordinance violation
authorized to be adjudicated pursuant to this section
10-2-9 shall be in accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   Marked Intersection: An intersection equipped with an automated traffic
law enforcement system must be posted with a sign visible to approaching
traffic indicating that the intersection is being monitored by an automated
traffic law enforcement system.
   B.   Violation Notice: Notice of vehicular standing or parking regulation
violation, vehicle compliance violation, automated traffic law enforcement
violation or vehicle sticker violation or other ordinance violation shall be
issued by the persons authorized and shall contain information and shall be
served, and have evidentiary admissibility as is set forth in this section
10-2-9.
   C.   Authorization: All full time police officers as well as other
specifically appointed individuals shall have the authority to issue violation
notices.
   D.   Violation Detection: Any individual authorized pursuant to this section
10-2-9 to issue violation notices and who detects an ordinance violation
authorized to be adjudicated under this section
10-2-9 or a violation of any section of any village ordinance restricting,
regulating or prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles, the
vehicle compliance requirements, automated traffic law enforcement violations
or the vehicle sticker requirements shall issue a notice of violation thereof
and shall make service thereof as is set forth in this section
10-2-9.
   E.   Contents Of Standing, Parking And Compliance Regulation Violation
Notice: The vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation "violation
notice" shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
      2.   The particular vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation
violated.
      3.   Vehicle make and state registration number.
      4.   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
      5.   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
      6.   A section entitled "request for hearing" which shall clearly set
forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the
date and at the time and place as specified in the violation notice by:
         a.   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified "request for hearing".
         b.   Placing his/her name and current address in the place provided.
         c.   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
         d.   Filing the violation notice, with the request for hearing portion
fully completed, with the traffic compliance administrator postmarked by the
twenty fifth of the month, if the violation notice was issued between the first
through the fifteenth day of the month, or postmarked by the tenth of the
month, if the violation notice was issued between the sixteenth and the end of
the prior month. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic
compliance administrator.
      7.   The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the
violation may be contested on its merits.
      8.   That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty
shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.
      9.   A section entitled "nonresident request for hearing -
nonappearance", which clearly sets forth that a nonresident registered owner or
lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the violation notice without personally appearing by:
         a.   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified "nonresident request for hearing - nonappearance".
         b.   Placing his/her name and current address in the place provided.
         c.   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
         d.   Filing the violation notice, with the "nonresident request for
hearing" portion fully completed, with the traffic compliance administrator
postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month, if the violation notice was issued
between the first through the fifteenth day of the month, or postmarked by the
tenth of the month, if the violation notice was issued between the sixteenth
and the end of the prior month. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt
by the traffic compliance administrator.
         e.   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the traffic
compliance administrator postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month, if the
violation notice was issued between the first through the fifteenth day of the
month, or postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the violation notice was
issued between the sixteenth and the end of the prior month. The request shall
be deemed filed, if postmarked by the due dates herein specified.
         f.   A clearly marked statement that execution of the nonresident
request for hearing is a waiver of the nonresident's right to a personal
appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the notarized
statement of facts submitted by the nonresident and the facts contained in the
violation(s) notice(s).
   F.   Contents Of Automated Traffic Law Violation Notice: The automated
traffic law violation notice shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following information:
      1.   The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle or
lessee of the vehicle as indicated by the records of the secretary of state, or
if such information is outdated and unalterable, then the last known address
recorded in a United States post office approved database;
      2.   The registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the
violation;
      3.   The violation charged, namely disregarding a traffic control device
or turning on red in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code;
      4.   The location where the violation occurred;
      5.   The date and time of the violation;
      6.   A copy of the recorded image(s); (Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-2009)
      7.   The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the penalty
should be paid (14 days from the date of issuance), if a hearing is not
requested, and a statement that the payment of the fine shall operate as a
final disposition of the violation; a statement that a failure to pay the civil
penalty by the date noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed
against the owner or lessee;
      8.   The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of section
10-2-9-3 of this chapter may request a hearing by the respond by date on the
notice of violation (14 days from the date of issuance), to challenge the
evidence or set forth an applicable defense. The notice of violation shall
constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in
any proceeding alleging a violation of section
10-2-9-3 of this chapter. The notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in
section
10-2-9-8 of this chapter; (Ord. 10-O-015, 11-2-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
      9.   A warning that failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest
liability in a timely manner is an admission of liability and may result in a
suspension of the driving privileges of the registered owner of the vehicle;
      10.   A statement that the person may elect to proceed by:
         a.   Paying the fine and any late payment penalty and that said
payment shall operate as a final disposition of the violation; or
         b.   Challenging the charge by mail, or by administrative hearing at a
specific date and time;
      11.   The make of the vehicle shall be specified if the make is available
and readily discernable.
   G.   Service Of Violation Notice: Service of the violation(s) notice(s)
shall be made by the person issuing such notice by:
      1.   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully
standing or parked vehicle; or
      2.   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present.
      3.   With regard to automated traffic law violations only, mailing the
notice to the address of the lessee or registered owner of the cited vehicle as
recorded with the secretary of state within thirty (30) days after the
secretary of state notifies the village of the identity of the owner of the
vehicle, but in no event later than ninety (90) days after the violation. A
lessee shall be notified only if the leasing company/lessor provides the
lessee's name by an affidavit and a copy of the lease within sixty (60) days of
the notice's issuance. If the driver's information is not provided within sixty
(60) days, the leasing company/lessor may be found liable.
   H.   Certification Of Facts: The correctness of facts contained in the
vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s)
shall be certified by the person issuing said notice by:
      1.   Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time of service; or
      2.   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the traffic compliance administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his/her control.
      3.   With regard to automated traffic law violations, a determination
shall be made by the traffic compliance administrator that, based on inspection
of recorded images, the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of
section 11-208.6 or a local ordinance. If the technician determines that the
vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in order to
yield the right of way to an emergency vehicle, a citation shall not be issued.
   I.   Violation Notice Retained: The original or a facsimile of the violation
(s) notice(s) and any recorded image or correspondence shall be retained by the
traffic compliance administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary course of
business.
   J.   Prima Facie Evidence Of Correctness: Any violation(s) notice(s) issued,
signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, or any
recorded image, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence
of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
   K.   Admissibility In Legal Proceedings: Violation(s) notice(s) or a copy
(ies) or any recorded image shall be admissible in any subsequent
administrative or legal proceeding.
   L.   Confidentiality: Recorded images made by an automated traffic law
enforcement system are confidential and shall be made available only to the
alleged violator and governmental and law enforcement agencies for purposes of
adjudicating a violation of this section
10-2-9, for statistical purposes, or for other governmental purposes. (Ord. 09-
1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
   A.   An administrative hearing to adjudicate any alleged ordinance violation
on its merits, or to contest the validity of a notice of impending impoundment
or the validity of a notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be:
      1.   Granted to the registered owner or operator of the cited vehicle,
pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 and 5/11-208.6, or the
lessee of the cited vehicle, pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
1306, incorporated herein by reference;
      2.   At the date, time and place as is set forth in the violation notice
issued and served, the second notice issued in accordance with this section
10-2-9 or as is set by the traffic compliance administrator and served upon the
registered owner, operator or lessee for hearings contesting the validity of
notices of impending impoundment or driver's license suspension;
      3.   Recorded; and
      4.   Culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability, made by
the hearing officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony without the
application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. The hearing officer
shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in
accordance with section
10-2-9-12 of this chapter.
   B.   Persons appearing to contest the alleged violation on its merits may be
represented by counsel at their own expense.
   C.   The final determination of any matter which may be decided by the
hearing officer may be reviewed as is set forth in this section
10-2-9. (Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-7: ADDITIONAL NOTICES:
   A.   Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle to
appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation or automated traffic enforcement violation(s)
notice(s) or upon final determination of violation liability, the traffic
compliance administrator shall send or cause to be sent additional notices
which shall be:
      1.   Sent to the registered owner of the cited vehicle at the address as
is recorded with the secretary of state; if any notice to that address is
returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in the U.S. post
office approved database or, under section 11-1306 of the vehicle code; or
      2.   Sent to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the address last known to
the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease; if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a
U.S. post office database; and
      3.   Sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
   B.   Service of additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   C.   The additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the
following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      1.   Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the cited
vehicle to appear at the hearing set forth in the vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation or automated traffic enforcement violation(s) notice
(s), additional notices shall be sent, as above set forth, and shall contain,
but not be limited to, the following information:
         a.   Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance or automated traffic enforcement regulation violation(s)
notice(s).
         b.   Particular standing, parking, or compliance or automated traffic
enforcement regulation violated.
         c.   Vehicle make and state registration.
         d.   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
         e.   Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current status,
other than paid in full.
         f.   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
         g.   Statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at
the time and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle
standing, parking, or compliance regulation or automated traffic enforcement
violation(s) liability for the cited vehicle violation in the amount of the
fine and penalty indicated.
         h.   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance or automated traffic enforcement
violation(s) liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure
to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any
unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the village.
      2.   A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance or automated traffic law violation(s) liability shall be sent
following an appearance by the violator and a determination of liability or the
failure to appear by the violator by the third and final hearing date upon
conclusion of any administrative and/or judicial review, as is hereinafter set
forth, and the notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information and warnings:
         a.   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a
debt due and owing the village.
         b.   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and
owing the village within the time specified may result in the village's filing
a complaint in the circuit court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a
judgment in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3(f),
incorporated herein by reference.
         c.   A warning that the person's driver's license may be suspended for
failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or
parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, incorporated
herein by reference or five (5) or more automated traffic law violations under
section 11-208.6.
         d.   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within
the village may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for one or
more vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) or one
or more automated traffic law violations under section 11-208.6.
      3.   A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license
shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine
or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violations or five (5) or more automated
traffic law violations.
         a.   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or
penalty owing within forty five (45) days of the date of the notice will result
in the village's notifying the secretary of state that the person is eligible
for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-306.5 incorporated herein by reference.
         b.   The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent
by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
secretary of state.
         c.   The notice shall also state that the person may obtain a
photostatic copy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a
self-addressed stamped envelope to the municipality along with a request for a
photostatic copy. (Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-8: DEFENSES:
The hearing officer may consider in defense of an automated traffic law
enforcement violation:
   A.   That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were
stolen before the violation occurred and not under the control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the violation. To demonstrate that the
motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen before the violation
occurred and were not under the control or possession of the owner at the time
of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a report concerning the
stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed with a law enforcement
agency in a timely manner;
   B.   That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the
light was red either: 1) in order to yield the right of way to an emergency
vehicle or 2) as part of a funeral procession; and
   C.   Any other evidence or issues provided by municipal or county ordinance.
(Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-9: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
   A.   A determination of automated traffic law violation shall occur
following failure to pay the fine or penalty, or to contest the alleged
violation within fourteen (14) days of the notice of violation. Where a person
fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and
manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer will enter
findings, decision and order which is a determination of automated traffic law
violation liability which shall become final: 1) upon denial of a timely
petition to set aside that determination, or 2) upon expiration of the period
for filing such a petition without a filing having been made. If a person
appears at a hearing and is found liable or contests the violation by mail and
is found liable, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order,
which is a final determination of automated traffic law violation liability
that is a final, appealable order. (Ord. 10-O-015, 11-2-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
   B.   Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the third and
final administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged violation(s) on
the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed
notice, the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking or
compliance regulation or automated traffic enforcement violation(s) liability
shall become final:
      1.   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or
      2.   Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition without a
filing having been made. (Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-10: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation or automated traffic enforcement violation(s) liability
may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and
subject to the restrictions and grounds hereinafter set forth:
   A.   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be
filed in the office of the traffic compliance administrator within, but not
later than, fourteen (14) days from the date the determination of liability is
made. Said petition and any supporting documentation shall be sent to the
traffic compliance administrator via certified mail, return receipt requested,
or personal delivery.
   B.   The traffic compliance administrator shall act upon the petitions
timely filed and render a decision thereon within fourteen (14) days of the
date filed.
   C.   The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be
limited to the following:
      1.   The person against whom the determination of liability is made was
not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the vehicular
standing, parking or compliance regulation or automated traffic law enforcement
system violation(s) notice(s) was issued.
      2.   The person(s) having paid the fine or penalty prior to the
determination of liability for the violation(s) in question.
      3.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   D.   Should the determination of liability be set aside, the traffic
compliance administrator shall:
      1.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, that the
determination of liability has been set aside.
      2.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of a
date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which
determination of liability has been set aside.
Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and the notice of the
hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address set
forth on the petition to set aside the determination of liability.
Service of the notice(s) shall be complete on the date the notice(s) is
deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-11: NONRESIDENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Nonresidents of this village who have been served vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation or automated traffic enforcement violation(s)
notice(s), in accordance with this section, may contest the alleged violation
on its merits, as could a resident, or may contest the validity without
personally appearing at an administrative hearing by:
      1.   Completing, in full, the "nonresident request for hearing" section
of the violation notice, served upon him/her pursuant to this section.
      2.   Signing the nonresident request for hearing in the space specified
in the violation notice and acknowledging that his/her personal appearance is
waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the notarized statement
filed by him/her and the facts contained in the violation notice.
      3.   Filing the violation notice with the "request for hearing" section
fully completed with the traffic compliance administrator postmarked by the
twenty fifth of the month, if the violation notice was issued between the first
through the fifteenth day of the month, or postmarked by the tenth of the
month, if the violation notice was issued between the sixteenth and the end of
the prior month. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic
compliance administrator.
      4.   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the traffic
compliance administrator postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month, if the
violation notice was issued between the first through the fifteenth day of the
month, or postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the violation notice was
issued between the sixteenth and the end of the prior month. The request shall
be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator. The
acceptance of a "nonresident request for hearing" after the due date or with
cause, at the discretion of the traffic compliance administrator, be accepted
for hearing consideration and decision.
   B.   The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set
forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as is
contained in the violation notice.
   C.   Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall be served upon
the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
   D.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail.
   E.   All other provisions of this section
10-2-9 shall apply equally to nonresidents of this village. (Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-
2009)
10-2-9-12: SCHEDULE OF FINES AND PENALTIES:
The fines and penalties which shall be imposed pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 and 5/11-208.6 shall be as follows:
   A.   For violation of sections hereunder, any compliance violation or
violation of any village ordinance regulating, restricting or prohibiting the
standing or parking of motor vehicles along the streets, byways, alleyways,
regulated parking lots or such other locations as may be controlled by off
street parking agreements, located within the geographical boundaries of this
village, other than for handicapped parking, the fine shall be:
      1.   From the date the citation is issued up to and including the first
hearing date, fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Upon failure to pay the fine amount by the date of the first hearing
date up to the second hearing date, seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      3.   Upon failure to pay the fine amount by the date of the second
hearing date up to the third hearing date, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
      4.   Upon failure to pay the fine amount by the date of the third hearing
date, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   B.   For violation of any village ordinance regulating, restricting or
prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles along the streets,
byways, alleyways, regulated parking lots or such other locations as may be
controlled by off street parking agreements, located within the geographical
boundaries of this village for areas specifically designated for handicapped
parking, the fine shall be:
      1.   From the date the citation is issued up to and including the first
hearing, $                .
      2.   Upon failure to pay the fine amount by the date of the first hearing
date up to the second hearing date, $                .
      3.   Upon failure to pay the fine amount by the date of the second
hearing date up to the third hearing date, $                .
      4.   Upon failure to pay the fine amount by the date of the third hearing
date, $                .
   C.   With regard to an automated traffic law enforcement system violation,
unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a uniform traffic citation from
a police officer at the time of the violation, the motor vehicle owner is
subject to a civil penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus an
additional penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for failure
to pay the original penalty in a timely manner, if the motor vehicle is
recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system. A violation for which
a civil penalty is imposed under this section is not a violation of a traffic
regulation governing the movement of vehicles and may not be recorded on the
driving record of the owner of the vehicle. (Ord. 09-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-13: CERTIFIED REPORT AND CONTESTING CERTIFIED REPORT:
   A.   The traffic compliance administrator, by certified report, shall
request that the secretary of state suspend the driving privileges of an owner
of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing
as a result of five (5) automated traffic violations or ten (10) or more
violations of vehicular standing, parking or compliance violations. The report
shall be certified and contain the following:
      1.   The name, last known address as recorded with the secretary of
state, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease, or
as recorded in a United States post office approved database if any notice sent
under this section
10-2-9 is returned as undeliverable, and driver's license number of the person
who failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number of any
vehicle known to be registered to such person in a state;
      2.   The name of the municipality making the report pursuant to this
section; and
      3.   A statement that a notice of impending driver's license suspension
has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with
the secretary of state or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited
vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this section
10-2-9 is returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a
United States post office approved database; the date on which such notice was
sent; and address to which such notice was sent. (Ord. 10-O-015, 11-2-2010,
eff. 1-1-2011)
   B.   The traffic compliance administrator shall take no further action
unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the village are paid or
upon determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified
report was in error. At such time, the traffic compliance administrator shall
submit to the secretary of state a notification which shall result in the
halting of a driver's license suspension proceedings. The person named therein
shall receive a certified copy of such notification upon request and at no
charge.
   C.   Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by
completing a form provided by the office of the traffic compliance
administrator. The form must be returned via certified mail, return receipt
requested, or via personal delivery within seven (7) days after the person
received notice from the secretary of state that the person's driver's license
will be suspended at the end of a specified time unless the secretary of state
is presented with a notice from the village certifying that the fines or
penalties due and owing have been paid or that the inclusion of the person's
name on its certified report was in error. The form shall specify the grounds
on which such challenge is based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the
following:
      1.   The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the vehicle(s)
receiving ten (10) or more violations or five (5) or more automated traffic
enforcement violation notices on the date or dates such notices were issued; or
      2.   The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten (10) or more
violations indicated on the certified report or five (5) or more automated
traffic enforcement violations.
   D.   The traffic compliance administrator shall render a determination
within fourteen (14) business days of receipt of the objection form and shall
notify the objector of the determination. (Ord. 2009-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-14: IMMOBILIZATION; TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Conditions Enumerated: Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has
been determined to be liable for one or more vehicular standing, parking or
compliance regulation or automated traffic law violation(s), for which the
fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized or towed and
impounded if:
      1.   The traffic compliance administrator has determined that a person
has been determined to be liable for one or more vehicular standing, parking or
compliance regulation or automated traffic law violation(s), the fines or
penalties for which remain unpaid.
      2.   The person determined to be liable for one or more violations is the
registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the village geographical
boundaries.
      3.   A pretowing notice has been sent to the registered owner of the
motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the village which
contains, but shall not be limited to, the following:
         a.   That a final determination has been made on one or more vehicular
standing, parking or compliance regulation or automated traffic law violation
(s), the fines and penalties for which remain unpaid.
         b.   A listing of the violations for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
            (1)   The vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation or
automated traffic law violation notice number.
            (2)   Date of issuance.
            (3)   Total amount of fine(s) and penalty(ies) assessed.
         c.   That the motor vehicle(s) owned by the person and located within
the village is subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the
fines and penalties are not paid within fourteen (14) days of the date of the
notice.
         d.   That the registered owner may contest the validity of the notice
by fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion of one notice
and by filing the request for hearing with the traffic compliance administrator
within, but not later than, fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice. The
request for hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic
compliance administrator.
      4.   The motor vehicle(s) of the registered owner to whom notice is sent
has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the
notice, and no timely request for hearing has been filed with the traffic
compliance administrator to contest the validity of the notice.
      5.   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity
of the notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment, the
traffic compliance administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to
contest the validity of said notice, by disproving liability for the unpaid
final determinations of parking, standing or compliance violation liability
listed on the notice, on the next available hearing date, but in no case shall
the hearing be scheduled later than sixty (60) days after the request for
hearing is filed.
         a.   The traffic compliance administrator shall serve notice of the
hearing date upon the registered owner.
         b.   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
         c.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed
in the United States mail.
   B.   Right To A Hearing: The registered owner of a vehicle(s) immobilized or
towed and impounded under this section
10-2-9, shall have the right to a prompt administrative hearing without the
requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties for which final
determination has been made.
      1.   The traffic compliance administrator shall serve a posttowing notice
upon the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed and impounded under
this section
10-2-9 which notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         a.   Date of immobilization or towing and date of impoundment.
         b.   Location of vehicle.
         c.   That the vehicle was immobilized under this section
10-2-9 for nonpayment of fines or penalties assessed for the violation of one
or more violations of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation(s)
for which the registered owner has been determined liable and notified of
impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.
         d.   Date of notice of impending immobilization or towing and
impoundment.
         e.   That the registered owner may contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and signing the request
for hearing portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing with the
traffic compliance administrator within, but not later than, fourteen (14) days
of the date of the notice which shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
traffic compliance administrator.
      2.   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the traffic compliance
administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next available hearing
date or if sooner scheduled by the traffic compliance administrator for good
cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than sixty
(60) days after the request for hearing is filed.
         a.   The traffic compliance administrator shall serve notice of the
hearing date upon the registered owner.
         b.   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
         c.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed
in the United States mail.
      3.   An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment is a final administrative decision
within the meaning of 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq.,
incorporated herein by reference.
   C.   Release Of Impounded Vehicle: A vehicle impounded pursuant to this
section
10-2-9, shall be released to the registered owner thereof, or his agent, upon
payment of the fines and penalties due and owing the village as specified in
the notice sent in accordance herewith and the payment of towing charges and
accrued daily impound charges or upon order of the hearing officer following
hearing contesting the validity of the impoundment.
   D.   Retain Services Of Towing Agency: The traffic compliance administrator
shall appoint or retain the services of an individual agency or company to tow
and impound vehicles in accordance herewith, provided:
      1.   The individual, agency or company is fully licensed according to
local and state law.
      2.   The individual, agency or company is fully insured.
      3.   The individual, agency or company has available a secured impound
area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of
this section, a "secured area" shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chainlink
or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize
or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles. (Ord. 2009-1032, 2-
3-2009)
10-2-9-15: IMMOBILIZATION, TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES; ELIGIBILITY:
   A.   A vehicle shall be eligible for immobilization under the following
criteria:
      1.   The registered owner of the motor vehicle has accumulated one
complaint or more issued by the village of Kildeer police department which are
not adjudicated, for which no payment has been made, or for which no appearance
has been filed within the time specified by the parking violation complaints;
and
      2.   The registered owner of said motor vehicle must have received notice
of eligibility for immobilization under the procedures listed herein.
   B.   Written notice of eligibility for immobilization shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the registered owner of the motor vehicle, at the address to which
the motor vehicle is registered, at least twenty one (21) days prior to placing
the registration plate number on the eligibility list. Notice shall be sent as
follows:
      1.   The address of the registered owner shall be determined from the
records of the Illinois secretary of state, or in the case of a vehicle bearing
a registration number of a state other than Illinois, from the records of that
state's registry of motor vehicles;
      2.   The notice shall state the name and address of the registered owner,
the state registration number of the motor vehicle, the nature of the
ordinances violated and the serial numbers and issue dates of the complaints
referred to herein; and
      3.   The notice shall advise that a person may challenge the validity of
the notice of eligibility for immobilization as set forth herein.
   C.   A challenge of the validity of the notice of eligibility for
immobilization must be made in person to the chief of police, or his/her
designee, only on grounds which would conclusively disprove liability, such as:
      1.   The person was not the owner or lessee of the motor vehicle on the
date or dates the complaints were issued; or
      2.   The fines or penalties for the violations cited were paid; or
      3.   The registered owner has not accumulated one or more parking
violation complaints which are unpaid, not adjudicated, or for which no
appearance has been filed.
   D.   Should no determination be made that eligibility of the motor vehicle
for immobilization be invalid within the twenty one (21) day period, the state
registration number of said vehicle shall be placed on the immobilization list
and immobilization shall proceed as follows:
      1.   A notice shall be placed in a conspicuous place on motor vehicle
warning that any attempt to move the vehicle while the immobilization device is
attached may result in damage to the vehicle;
      2.   The notice shall set forth the following procedures for release of
the immobilization device; the owner of the immobilized vehicle, or another
authorized person, may, within twenty four (24) hours:
         a.   Pay all fees for immobilization and penalties due on the
outstanding complaints listed in the notice of eligibility for immobilization,
or may pay a deposit prior to a hearing as provided herein; or
         b.   Present copies of appearances filed with the clerk of the circuit
court of Lake County on all outstanding complaints specified in the notice of
eligibility; or
         c.   Deposit collateral in the amount of the number of outstanding
complaints listed in the notice of eligibility for immobilization times five
dollars ($5.00), but not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), and execute
an agreement to present copies of appearances filed with the clerk of the
circuit court of Lake County on all outstanding complaints specified in the
notice of eligibility for immobilization within twenty one (21) days from the
date of the agreement. Such collateral shall be returned upon receipt of copies
of the appearances, but shall be forfeited if the owner does not present such
copies and the forfeited collateral may not be used to satisfy any unpaid fees
or penalties. Upon forfeiture of collateral, the motor vehicle involved shall
again be subject to immediate immobilization and no further deposit of
collateral as described in this subsection shall again be allowed as a method
of release; and
      3.   The notice shall warn the owner that the immobilized vehicle will be
towed and impounded if release is not obtained hereunder within twenty four
(24) hours after the vehicle has been immobilized and that the costs of
immobilization, towing and impoundment must be paid in addition to the
penalties due on the outstanding complaints listed on the notice of eligibility
for impoundment, or the deposit for a hearing as provided herein.
   E.   Within fifteen (15) days after a vehicle has been towed and impounded,
notice of impoundment shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the registered owner of
the motor vehicle at the address to which the motor vehicle is registered. The
notice shall state that the owner has a right to a hearing as specified herein,
and that if release is not obtained under the procedures herein within thirty
(30) days, the vehicle will be considered an abandoned vehicle as provided in
this section and subject to disposal as provided.
   F.   The fee for immobilization shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) and
the fee for towing shall be as invoiced; provided, however, that no fees shall
be assessed for any immobilization or tow which has been determined to be in
error pursuant to a hearing which shall be held under the following procedure:
      1.   A deposit of twenty five dollars ($25.00) on the immobilization fee
and twenty five dollars ($25.00) on the towing fee must be submitted within
twenty one (21) days of the receipt of a notice pursuant hereto, or twenty one
(21) days after immobilization, whichever is later, with a written demand to
the chief of police for a hearing on whether the motor vehicle was properly
included on the immobilization list;
      2.   The hearing shall be held before the village's hearing officer
within forty eight (48) hours of the receipt of the demand and the deposit
required, unless an extension of time is agreed to by the parties;
      3.   Failure to demand or to attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a
waiver of the right to a hearing. In the event of a failure to attend the
scheduled hearing, the deposit shall be forfeited and applied to towing or
immobilization fees specified herein; and
      4.   A hearing as provided in this subsection shall not determine the
validity of or otherwise adjudicate any citation or parking violation issued
relative to the immobilized vehicle but only shall determine the validity of
assessment of the fees for immobilization and/or towing. (Ord. 2009-1032, 2-3-
2009)
10-2-9-16: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation or automated traffic law violation(s) and final
administrative decisions issued after hearing(s) regarding vehicle
immobilization or towing and impoundment made under this section
10-2-9 shall be subject to the provisions of the administrative review law as
is set forth in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., incorporated
herein by reference. (Ord. 2009-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-17: DEBT TO VILLAGE:
Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in accordance
with the provisions of this section
10-2-9 and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
administrative remedies created under this section
10-2-9 and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures shall be a debt due
and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with the
applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation shall constitute a final
disposition of that violation. (Ord. 2009-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-18: JUDGMENT:
   A.   The traffic compliance administrator shall, following the expiration of
the period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought for a
final determination of violation, take all necessary action(s), execute all
required documents and appoint or retain any individual or agency deemed
appropriate to obtain a judgment against and collect monies from the person(s)
who has been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid and have become a
debt due and owing the village in accordance with the provisions of this
section
10-2-9 and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 by:
      1.   Filing a complaint in the circuit court praying for the entry of a
judgment against the person for whom a final determination of standing, parking
or compliance regulation violation(s) liability has been made.
      2.   The complaint filed by the traffic compliance administrator or
individual or agency on behalf of the village seeking entry of a judgment
against an individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to a final
determination of standing, parking or compliance regulation violations shall
have appended:
         a.   A certified copy of the final determination of the standing,
parking or compliance regulation violation(s).
         b.   A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the
final determination of standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s)
was issued in accordance with this section
10-2-9 and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3.
      3.   Nothing shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple final
determinations of standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s)
liability in an action in the circuit court against an individual.
      4.   Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money
judgments.
   B.   Service of summons and a copy of the complaint may be served upon the
person against whom a judgment is sought under the provisions of this section
10-2-9 by any method provided under 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203,
incorporated by reference, or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
provided the total amount of fines and penalties for final determination of
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) does not exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). (Ord. 2009-1032, 2-3-2009)
10-2-9-19: IMPACT ON OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEMS:
This section
10-2-9 shall not affect the validity of systems of administrative adjudication
authorized by state law and adopted by the village. (Ord. 2009-1032, 2-3-2009)
CHAPTER 3
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Purpose
10-3-2: On Street Parking Prohibited, Exception
10-3-3: Avoidance Of Prosecution (Rep. by Ord. 02-O-852, 6-3-2002)
10-3-4: Removal And Impoundment
10-3-5: Notice To Owner
10-3-6: Records Kept
10-3-7: Release Of Vehicle
10-3-8: Sale Of Vehicle
10-3-9: Liability Of Registered Owner
10-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted as an enforcement procedure for protection of the
public peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall
be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention
and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations, and for
the protection of the public rights in the use of village streets and
thoroughfares. (Ord. 78-O-279A, 11-2-1978)
10-3-2: ON STREET PARKING PROHIBITED, EXCEPTION:
   A.   1. It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle, vehicle trailer, or
combination thereof on any minor arterial street within the village. For the
purposes of this section, the following streets are hereby designated as minor
arterial streets:
      East Cuba Road
      Long Grove Road
      South Krueger Road
      West Cuba Road
      2.   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle, vehicle trailer, or
combination thereof on any street maintained by the village of Kildeer between
the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day of
the week.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle, vehicle trailer, or
combination thereof on any street maintained by the village of Kildeer during
any snow event where the accumulation of snow is two inches (2") or greater.
Such parking prohibition shall remain in effect for twenty four (24) hours past
the cessation of that snow event.
         a.   Any vehicle parked on the street in violation of this subsection
may be removed to a designated impound area by the Kildeer police department in
order to facilitate the snow or ice removal efforts on that street; provided
that reasonable attempts to have the offending vehicle removed by the owner
have been unsuccessful.
         b.   Any vehicle relocated on the order of the Kildeer police
department shall be returned to the owner only after payment of any towing and
storage charges accrued by the towing and relocation agency. (Ord. 10-O-008, 5-
4-2010)
   B.   Any individual violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 90-O-528, 4-2-1990)
   C.   It shall be unlawful to park an automotive vehicle in any place where
parking is prohibited and signs are posted to that effect or the parking area
is designated no parking through a paint scheme, such as red for a fire lane,
for any shopping center, school board property, hospital, church or apartment
complex which is subject to an agreement between the owner thereof and the
village, pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-209. It shall be
unlawful to park an automotive vehicle, which does not have affixed to it
registration plates or a decal, as provided for in the Illinois vehicle code,
for handicapped persons or disabled veterans, in any place where parking is
limited to handicapped parking only and the required signs are posted to that
effect or the parking area is so designated by the required paint scheme, for
any shopping center, school board property, hospital, church or apartment
complex, which is subject to an agreement between the owner thereof and the
village, pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-209. The terms
"shopping center", "fire lane", and "apartment complex" shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-209.
   D.   It shall be unlawful to park an automotive vehicle, which does not have
affixed to it registration plates, a decal or authorized placard, as provided
for in the Illinois vehicle code, for handicapped persons or disabled veterans,
in any place where parking is limited to handicapped parking only and the
required signs are posted to that effect or the parking area is so designated
by the required paint scheme. (Ord. 93-O-632, 1-11-1993)
   E.   1. Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful to park, stand, or
store any vehicle of the second division (as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes) on the property of a commercial planned development between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      2.   The police department is authorized to relocate any commercial
vehicle in violation of this subsection to a storage area at the sole cost and
expense of the registered owner or lessee of that vehicle. Such police
authority shall have the power and is hereby authorized to move the vehicle by
either private or governmental equipment to a storage area.
      3.   Second division vehicles (as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes) used primarily for the construction of buildings, fixtures, or
infrastructure of the commercial planned development are exempt from the
provisions of this subsection during the actual construction process, pursuant
to the issuance of a building permit for said construction. (Ord. 02-O-862, 10-
7-2002)
   F.   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any commercial cargo vehicle
to park, load, or unload such vehicle in the public parking area of any retail
or restaurant establishment except where such parking, loading, or unloading
area has been designated for the use of such commercial cargo vehicles.
The owners of any such described property shall erect or cause to be erected
and maintained, signage designating "NO TRUCK PARKING" at each entrance to such
property.
For the purpose of this section, a "commercial cargo vehicle" is defined as any
truck, truck tractor, truck and trailer combination, or truck tractor and
trailer combination over eight feet (8') in width, or over thirty feet (30') in
overall length, or over thirty two thousand (32,000) pounds' gross registered
weight, or any vehicle transporting cargo that is required to be placarded by
the U.S. department of transportation. (Ord. 05-O-926, 1-3-2005)
10-3-3: AVOIDANCE OF PROSECUTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 02-O-852, 6-3-2002)
10-3-4: REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Any vehicle parked on a village street in violation of this chapter and deemed
a hazard to traffic and the general public may, at the order of the police
department, be removed or caused to be removed at the sole cost and expense of
the owner of the vehicle to a storage facility. Such police authority shall
have the power and is hereby authorized to remove the vehicle by either private
or governmental equipment to a storage area. (Ord. 78-O-279A, 11-2-1978)
10-3-5: NOTICE TO OWNER:
Whenever the police department has impounded a vehicle described above, a
notice of such removal and the storage place of such vehicle shall be mailed to
the last registered owner of such vehicle, if the name and address of such
owner can be ascertained with reasonable diligence. Such notice shall state
that if the owner fails to reclaim such vehicle within sixty (60) days from the
date of the mailing, title to such vehicle will vest in the village and such
vehicle will be sold at public auction to be held not sooner than thirty (30)
days after the expiration of the sixty (60) day period contained in the notice.
A registered owner of a vehicle shall be presumed to be the owner at the time
the vehicle was observed parked in a village street and said owner shall be
responsible for the offense and the impoundment, except when the use of the
vehicle was secured by the operator without the owner's consent. (Ord. 78-O-
279A, 11-2-1978)
10-3-6: RECORDS KEPT:
It shall be the duty of the police department to safely keep any impounded
vehicle until such vehicle shall have been repossessed by the owner or person
legally entitled to possession thereof or otherwise disposed of as provided in
this chapter. The police department shall cause to be kept an accurate record
of the description of such vehicle, including the name of the officer from whom
such a vehicle was received, the officer employed to tow or have delivered the
same to said storage area, the date and time when received, the place where
found, seized or taken possession of, the make and color of car, style or body,
kind of power, motor number, serial number, number of cylinders, year built,
state license number, if any, equipment and general description of condition,
the name and address of the person redeeming said vehicle, the date of
redemption, and the manner and date of disposal of said vehicle in case the
same shall not be redeemed, together with cost of outstanding summons and the
towing and storage charges. (Ord. 78-O-279A, 11-2-1978)
10-3-7: RELEASE OF VEHICLE:
Vehicles impounded pursuant to this chapter will be released; provided, that
the lawful owner or person entitled to possession demonstrates adequate
evidence of a right to its possession and pays all storage costs incurred
thereby. (Ord. 78-O-279A, 11-2-1978)
10-3-8: SALE OF VEHICLE:
Whenever any vehicle so impounded shall remain unclaimed by the owner or other
person legally entitled to possession thereof for a period of sixty (60) days
from the day notice to owner was mailed, it shall be the duty of the police
department to sell such vehicle at public auction to the highest bidder for
cash, the time and place of such sale to be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village, not less than ten (10) days
nor more than fifteen (15) days from expiration of said sixty (60) days. Said
notice shall contain a full description of the vehicle to be sold and the time
and place of sale; provided, that any such vehicle not sold at the first sale
may be offered for sale and sold at any subsequent sale without further notice
or publication. The proceeds of such sale after paying all liens and deducting
all reasonable charges and expenses incurred by such officer charged with the
keeping of said pound, including the fees and charges herein specified, in
receiving, towing, keeping, preparing and giving notices, advertising for sale
or selling or otherwise disposing of such vehicle shall be paid to the village
clerk.
Whenever any such vehicle shall remain unsold for a period of one hundred
eighty (180) days from and including the day when the same shall have been
delivered to any storage area as in this chapter provided, any such vehicle may
be given to the use of any department of the village or other governmental
agency desiring the same.
No member of the police department, nor any other employee of the village,
directly or indirectly, shall purchase or participate in the bidding for, or
purchase of, any vehicle offered for sale as aforesaid.
If the vehicle shall be deemed by the police chief of no value or of
insufficient value to warrant storage and sale, and if no owner shall appear to
redeem such valueless vehicle within sixty (60) days after the mailing of
notice of its removal, which notice shall contain a statement that the vehicle
is deemed to be of no value or of insufficient value to warrant storage and
sale, and that it is the intention to dispose or destroy such vehicle, to any
owner whose name and address can be ascertained with reasonable diligence, or
by publishing such notice in the official newspaper once, at least five (5)
days before its destruction or other disposition. Such vehicle as above
provided shall be conclusively deemed of no value and to be abandoned property,
and there shall be no claim against the village nor any of its agents or
employees by reason of such destruction or disposition. (Ord. 78-O-279A, 11-2-
1978)
10-3-9: LIABILITY OF REGISTERED OWNER:
Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of this chapter,
prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be prima facie responsible for such violation and subject to
the penalty therefor. (Ord. 78-O-279A, 11-2-1978)
CHAPTER 4
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Definitions
10-4-2: Regulations
10-4-3: Equipment Required
10-4-4: Unattended Vehicles
10-4-5: Traffic Regulations
10-4-6: Penalty
10-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
OPERATE: To control the operation of a snowmobile.
OPERATOR: A person who operates or is in actual control of a snowmobile.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice in a
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.
10-4-2: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the following
circumstances:
   A.   On private property of another without the express written permission
to do so by the owner or occupant of said property.
   B.   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
   C.   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
safety of any person or the property of any other person.
   D.   Without having such snowmobile registered as provided for by Statute,
except that this provision shall not apply to the operation of a snowmobile on
the private property of the owner by the owner or a member of his immediate
family.
   E.   Within the shoulder or parkway only of any right of way (except for
crossing said street or streets) of any public street within the Village unless
the operator shall have a valid driver's license, or is accompanied by a
licensed driver, who is actually occupying a seat in the vehicle, and has on
display a snowmobile tag issued by the Village.
10-4-3: EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
All snowmobiles operated within the Village shall have the following equipment:
   A.   Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of
operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating the
vehicle, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass or similar device
on said vehicle.
   B.   Adequate brakes in good working condition and at least one headlight
and one taillight.
   C.   A safety or so-called "dead man" throttle in operating condition; a
safety or "dead man" throttle is defined as a device which, when pressure is
removed from the accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged
from the driving track.
10-4-4: UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a snowmobile to be
or remain unattended on public property while the motor is running or with the
keys for starting the vehicle left in the ignition.
10-4-5: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
Each person operating a snowmobile shall strictly observe all traffic signs and
signals and all other traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and
shall obey the orders and directions of any police officer of the Village
authorized to direct or regulate traffic. (Ord. 71-0-177, 12-2-71)
10-4-6: PENALTY:
Each violation of this Chapter shall subject the violator to a fine of a
minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per violation and a maximum of five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 71-0-177, 12-2-71; amd. 1981 Code)
CHAPTER 5
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
SECTION:
10-5-1: Adoption of Illinois Vehicle Code
10-5-1: ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE:
Pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-204, the Village hereby adopts
in entirety the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100
et seq., as heretofore or hereafter amended, and the same are hereby adopted as
ordinance provisions of the Village. Any violation of said provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code shall hereinafter be considered a violation of this
Chapter, and each such violation shall subject the violator, upon conviction,
to the same penalty as set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 93-0-632,
1-11-93)
CHAPTER 6
ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Definitions
10-6-2: Abandonment Unlawful
10-6-3: Notification of Abandonment
10-6-4: Removal of Abandoned, Wrecked, or Unattended Vehicles
10-6-5: Record of Vehicles Towed Away
10-6-6: Identification Procedure
10-6-7: Reclamation
10-6-8: Sale of Vehicles Seven Years of Age or Newer
10-6-9: Disposal of Vehicles
10-6-10: Disposal of Vehicles More Than Seven Years of Age
10-6-11: Report of Sale and Disposal
10-6-12: Proceeds of Sales
10-6-13: Liability for Damages
10-6-14: Impoundment of Vehicles
10-6-15: Presumption of Ownership
10-6-16: Penalty
10-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
described to them:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved
or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more, or is not fully licensed in
accordance with the State of Illinois Statutes and the Village Code.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle twenty (20) years of age or
older.
HIGHWAY: Any road, street, alley, or other public way situated within the
Village.
10-6-2: ABANDONMENT UNLAWFUL:
The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle, or any part thereof, on
any highway within the Village is unlawful and subject to the penalties as set
forth herein. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle, or any part
thereof, on private or public property, or other than a highway, in view of the
general public within the Village is unlawful, except on property of the owner
or bailee of such abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle or other vehicle, or any
part thereof, so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal by
or upon the order of Chief of Police after a waiting period of seven (7) days
or more has expired. No owner may keep or store on private property more than
one nonfunctioning vehicle, unless the private property is a licensed garage,
service station, farm, or auto repair facility.
10-6-3: NOTIFICATION OF ABANDONMENT:
When an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle
comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person within the Village
who is not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the
Police Department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the
Village. Upon receipt of such notification, the Chief of Police shall authorize
a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen,
or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely
keep the towed vehicle, and its contents, maintain a record of the tow until
the vehicle is claimed by the owner, or any other person legally entitled to
possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided in this Chapter.
10-6-4: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, WRECKED, OR UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
   A.   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway within
the Village twelve (12) hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by order of the Chief of Police.
   B.   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned, or partially dismantled
motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its
position in relation to the highway, or its physical appearance is causing the
impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway or private property
adjacent to the highway by a towing service may be authorized by the Chief of
Police.
   C.   When a vehicle removed from either public or private property is
authorized by order of the Chief of Police, the owner of the vehicle shall be
responsible for all towing costs.
10-6-5: RECORD OF VEHICLES TOWED AWAY:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the
Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed,
including a listing of the color, year of the manufacture, manufacturer's trade
name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number,
and license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall
also indicate the date and hour of the tow, the location towed from and the
location towed to, the reason for the towing, and the name of the officer
authorizing the tow.
10-6-6: IDENTIFICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   When the Police Department does not know the identity of the registered
owner or other legally entitled person, it will cause the motor vehicle
registration records of the State of Illinois to be searched by a direct
communication with the Secretary of State, for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
The Police Department shall cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the
Illinois State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the
Illinois State Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the
Illinois State Police files are searched with negative results, the information
contained in the National Crime Information Center files will be searched by
the Illinois State Police. The information determined from these records
searches will be used by the Police Department in sending a notification by
certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person, advising where the
vehicle was held, requesting a disposition to be made, and setting forth public
sale information.
   B.   When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the
registration files of this State, or from the registration files of any other
state, the Police Department shall notify the Illinois State Police for the
purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the Illinois State
Police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having
custody of the vehicle for notification of owner.
10-6-7: RECLAMATION:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale, or
disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled to
its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police Department
proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No
vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this Section until
all towing and storage charges have been paid. All such payments shall be made
by cash, cashier's check, or certified check.
10-6-8: SALE OF VEHICLE SEVEN YEARS OF AGE OR NEWER:
Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by the registered
owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty
(30) days after notice has been given as provided herein, the Police Department
shall cause the vehicle to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice
of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at
least ten (10) days prior to the sale, on the premises where the vehicle has
been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the Police Department
shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified
mail to the registered owner or other person known by the Police Department to
be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain
a complete description of the vehicles to be sold, and what steps must be taken
by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been
returned by the postal authorities to the Police Department, the sending of a
second certified notice shall not be required. (Ord. 83-O-364, 7-12-1983)
10-6-9: DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES:
When the identity of a registered owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of
age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this Chapter,
the vehicle may be sold as provided herein, or disposed of in the manner
authorized by this Chapter, without notice to the registered owner or other
person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. (Ord. 83-O-364, 7-12-
1983)
10-6-10: DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES MORE THAN SEVEN YEARS OF AGE:
When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as
specified in this Chapter, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of ten (10)
days for the purpose of determining ownership, the contacting of the registered
owner by U.S. mail or in person for a determination of disposition, and an
examination of the Illinois State Police Stolen Motor Vehicle files for theft
and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, if
disposition information has not been received from the registered owner, the
Chief of Police may authorize the disposal of the vehicle as a junk only. This
Section does not apply to antique vehicles, which are specifically excluded
from this Chapter. (Ord. 83-O-364, 7-12-1983)
10-6-11: REPORT OF SALE AND DISPOSAL:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police Department
is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when
the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this
Chapter, a report of the transaction shall be maintained by the Police
Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
(Ord. 83-O-364, 7-12-1983)
10-6-12: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle located within the corporate limits of
the Village is authorized to be towed away by the Chief of Police and disposed
of as set forth in this Chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition
after the deduction of towing, storage, and processing charges shall be
deposited in the Village General Corporate Fund. (Ord. 83-O-364, 7-12-1983)
10-6-13: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
No police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall be held to
answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered owner,
former registered owner, his legal representative, or any other person legally
entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or any other vehicle, when the
vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this Chapter.
(Ord. 83-O-364, 7-12-1983)
10-6-14: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
The Police Department is hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a private
parking space or lot to the nearest vehicle pound or authorized garage as
determined and designated by the Chief of Police under the following
circumstances:
   A.   When the private space or lot is clearly marked or posted with the sign
containing a warning "Private parking", "No trespassing", "Violators will be
towed away at their expense", or words to that effect.
   B.   When the owner or proprietor of the space or lot, or his authorization,
signs a written complaint for trespassing.
   C.   When the owner or proprietor of said space or lot, or his duly
authorization, deposits with Police Department a sum of money sufficient to
cover the minimum towing and storage charges to be incurred by the Village in
removing and storing of the vehicle.
Any person seeking to reclaim a vehicle impounded pursuant to this Section
shall first pay all towing and storing charges incurred by the Village. All
such payments shall be made in cash, cashier's check, or a certified check.
(Ord. 83-O-364, 7-12-1983)
10-6-15: PRESUMPTION OF OWNERSHIP:
The fact that an automobile which is illegally abandoned, operated, stored, or
parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie
proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such
violation. (Ord. 83-O-364, 7-12-1983)
10-6-16: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the terms of this Chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined a sum as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, and a separate offense shall be committed on each day upon
or during which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 83-O-364, 7-12-1983;
amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 7
INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
10-7-1: Inoperable Vehicles A Nuisance; Definition
10-7-2: Removal, Disposition Of Vehicle
10-7-3: Penalty
10-7-1: INOPERABLE VEHICLES A NUISANCE; DEFINITION:
The storage or parking of inoperable motor vehicles on public or private
property is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful. For the purpose of
this Chapter, an "inoperable motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle from
which, for a period of at least sixty (60) days, the engine, wheels, or other
parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels, or other parts have
been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of
being driven under its own motor power. The term "inoperable motor vehicle"
shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable
of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service
or repair operations, nor shall it include any motor vehicle which is kept
within a building when not in use, or historic vehicles over twenty (20) years
of age. (Ord. 83-O-365, 7-12-1983)
10-7-2: REMOVAL, DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE:
The owner of an inoperative motor vehicle shall remove and dispose of said
vehicle within seven (7) days of receiving notice from the Kildeer Police
Department, which states that such person is to dispose of any inoperable motor
vehicle under his control. The failure to dispose of said vehicle within the
prescribed time, after notice having been given, is hereby declared to be
unlawful and in violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 83-O-365, 7-12-1983)
10-7-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the terms or provisions of this Chapter shall,
upon conviction, be fined a sum as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have occurred for
each day during, or upon which a violation commences or continues. (Ord. 83-O-
365, 7-12-1983; amd. Ord. 95-O-707, 11-6-1995)
CHAPTER 8
VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-8-1: Definitions
10-8-2: Use Of Motor Vehicles For Unlawful Purposes
10-8-3: Seizure And Impoundment
10-8-4: Administrative Hearing
10-8-5: Disposition Of Impounded Vehicles
10-8-6: Posting Of Bond
10-8-7: Vehicle Possession
10-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
stated in this section:
BUSINESS DAY: Any day in which the office of the village clerk of the village
of Kildeer is open to the public for a minimum of seven (7) hours.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not
limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters.
OWNER OF RECORD: The recorded titleholder(s) of the vehicle. (Ord. 08-O-1027,
11-3-2008)
10-8-2: USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES:
   A.   Conduct Prohibited: Pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
208.7 a motor vehicle may be impounded whenever a police officer has cause to
believe that an individual has used a motor vehicle in the commission of any of
the following offenses and may be subject to seizure and impoundment by the
village, and the owner of record of said vehicle may be liable to the village
for an administrative penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00),
plus any applicable towing and storage fees prior to the vehicle being released
to the owner.
Violation Or Offense Statute Reference
Violation Or Offense                              Statute Reference
1. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the
commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an    720 ILCS 5/36-1
offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized
and forfeited.
2. Driving under the influence of alcohol,
another drug or drugs, an intoxicating compound   625 ILCS 5/11-501
or compounds, or any combination thereof.
3. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the
commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a     720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
felony or in violation of the cannabis control
act.
4. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the
commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an    720 ILCS 570/101 et seq.
offense in violation of the Illinois controlled
substances act.
5. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the
commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an     
offense in violation of:
   Unlawful use of weapons.                    720 ILCS 5/24-1
   Reckless discharge of a firearm.            720 ILCS 5/24-1.5
   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm 720 ILCS 5/24-3.1
ammunition.
6. Driving while a driver's license, permit, or
privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended
or revoked; except that vehicles shall not be
subjected to seizure or impoundment if the        625 ILCS 5/6-303
suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or
moving) or due to failure to comply with emission
testing.
7. Operation or use of a motor vehicle while
soliciting, possessing, or attempting to solicit  720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., or
or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as 720 ILCS 570/101 et seq.
defined by the cannabis control act or the
Illinois controlled substances act.
8. Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an
expired driver's license, if the period of        625 ILCS 5/6-101
expiration is greater than one year.
9. Operation or use of a motor vehicle without
ever having been issued a driver's license or
permit, or operating a motor vehicle without ever 625 ILCS 5/6-101
having been issued a driver's license or permit
due to a person's age.
10. Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a
person against whom a warrant has been issued by  625 ILCS 5/6-101, 5/6-303, or
a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer 5/11-501
charges that the driver violated.
11. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the
commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an     
offense in violation of:
   Theft and related offenses.                 720 ILCS 5/16
   Retail theft.                               720 ILCS 5/16A
12. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the
commission of, or in the attempt to commit, any   720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
other misdemeanor or felony offense, when so
provided by this code.
 
(Ord. 12-O-002, 2-20-2012)
10-8-3: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Whenever a police officer has cause to believe that a motor vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section
10-8-2 of this chapter, the police officer may cause the vehicle to be towed to
a facility authorized by the municipality. A reasonable administrative fee not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed by the village upon
the owner of record or the agents of the registered owner. For purposes of this
chapter, owner of record is the person or entity recorded with the Illinois
secretary of state as the vehicle owner or listed in the registry of motor
vehicles of another state. It is not necessary for criminal charges to be
filed, prosecuted or proven in order to seize and impound a motor vehicle
pursuant to this section. An administrative fee shall not be assessed if
verifiable proof is presented confirming that the motor vehicle was stolen at
the time the motor vehicle was impounded.
   B.   At the time the vehicle is towed, the municipality shall notify or make
a reasonable attempt to notify the owner or lessee, or person identifying
himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is
found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of
fact of seizure, and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's right to an
administrative hearing.
   C.   Any administration fee imposed shall be in addition to:
      1.   Any other penalties that may be assessed by a court of law for the
underlying violations; and
      2.   Any towing or storage fees, or both, charged by the towing company.
   D.   The administrative fee assessed shall be uniform for all similarly
situated motor vehicles.
   E.   The fees shall be collected by and paid to the municipality imposing
the fees.
   F.   The towing and storage fees, or both, shall be collected by and paid to
the person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle.
   G.   The municipality shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will
remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing, unless
the owner or lessee of the vehicle or lienholder posts with the municipality a
bond equal to the administrative fee as provided by ordinance and pays for all
towing and storage charges. (Ord. 12-O-002, 2-20-2012)
10-8-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
   A.   Within ten (10) business days after a vehicle is seized and impounded
pursuant to this chapter, the village shall notify, personally or by certified
mail, the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record of the owner's right to
request a hearing to challenge whether a violation of this chapter has
occurred. The owner of record seeking a hearing must file a written request for
a hearing with the village administrator or designee no later than ten (10)
business days after notice was issued. The hearing date must be no more than
forty five (45) business days after the date of the notice of hearing and shall
be conducted pursuant to the administrative hearing procedures set forth in
title 1, chapter 26 of this code. (Ord. 12-O-002, 2-20-2012)
   B.   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the
hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. In a hearing on the propriety
of impoundment of a vehicle any sworn or affirmed report, citation or ticket
that: 1) is prepared in the performance of a law enforcement officer's duties
and 2) sufficiently describes the circumstances leading to the impoundment,
shall be admissible evidence of the vehicle owner's liability, unless rebutted
by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
   C.   If, after the hearing, the administrative hearing officer determines by
a preponderance of evidence that the vehicle was used in violation of this
chapter, the administrative hearing officer shall then enter an order finding
the owner of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the village for the
administrative penalty.
   D.   If, after a hearing, the administrative hearing officer does not
determine by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in such
a violation, the administrative hearing officer shall enter an order finding
for the owner and for the return of the vehicle.
   E.   If the owner of record requests a hearing but fails to appear at the
hearing or fails to request a hearing in a timely manner, the owner of record
shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing and the
administrative hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor of the
village in the amount of the administrative penalty.
   F.   If the owner pays the administrative penalty and the vehicle is
returned to the owner, no default order needs to be entered if the owner is
informed of his or her right to a hearing and signs a written waiver, in which
case an order of liability shall be deemed to have been made when the village
receives the written waiver. (Ord. 08-O-1027, 11-3-2008)
10-8-5: DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES:
   A.   An administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall
constitute a debt due and owed the village. A vehicle impounded pursuant to
this chapter shall remain impounded until:
      1.   The administrative penalty as set forth herein is paid to the
village and all applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the towing
agent, in which case the owner of record shall be given possession of the
vehicle; or
      2.   A bond in the amount of the administrative penalty is posted with
the police department and all applicable towing and storage fees are paid to
the towing agent, at which time the vehicle will be released to the owner of
record; or
      3.   The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned
vehicles. (Ord. 08-O-1027, 11-3-2008)
10-8-6: POSTING OF BOND:
   A.   If a bond is posted with the police department, the impounded vehicle
shall be released to the owner of record. The owner of the vehicle shall still
be liable to the towing agent for any applicable towing and storage fees.
   B.   If an administrative penalty is imposed for violation of this chapter,
the bond will be forfeited to the village; however, if a violation of this
chapter is not proven by the preponderance of the evidence, the bond will be
returned to the person posting the bond.
   C.   All bond money posted pursuant to this section shall be held by the
village until the administrative hearing officer issues a decision, a hearing
has been waived, or, upon entry of a decision by the circuit court, if judicial
review has been requested.
   D.   The bond posted will be in the form of cash. Credit cards, personal
checks, business checks or traveler's checks will not be accepted. (Ord. 08-O-
1027, 11-3-2008)
10-8-7: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within thirty five (35) days after the
expiration of the time during which the owner of record may seek judicial
review of the village's action under this chapter, or the time at which a final
judgment is rendered in favor of the village, or the time a final
administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in
default, may be disposed of as an unclaimed or abandoned vehicle as provided by
law, provided, however, that where proceedings have been instituted under state
or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the subject vehicle may not be disposed
of by the village except as consistent with those proceedings. (Ord. 12-O-002,
2-20-2012)
