VILLAGE OF KIRKLAND, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-13 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-05, passed 9-15-2025
State legislation current through 2025 Legislative Service Pamphlet #2
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
OF
KIRKLAND, ILLINOIS
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
VILLAGE PRESIDENT           Ryan Block
TRUSTEE                     Brian Benes
TRUSTEE                     Jessica Fruit
TRUSTEE                     John Michener
TRUSTEE                     Erik Marshall
TRUSTEE                     Dan Chambers
TRUSTEE                     Sarah Ziegler
                            
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
VILLAGE CLERK               Leslie Scidmore
VILLAGE ATTORNEY            Matthew Walters
VILLAGE TREASURER           William Newkirk
POLICE CHIEF                Adam Davenport
FIRE CHIEF                  Chad Connell
PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT Jim Stark
 
Village of Kirkland
511 W. Main
P.O. Box 550
Kirkland, IL 60146
Tel.: 1-815-522-6179 / Fax: 1-815-522-3501
Email: l.scidmore@villageofkirkland.com
www.villageofkirkland.com
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
   
10.18   Amending ordinances
   
10.19   Code alterations
   
10.98   Procedure for settling and compromising ordinance violations; index of
minimum fines
   
10.99   General penalty
   
Appendix A:   Minimum Fine Schedule
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the Village of Kirkland shall be designated as
the Code of Kirkland and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT.  A person acting on behalf of another.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the village.
   CODE. The Municipal Code of Kirkland, Illinois, and amendments thereto.
   COUNTY. DeKalb County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of DeKalb County, Illinois.
(5 ILCS 70/1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.  
(5 ILCS 70/1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2)
   EMPLOYEES.  Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
Village of Kirkland.”
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of that officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(5 ILCS 70/1.08)
   FEE. A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a
business, profession or occupation.
   FISCAL YEAR. May 1 to April 30.
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at any
time after that date.
(5 ILCS 70/1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and
all bridges thereupon.
(5 ILCS 70/1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The President of the Village of Kirkland.
   MISDEMEANOR. Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5.
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(5 ILCS 70/1.12)
   OCCUPANT.  As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of the building or land, whether
alone or with others.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
Village of Kirkland.”
   OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(5 ILCS 70/1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the Village
of Kirkland. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include those persons in the
employ of a village as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.
(5 ILCS 70/1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, county, state or federal governments, officers and agencies thereof,
or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized public
official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   RETAILER.  Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in
small quantities direct to the consumer.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The village code hereby adopted, and
as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in Section 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Kirkland, Illinois.
   VILLAGE PRESIDENT. The President of the Village may be referred to as
“Mayor” or “President” of the village.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER.  Unless otherwise specifically defined, the
terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
(1983 Code, § 1-3-2)
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law,
except as otherwise provided by law it shall be:
      (1)   The proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, except as otherwise provided by law.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed:
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(5 ILCS 70/1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(5 ILCS 70/1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(5 ILCS 70/1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or
Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(5 ILCS 70/1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(5 ILCS 70/1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the President
and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as
those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(5 ILCS 70/2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context clearly
indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was not
intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of these codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the
Board of Trustees.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. These references
shall also include the designee or agent of the officer or office, unless the
law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Board
of Trustees or a certain village officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to the technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the village. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1)
   (C)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text
of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
      Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
§ 10.18 AMENDING ORDINANCES.
   Any ordinance amending this village code shall set forth the title, chapter
and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this village code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its
proper place in each copy of this village code. Each replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this
village code.
(1983 Code, § 1-1-3)
§ 10.19 CODE ALTERATIONS.
   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or
deface in any way any section or any page of this village code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement
pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the Village Board. The Village Clerk shall see that the replacement pages
are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the
Clerk. Any person having in his or her custody an official copy of this village
code shall make every effort to maintain this code in an up-to-date and
efficient manner. He or she shall see to the immediate insertion of new or
replacement pages when they are delivered to him or her or made available to
him or her through the office of the Village Clerk. The code books, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the
Clerk when directed so to do by order of the Village Board.
(1983 Code, § 1-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.98 PROCEDURE FOR SETTLING AND COMPROMISING ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS; INDEX OF
MINIMUM FINES.
   (A)   Notice of violation. All persons accused of violating or failing to
comply with any provision of the code of ordinances of the village or any other
ordinances of the village not reprinted within the loose-leaf volume entitled
“Code of Ordinances of the Village of Kirkland,” including but not limited to
ordinances relating to traffic control, shall be notified of the violation or
failure to comply in one of the following two ways:
      (1)   By arrest, or by the issuance of a formal complaint in the Circuit
Court of DeKalb County, which complaint shall require the appearance of the
defendant at the Circuit Court upon a noted day. All citations for moving
violations found in 625 ILCS 5/11 may require such an appearance. A violation
or a failure to comply commenced in this manner shall not be settled or
compromised, but shall proceed to a hearing at which the defendant may plead
“guilty” or “not guilty;” or
      (2)   By the issuance to the defendant of a “hang-on ticket.”
         (a)   A “hang-on ticket” may be issued for any ordinance found in the
village municipal code; however, “hang-on tickets” shall not be issued for
moving violations found in Chapter 11 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
         (b)   A violation or failure to comply commenced pursuant to the
issuance of a “hang-on ticket” may be settled or compromised as provided in
this section.
   (B)   Hang-on tickets.
      (1)   A person receiving a “hang-on ticket” may settle or compromise the
ticket by payment of the amount shown on the ticket or, if no amount is shown
on the ticket, then the amount of the minimum fine provided in this section for
the offense, at the Village Hall of the village within ten days after the
issuance of the ticket. If the ticket is not settled or compromised within the
initial ten-day period, it may be settled or compromised by the payment of
twice the amount of the ticket, or if no amount is shown on the ticket, then
twice the amount of the minimum fine provided in this section for the offense,
for a period of 20 days after the lapse of the initial ten-day period.
      (2)   In the case of failure to make payment as herein provided, the
officer issuing the ticket shall issue a written notice to appear and complaint
which shall state the name and address of the person, if known; the offense
committed; be signed by the officer; and request the person to appear at the
Circuit Court of DeKalb County at a specific time and date. The notice to
appear and complaint shall be served in the manner provided by the rules of the
Circuit Court of DeKalb County.
      (3)   In the event that the person fails to appear in court on the date
set forth in the notice to appear and complaint, the matter shall be referred
to the Circuit Court of DeKalb County for issuance of summons or an arrest
warrant and the setting of a date for a hearing.
      (4)   At any time during the initial ten-day period, the person issued
the citation can request that a court date be assigned in order to contest the
allegations. The failure to request a court hearing date shall constitute a
waiver of a person’s right to contest the allegations set forth in the “hang-on
ticket” as a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
   (C)   Payment of settlement. Payment of a settlement and compromise amount
shall be made to the village in person or by mail, and a receipt shall be
issued for all money so received.
   (D)   Prosecutions. Officers of the Village Police Department are hereby
authorized to refrain from initiating a prosecution for the alleged offense for
which “hang-on tickets” are issued until the expiration of 11 days from the
date of issuance of the ticket, as provided in this section.
   (E)   Index of minimum fines.
      (1)   This index in no way limits the right of the village to assess or
to seek a higher fine than is listed herein, or to impose or seek any other
remedy which is provided by ordinance or other law. The maximum penalty which
may be assessed in the event of any violation of the code of ordinances of the
village per offense is as set forth in §
10.99.
      (2)   The index in
Appendix A to this chapter is provided for reference purposes only. Failure to
include an existing or future minimum fine within this index in no way
invalidates the fine.
   (F)   Payment of fines.  
      (1)   Unless provided otherwise herein, all fines, forfeitures and
penalties, shall be paid on or before the tenth day after the receipt thereof,
to the proper officer collecting the same.
      (2)   Upon failure to comply with a final warning notice from the village
to pay the designated fine for a violation as described herein, the collection
of this debt shall be turned over to a collection agency, referred to the
Circuit Court of DeKalb County, or otherwise collected as prescribed by law.
The Chief of Police shall promulgate any necessary rules and regulations
regarding the implementation and administration of this practice.
(Ord. 04-18, passed 11-1-2004)
Cross-reference:
   Administrative adjudication, see
Chapter 96
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
village for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-
1.1
   Limitations on penalties, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1
APPENDIX A: MINIMUM FINE SCHEDULE
Minimum Fine Schedule
Violation Fine
Minimum Fine Schedule
Violation                                         Fine
Building Codes
   Compliance of fee schedule: distribution of Not less than $50 or more than $750
fees
                                                  Court costs and attorney’s fees for the proceeding and a minimum fine of $750,
   Continued non compliance                    in addition to a fee in double of the fees set forth in
                                                  Chapter 150, Appendix A
                                                  Not be less than $100
Disabled parking                                  nor more than $750
                                                  for each offense
False alarms
   Third through sixth                         $50 per false alarm
   Seven or more                               $100 per false alarm
Litter                                            $50
Limited parking
                                                  Not less than $50 nor more than $750, provided that any fine paid to the Village
   513 West Main Street                        Clerk within ten days of issuance shall be $50, and any fine requiring
                                                  enforcement in the Circuit Court shall be not less than $100
   Main Street prohibition of Ordinance 02-21  Not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense
Police
   Neglect of duty                             Not less than $50, not more than $750
   Resisting Chief of Police                   Not less than $50, not more than $750
Regulations of dogs and animals
   Barking or loud animals                     $50
   Control of defecation                       $50
   Dangerous animal                            $100
   Health regulations (as defined by ordinance)$100
   Vicious animal                              $400
Snow and parade routes                            Not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense
Storage of inoperable vehicles                    $50
Subdivisions
Traffic
   All other parking                           $50 Main Street - $35 all other streets
   Non-moving and equipment violations         $50
   Parking for disabled persons                $100
Water generally and stormwater drainage
   Turning on water service without permission $100
   Use of water from fire hydrants             $100
   Unauthorized sprinkling                     $100
   Unauthorized opening of water main          $500
Weeds and plants                                  $50
 
(Ord. 04-18, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
Cross-reference:
   Additional fines, in addition to the penalty sections of the respective
chapters, see §§
32.48,
32.49,
Chapter 74 Schedules I,
III and
IV,
75.05,
91.47,
95.02,
96.24,
130.22 and
150.06
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   VILLAGE GOVERNMENT
         
31.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
         
32.   VILLAGE DEPARTMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS
         
33.   TAXATION AND FINANCES
         
34.   VILLAGE POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE GOVERNMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Compensation
   
30.02   Freedom of Information Act Policy
   
30.03   Procedures for public discussion at meetings
Village President
   
30.15   Bond
   
30.16   Powers and duties
   
30.17   Emergency purchasing powers
Board of Trustees
   
30.30   Meetings
   
30.31   President Pro Tem
   
30.32   Order of business at Board meetings
   
30.33   Committees of the Board
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Village President. The Village President shall receive as compensation
for all of his or her services, a salary of $8,000 per fiscal year plus a
stipend in the sum of $500 per fiscal year for duties as Liquor Commissioner
payable in accordance with the village’s usual and customary payroll practice.
   (B)   Village Trustees. Each member of the Board of Trustees shall receive
as compensation for his or her services, the sum of $60 for each regular or
special board meeting attended payable in accordance with the village’s usual
and customary payroll practice.
   (C)   Effective dates. The salaries established herein shall not take effect
until such time as the term of the Village President and Trustees of the
Village Board begin following the next election, which term is more than 180
days following the date of approval of this ordinance. The salaries established
herein shall only be effective for those Trustees who are elected and whose
terms begin following the next election, and in elections occurring thereafter.
(1983 Code, § 1-5-7) (Ord. 12-16, passed 10-1-2012)
§ 30.02 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT POLICY.
   The Board of Trustees hereby adopts the Village of Kirkland Freedom of
Information Act Policy, attached to Ordinance 09-16, passed December 21, 2009,
as if set out in full herein.
(Ord. 09-16, passed 12-21-2009)
§ 30.03 PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC DISCUSSION AT MEETINGS.
   (A)   Public discussion shall be listed on each regularly scheduled Village
Board meeting and persons shall be allowed to address the Village Board as set
forth in this section.
   (B)   It shall be the policy of the Village Board that any person may
address the Village Board at its regular meetings under the public discussion
agenda item. Public discussion shall be limited to three minutes per speaker on
any matter pertinent to issues or matters relating to the village. The three-
minute time limit shall apply unless the Village Board, by a majority vote,
sets a lower or higher time limit for comment on a particular subject which
shall apply to all speakers during that public discussion section. After a
reasonable period of time has been devoted to public discussion and all of
those desiring to provide public discussion have not had a chance to do so, the
public discussion section may be closed upon a motion and second of the Village
Board and a majority vote in favor thereof. Any person who was not able to
address the Village Board will be encouraged to attend a subsequent meeting to
address the Village Board or to provide written comments.
   (C)   If numerous persons wish to speak on a single topic, the Village Board
may recognize a specified number of individuals who wish to speak in favor of,
against or wish to make general comments regarding the issue. The village shall
not be required to allow every person who wishes to address the issue to do so,
but as many views as possible are encouraged to be heard. Any person who is not
able to speak during a public discussion period shall be allowed and encouraged
to present their views to the village in writing.
   (D)   All comments must be civil in nature. Any person who engages in
threatening, slanderous or disorderly behavior when addressing the Village
Board shall be deemed out-of-order by the presiding officer and his or her time
to address the Village Board at said meeting shall end.
   (E)   Public discussion shall be allowed in a similar manner at all
committee meetings or meetings of subsidiary bodies of the village.
(Ord. 12-02, passed 1-2-2012)
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
§ 30.15 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of this office, the Village President shall
execute a bond to the village in the penal sum of $3,000 with surety or
sureties to be approved by the Board of Trustees and conditioned as prescribed
by law.
(1983 Code, § 1-5-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30
§ 30.16 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Powers and functions. The President of the Board of Trustees shall be
the chief executive officer of the village and shall attend all the meetings of
the Board of Trustees and preside over them. He or she shall have the authority
to assign to any officer of the village the duty of enforcing any ordinances or
performing any municipal function or duty which is not specifically assigned to
any particular officer; and whenever the ordinances are not clear as to which
of two or more officers or departments have the duty of performing certain acts
of enforcing certain ordinances, the President of the Board of Trustees shall
designate the particular officer or department to do so.
   (B)   Appointments of officers. At the first regular meeting of the Board of
Trustees in each fiscal year or as soon thereafter as is practicable, the
President by and with the approval of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint the
following officers, who shall hold their respective offices at the will of the
President by and with the approval of the Board of Trustees:
      (1)   Chief of Police;
      (2)   Village Auditor;
      (3)   Village Attorney;
      (4)   Superintendent of Public Works;
      (5)   Village Treasurer; and
      (6)   Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   General duties. The Village President shall perform all the duties
required of him or her from time to time by law and by the ordinances of the
village. He or she shall supervise the conduct of the officers of the village,
examining the grounds for all reasonable complaints made against any of them,
investigate all their misconduct and neglect of duty and take such steps for
their punishment or dismissal of office, whenever found to be guilty of
misconduct or neglect of duty or incompetency, as the interest of the village
may require and in the manner prescribed by law. He or she shall see that all
ordinances are properly enforced and shall supervise the corporate business and
affairs of the village and see that its interests are in all cases properly
protected and taken care of.
(1983 Code, § 1-5-2) (Ord. 98-4, passed 6-1-1998)
§ 30.17 EMERGENCY PURCHASING POWERS.
   (A)   Definition of emergency.
      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power
to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law;
or
      (2)   Any natural disaster, epidemic, or manmade calamity, including
outbreak of disease, flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or
explosion, or eminent threat of any of those events within the corporate limits
of the village, resulting in or threatening the death or injury of persons or
the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must
be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Declaration. Whenever an emergency, as defined in division (A) of this
section exists, the Village President is authorized to declare the existence of
a local state of emergency by means of a written declaration of the Village
President, under oath, setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency,
describing the nature of the emergency and declaring that a local state of
emergency exists in accordance with the definitions set forth in this section.
This declaration must be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as practicable
after issuance.
   (C)   Orders authorized. After the declaration of a local state of
emergency, the Village President may also, in the interest of public safety and
welfare, and to address this issues caused threatened by the emergency, take
any or all of the following actions by executive order during the local state
of emergency:
      (1)   Make emergency purchases in excess of $250, but not exceeding
$10,000; and
      (2)   The Village President shall report to the Board of Trustees at its
next meeting any actions taken by executive order during the local state of
emergency.
   (D)   Duration. The declaration of a local state of emergency herein
authorized shall be effective for a period of up to 30 days or until the
adjournment of the next regular or special meeting of the Board of Trustees,
whichever comes first, unless sooner terminated by a declaration of the Village
President or his or her interim emergency successor, indicating that the
emergency no longer exists. The Village President or his or her interim
emergency successor shall have the power to re-declare the existence of an
emergency at the end of each 30-day period during the time said emergency
exists.
   (E)   Effect on other ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to impair the powers contained in this code or giving powers to the
police department, but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now
in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the village.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-4-2020)
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 30.30 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Meeting place. All meetings of the Village Board of Trustees shall be
held in the Village Hall, located at 511 W. Main Street, Kirkland, Illinois.
   (B)   Regular meetings. All regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall
be held in the Village Hall on the first and third Mondays of each and every
month at the hour of 7:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the Board of
Trustees, and adjourned meetings may be held for the purpose of completing the
unfinished business of the regular meeting at such times as may be fixed by the
Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may, by vote taken at the first
meeting of any month, cancel the second meeting of that month upon a finding
that the second meeting is not necessary.
   (C)   Special meetings. The Village President or any three members thereof
may call a special meeting of the Board of Trustees as by law provided. This
call shall be in writing and delivered to the Village Clerk, who shall
thereupon file the same in his or her office and make copies thereof. The
Village Clerk shall thereupon either place a copy of the call in an envelope
addressed to the home address of the recipient with postage prepaid and
thereupon said envelope be placed in the U.S. mail, or a copy of the call shall
be personally delivered by the Village Clerk or the Chief of Police to the
recipient. A copy of the call shall be delivered as herein provided to the
Village President and to each member of the Board of Trustees, except the
persons making the call. Personal delivery may be made by leaving the copy at
the place of residence or usual place of abode of the recipient. In any event,
personal delivery must be made at least ten hours before the time of the
special meeting. For delivery by mail to be effective, the envelope must be
postmarked at least three days before the date of the meeting.
   (D)   Quorum. A majority of the Trustees elected to the Board of Trustees
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number
may adjourn from time to time until a quorum can be secured for a meeting.
   (E)   Penalty for nonattendance. If the Village President, Village Clerk or
any member of the Board of Trustees shall, without just cause, wilfully refuse
to attend six or more regular or special meetings of the Board of Trustees of
which notice, as required by law, has been given during any 12-month period,
then upon motion of any member of the Board of Trustees, and a majority vote of
the Board of Trustees, the nonattending individual shall be deemed to have
forfeited his or her office and the same declared vacant and shall be filled as
in other cases of vacancies.
(1983 Code, § 1-5-3) (Ord. 03-03, passed 2-3-2003)
§ 30.31 PRESIDENT PRO TEM.
   In case of the absence of the President at the time set for any regular,
adjourned or special meeting of the Board of Trustees, some member of the Board
of Trustees, to be selected by the members thereof, shall call the same to
order and act as president of the Board of Trustees Pro Tem, and he or she
shall, during such absence, possess the powers of the President of the Board of
Trustees, but such member shall not lose the right of voting and like
proceedings may be had.
(1983 Code, § 1-5-4)
§ 30.32 ORDER OF BUSINESS AT BOARD MEETINGS.
   At every regular meeting of the Board of Trustees at which a quorum is
present, the order of business shall be as follows:
   (A)   At meetings held on the first Monday:
      (1)   Roll call of members;
      (2)   Recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance;
      (3)   Reading, correcting and approving the minutes of the regular and
special meetings held during the preceding month;
      (4)   Presentation of petitions and communications;
      (5)   Presentation and approval of bills for payment;
      (6)   Financial report;
      (7)   Reports of officers;
      (8)   Reports of standing committees;
      (9)   Unfinished business;
      (10)   Resolutions, ordinances and miscellaneous business;
      (11)   New business;
      (12)   Comments from audience;
      (13)   Closed sessions (if necessary); and
      (14)   Adjournment.
   (B)   At meetings held on the third Monday:
      (1)   Roll call of members;
      (2)   Recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance;
      (3)   Presentation of petitions and communications;
      (4)   Reports of standing committees;
      (5)   Unfinished business;
      (6)   Scheduled speakers;
      (7)   Resolutions, ordinances and miscellaneous business;
      (8)   New business;
      (9)   Comments from audience;
      (10)   Closed sessions (if necessary); and
      (11)   Adjournment.
   (C)   In all cases where a resolution or motion shall be entered on the
minutes of the proceedings of the Board of Trustees, the name of the member
moving and that of the member seconding the same shall be entered in the
minutes. Persons wishing to address the Board will be recognized only during
the time allotted to “Scheduled speakers,” if time was requested prior to the
meeting, or “Comments from audience.” Persons recognized during “Comments from
audience” shall be limited to three minutes.
(1983 Code, § 1-5-5) (Ord. 03-03, passed 2-3-2003)
Cross-reference:
   Procedures for public discussion at meetings, see §
30.03
§ 30.33 COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   At the first regular meeting of the Board of Trustees in each fiscal
year, the Village President shall appoint the standing committees of the Board
of Trustees, and he or she shall be authorized to fill vacancies occurring in
any of the committees. Each of the committees shall consist of three members,
of whom one shall be designated by the Village President at the time of making
the appointment, to serve as the chairperson of the committee.
   (B)   The standing committees of the Village Board are as follows:
      (1)   Committee on Finance: Primary responsibilities are to review, on a
monthly basis, revenues and expenditures of the village, to evaluate how the
village is adhering to its appropriation and budget thresholds; to ensure that
spending authority is properly exercised for all expenditures; to review the
annual budget prior to recommending it to the Village Board; and to otherwise
review and make appropriate recommendations to the Village Board regarding
financial matters of the village.
      (2)   Committee on Ordinances: Primary responsibilities are to establish
and follow a routine of reviewing the village code and identify recommended
additions, deletions, or amendments to the village code, consulting with the
Village Attorney as appropriate to ensure legal compliance.
      (3)   Committee on Police: Primary responsibilities are: to review police
response metrics; to review any requests made by the Chief of Police for
equipment, vehicles, and supplies and make a recommendation to the Village
Board; and to discuss and recommend any internal policy changes for the
betterment of the Police Department's operations, consulting with the Chief of
Police as appropriate.
      (4)   Committee on Economic Development: Primary responsibilities are to
identify and recommend strategies for the Village Board to entice beneficial
business and other growth into the community by means of existing business
expansion, identifying occupants for vacant spaces, discussing Tax Increment
Finance Districts, reviewing and making recommendations for requests for
incentives by potential developers and business investors, and otherwise
identify ways to engage the village in opportunities for expansion of its tax
base and the equalized assessed value of properties within the village.
      (5)   Committee on Streets, Alleys, and Parks: Primary responsibilities
are to review the functionality of existing roads, alleys, and park spaces; to
identify and review grant and other funding opportunities for improvements to
roads, alleys, and park spaces; to identify improvements and repairs that can
be made and make recommendations to the Village Board regarding priorities for
any improvement/repair on such roads, alleys, and park spaces, consulting with
the Public Works Director as appropriate; and to identify and review requests
and opportunities for use of the village's park spaces.
      (6)   Committee on Water and Sewer: Primary responsibilities are to
review the functionality of existing water and sewer facilities and
infrastructure; to identify and review grant and other funding opportunities
for improvements to water and sewer infrastructure; and to identify
improvements and repairs that can be made and make recommendations to the
Village Board regarding priorities for any improvement/repair of water and/or
sewer infrastructure, consulting with the Public Works Director as appropriate.
   (C)   Rules and responsibilities applicable to Board Committees. Unless
otherwise stated in the code, the following rules and responsibilities apply to
all Board Committees:
      (1)   All Board Committee appointments and designated Chair of each
Committee are made by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the
Village Board, on an annual basis;
      (2)   A minimum of three Board members shall serve on each Committee,
with a minimum of two being present to establish a quorum for a meeting;
      (3)   All Board Committee Meetings are to be conducted in compliance with
the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.) with public comment being
permitted as prescribed by the village code;
      (4)   Each meeting shall have a call to order, roll call, discussion on
any agenda items, review of past meeting minutes, opportunity for public
comment, and adjournment. The Chair shall appoint a recording secretary for the
meetings to prepare minutes.
      (5)   Committees are expected to meet as often as needed but in no event
less than quarterly. (NOTE: The Finance Committee is expected to meet monthly).
(1983 Code, § 1-5-6) (Ord. 07-03, passed 5-7-2007; Ord. 12-09, passed 7-2-2012;
Ord. 2019-08, passed 4-29-2019; Ord. 2019-09, passed 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
Village Clerk
   
31.01   Appointment, term of office; bond
   
31.02   General powers and duties
   
31.03   Disposition of money collected
   
31.04   Maintain office hours
   
31.05   Compensation
Village Treasurer
   
31.15   Requirements
   
31.16   General fiscal duties
   
31.17   Annual report
   
31.18   Salary
Village Attorney
   
31.30   Appointment
   
31.31   Duties
   
31.32   Village Attorney Pro Tem
   
31.33   Salary
Superintendent of Public Works
   
31.45   Appointment and term
   
31.46   General duties
Deputy Clerk
   
31.55   Office created
   
31.56   Appointment
   
31.57   Duties
   
31.58   Responsibilities
   
31.59   Compensation
Village Employees
   
31.70   Public works; prevailing wage rates
   
31.71   Residency requirements
   
31.72   State Gift Ban Act
   
31.73   Paid leave rights
Cross-reference:
   Zoning Administrator, see §
154.201
VILLAGE CLERK
§ 31.01 APPOINTMENT, TERM OF OFFICE; BOND.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall be appointed by the Village President, with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The Village Clerk shall serve
a term as established from time to time by the Board of Trustees; provided,
however, that any such term shall not exceed that of the current Village
President.
   (B)   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Village
Clerk shall execute to the Village a bond in the penal sum of $5,000 with a
surety as approved by the Village Board. The bond shall be filed with the
Village Treasurer.
(1983 Code, § 1-6-1) (Ord. 07-11, passed 8-6-2007)
§ 31.02 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Corporate seal.
      (1)   In addition to the duties now imposed upon the officer by law, he
or she shall affix the Corporate Seal to all papers which shall require it. He
or she shall also sign and issue all licenses and permits, in compliance with
the ordinances of the village, or as so ordered by the President, Board of
Trustees or other proper officer of the village. He or she shall sign, seal and
number all bonds issued by the village, and keep a true and correct account of
the same.
      (2)   He or she shall be the custodian and keeper of the Corporate Seal
and of all books, records, ordinances and papers of the village, except as
otherwise provided by law.
   (B)   Attend meetings. He or she shall attend all meetings of the Board of
Trustees and keep a full record of all proceedings in the journal; keep all
records, receive, mark and properly file all papers coming to this office
belonging to the village; grant certified copies from the records or papers of
the village, and execute such orders as he or she may receive from the Board of
Trustees. He or she shall also, within ten days after they are passed, cause
all ordinances of the village imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or
forfeiture, or making any appropriation, to be published in such newspaper as
the Board of Trustees shall designate.
   (C)   Read petitions, bills. All petitions, remonstrances, bids, bills or
other communications, addressed to the President or Board of Trustees, shall be
received by the Clerk and read by him or her, at the meeting of the Board of
Trustees next succeeding their receipt by him or her, unless otherwise ordered
by the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Deliver resolutions and ordinances.
      (1)   Resolutions delivered to Trustees.  He or she shall without delay
deliver to the officers of the village and to the proper committee of the Board
of Trustees all resolutions and communications referred to such officers or
committees by the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   Ordinances delivered to President. He or she shall without delay
deliver to the President all ordinances or resolutions under his or her charge
which may require approval or action by the President, with all the papers
relating to same.
   (E)   Licenses.
      (1)   Grant and issue licenses. All applications for licenses to be
issued by the village shall be made to the Clerk, who shall have power to hear
and grant applications therefor, and each and every license authorized or
required by an ordinance of this village shall be issued by the Clerk upon the
proper application therefor and the payment to him or her of the amount of the
license fee as provided in the several ordinances of this village.
      (2)   Keep records of licenses.  He or she shall keep a full record of
all licenses granted, transferred or revoked by authority of the Board of
Trustees, with the date that the same were granted, transferred or revoked (and
if revoked, the cause therefor), with the number thereof, and full name and
residence of applicants for such licenses, in a book to be kept by him or her
for that purpose and, where bonds are required, the names of the bondspeople or
sureties.
   (F)   Notify person elected or appointed. It shall be the duty of the Clerk,
within five days after the result of any election is declared or appointment
made, to notify all persons elected or appointed to any village office of their
election or appointment, if the DeKalb County Clerk has not done so.
   (G)   File ordinance of tax levy. It shall be the duty of the Clerk, within
the time prescribed by law, in each year, to file with the County Clerk of
DeKalb County, Illinois, a certified copy of the ordinances in which the total
amount of appropriations for all corporate purposes of the village legally made
are levied and assessed.
   (H)   Water and sewer charges.
      (1)   The Clerk shall, in accordance with applicable ordinances, compute
all the charges for water and sewer service provided by the village; send
statements for the service in accordance with the village's billing practices;
receive payment; and report to the Board of Trustees all delinquent accounts.
      (2)   Any resident and water billing customer who wishes to seek a
reduction in their water bill for a single billing cycle, based upon
extraordinary circumstances which caused an inordinately high water bill, may
submit a written request to the Village Clerk for presentment at the next
regularly scheduled Village Board meeting for consideration. The Board may
consider the request and determine if the circumstances warrant a reduction in
the bill, with such circumstances to include, without limitation: the amount of
the water bill in relation to customary usage; the presented reason for the
higher bill; whether such reason was within the reasonable control of the
resident; whether such reason has been mitigated to prevent a reoccurrence and
how timely the mitigation was pursued; and any prior instance(s) of the
resident or another person in control of the same property seeking a reduction
in the water bill. Based upon a totality of the circumstances the Village Board
may, by motion, reduce the amount owed on the single water bill in an amount
deemed reasonable but in no event shall such reduction be less than the average
water bill based upon the 12 prior months’ usage and billing for the property
(or if there is not a 12 month history, as many months as are available).
Nothing in this provision shall be construed to be a right or guarantee that
any water bill will be reduced.
(1983 Code, § 1-6-2) (Ord. 541, passed 3-3-1975; Ord. 11-02, passed 4-4-2011;
Ord. 2021-09, passed 8-2-2021)
§ 31.03 DISPOSITION OF MONEY COLLECTED.
   The Clerk shall turn over all money received by him or her on behalf of the
village to the Treasurer, promptly on receipt of same; and with such money he
or she shall give a statement as to the source thereof.
(1983 Code, § 1-6-3)
§ 31.04 MAINTAIN OFFICE HOURS.
   In an office provided by the village, the Clerk shall maintain regular
office hours as directed by the Village Board. The Clerk shall be present,
generally, during regular business hours in addition to any regular or special
Village Board meetings or as otherwise reasonably requested by the Village
Board. During the regular office hours, the Clerk shall receive water and sewer
service payments, issue licenses and discharge other responsibilities of the
office as necessary or as directed by the Village Board. The Clerk is expected
to avoid working in excess of 40 hours in any work week and to reasonably
adjust his or her schedule if Board meetings or other functions would require
the Clerk to work in excess of 40 hours, and to obtain approval from the
Village President prior to working in excess of 40 hours.
(1983 Code, § 1-6-4) (Ord. 07-05, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 08-15, passed 7-7-2008;
Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 31.05 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Board shall determine the compensation and benefits of the
Clerk, subject to all applicable law, and make adjustments, as it deems
appropriate, from time to time. The wages of the Village Clerk shall be paid in
equal bi-monthly installments.
(1983 Code, § 1-6-5) (Ord. 04-20, passed 10-4-2004; Ord. 08-15, passed 7-7-
2008; Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)
VILLAGE TREASURER
§ 31.15 REQUIREMENTS.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Village Treasurer
shall execute a bond to the village in the penal sum of an amount not less than
three times the latest federal census population or any subsequent census
figure used for motor fuel tax purposes, with surety and sureties to be
approved by the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties of his or her office and the payment of all monies received by him
or her according to law in the ordinances of the village.
(1983 Code, § 1-7-1)
§ 31.16 GENERAL FISCAL DUTIES.
   (A)   Keeping of accounts. The Village Treasurer shall receive all monies
belonging to the village and shall keep a separate account of each fund in
appropriation and the debits and the credits belonging thereto. He or she shall
give to every person paying money into the village treasury a receipt therefor,
specifying the date of the payment and upon what account paid.
   (B)   Special assessment funds. All monies received by the Village Treasurer
on any special assessment or special tax shall be held by him or her as a
special fund, to be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the
special assessment or special tax was made, except to reimburse the village for
money expended for the improvement.
   (C)   Warrant register. He or she shall keep an accurate register of all
warrants redeemed and paid by him or her, showing the number, date and amount
of each, the fund from which paid, the name of the person to whom and when
paid; and he or she shall cancel all warrants as soon as redeemed by him or
her.
   (D)   Receipts and disbursements. The Treasurer shall keep his or her books
and accounts in such manner as to show with accuracy all monies received and
disbursed by him or her for the village, stating from whom and on what account
received, and to whom and on what account paid out, and in such way that the
books and accounts may be readily investigated and understood at all times; and
the same together with all files and papers of the office shall be at all times
open to examination by the Village President, the Village Clerk or the Finance
Committee of the Board of Trustees.
(1983 Code, § 1-7-2)
§ 31.17 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Treasurer shall annually, within time required by law or ordinance, make
out and file with the Village Clerk a full report of all receipts and
expenditures of the corporation, as shown by his or her books and all his or
her transactions as such Treasurer during the preceding fiscal year; and he or
she shall, in such report, show the state of the Treasury at the close of such
year, which report the Clerk shall cause to be published without delay.
(1983 Code, § 1-7-3)
§ 31.18 SALARY.
   The Village Treasurer shall receive as compensation for all his or her
services, a salary in an amount to be determined by the Village Board from time
to time, per fiscal year, to be paid at such times as determined by the Village
Board.
(1983 Code, § 1-7-4) (Ord. 08-01, passed 1-7-2008)
VILLAGE ATTORNEY
§ 31.30 APPOINTMENT.
   The President, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, may appoint an
attorney of good standing and licensed to practice law in this state to act as
Village Attorney.
(1983 Code, § 1-8-1)
§ 31.31 DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to act as legal advisor
of the Board of Trustees and all of the village officers, and the Board of
Trustees may require his or her opinion in writing upon any question of law
arising in connection with any village affairs, or upon any suit, claim or
demand in which the village is or may become interested.
   (B)   It shall be his or her duty to prosecute all suits for the recovery of
fines, forfeitures and penalties which may be brought before the proper officer
or any court, by or against the village or any of its officers on account of
their official acts; and he or she shall give his or her personal attention at
court where any suit to which the village is interested may be pending, when
called upon by the Board of Trustees or by the Chief of Police for that
purpose.
   (C)   The Village Attorney shall attend all regular meetings of the Board of
Trustees, and all special meetings when requested to do so by the President of
the Board of Trustees or the Village Clerk, and shall draft all ordinances,
bonds, contracts, leases, conveyances, and other instruments of writing
required for the business of the village, examine and inspect tax and
assessment rolls and all proceedings in reference to the assessment and
collections of taxes and assessments.
   (D)   He or she shall perform such other professional services incident to
his or her office as may in any case be required by the Board of Trustees or
the Village President.
(1983 Code, § 1-8-2)
§ 31.32 VILLAGE ATTORNEY PRO TEM.
   Whenever the Village Attorney shall be unable to attend any trial of any
cause to which the village is a party or do any other legal business of the
village, the Village President shall have the power, as hereby authorized, to
employ an attorney to attend the same and reasonable fees shall be paid to the
attorney as employed.
(1983 Code, § 1-8-3)
§ 31.33 SALARY.
   The President and the Village Board of Trustees shall annually determine the
appropriate amount and charges for compensation for legal services, as well as
the method of payment.
(1983 Code, § 1-8-4) (Ord. 87-5, passed - -)
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ 31.45 APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   There is hereby created the office of Superintendent of Public Works. The
Superintendent shall be appointed by the Village President with the approval of
the Board of Trustees, and shall hold office at the will of the Village
President and Board of Trustees.
(1983 Code, § 1-9-1)
§ 31.46 GENERAL DUTIES.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall have charge of the improvement,
repairing and cleaning of the streets, avenues and alleys of the village and
shall supervise the construction and repairs of all sidewalks, bridges and
other public works thereof. The Superintendent of Public Works, under the
direction of the Board of Trustees, shall have the general supervision and
management of the waterworks and of all property, machinery and appurtenances
connected therewith.
   (A)   Receive applications for water. He or she shall also receive
applications for water and give information in all matters relative to the
waterworks and water rates, and he or she shall see that all ordinances
relating to waterworks and water rates are strictly enforced.
   (B)   Keep accounts and records.  He or she shall also keep full and
detailed accounts and records of all business connected with the waterworks in
suitable books and forms so as to readily show the amount and kinds of
materials and supplies on hand and contracted for the persons employed about
the works, the time and rate of wages at which they are employed, the amount
and kind of pipe laid or repaired; the hydrants, valves, cutoffs, connections
and attachments made for consumers or for fire protection with the cost of
same, the location and condition thereof, the kinds and amounts of rents or
charges for water contracted for and the amounts due by individuals with the
accounts paid thereon, and such other accounts and records as the Board of
Trustees may direct. These books shall be open at all times for the inspection
of all village officers.
   (C)   Read meters; report monies collected. He or she shall also install and
read all meters and keep records of amounts of water consumed.
(1983 Code, § 1-9-2)
DEPUTY CLERK
§ 31.55 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of Deputy Clerk.
(Ord. 06-11, passed 11-27-2006)
§ 31.56 APPOINTMENT.
   This office shall be filled by appointment of up to one Deputy Clerk by the
Village Clerk for a term which shall not exceed the term of the office of the
Village Clerk. Prior to any such appointment, the Village Clerk needs Board
approval to fill the position of Deputy Clerk. The Deputy Clerk appointed by
the Village Clerk shall submit to a background check which shall disclose no
unacceptable information.
(Ord. 06-11, passed 11-27-2006; Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 31.57 DUTIES.
   (A)   The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised only in the
absence of the Clerk from the place where the Clerk’s office is maintained, and
only when either written direction has been given by the Clerk to the deputy to
exercise such power, or the Board of Trustees has determined by resolution that
the Municipal Clerk is temporarily or permanently unable to perform that
function.
   (B)   When duly authorized as provided herein, the Deputy Clerk shall have
the power and duty to execute documents required by law to be executed. The
signature affixed by the Deputy Clerk on any such document shall have the same
effect as if signed by the Municipal Clerk.
   (C)   A Deputy Clerk shall be the subordinate of the Village Clerk and the
Village Clerk shall be held responsible, severally, for fidelity and
supervision of the Deputy Clerk.
(Ord. 06-11, passed 11-27-2006)
§ 31.58 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Deputy Clerk shall have the responsibilities outlined in this subchapter
and, in the absence of the Village Clerk, and as authorized by the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5) upon the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 06-11, passed 11-27-2006)
§ 31.59 COMPENSATION.  
   The compensation of the Deputy Clerk shall be determined by the Board of
Trustees.
(Ord. 06-11, passed 11-27-2006; Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)
VILLAGE EMPLOYEES
§ 31.70 PUBLIC WORKS; PREVAILING WAGE RATES.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by the Act, 820 ILCS 130/0.01 through
12, as may be amended from time to time, the general prevailing rate of wages
in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in the
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the village is
hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for
construction work in DeKalb County as determined by the Department of Labor of
the State of Illinois (the “Department”), as is annually or otherwise updated ,
any such determination being incorporated herein by reference. As required by
said Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the
Department shall supersede the Department’s prior determination and apply to
any and all public works construction undertaken by the village. The definition
of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in the Act shall be
the same as the definitions specified in the Act.
   (B)   Nothing herein is intended to apply or shall be construed to apply
said prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment
performed on behalf of this village except public works construction to the
extent required by the Act.
(1983 Code, § 1-10-1) (Ord. 07-06, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 08-14, passed 6-16-
2008; Ord. 09-04, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 10-02, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 11-08,
passed 6-6-2011; Ord. 12-08, passed 7-2-2012; Ord. 14-12, passed 7-7-2014; Ord.
15-04, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 16-07, passed 6-6-2016; Ord. 2017-03, passed 6-5-
2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018)
§ 31.71 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   All permanent full-time village employees shall reside within a 15-mile
radius of the village limits, except village department heads, who shall reside
within the village limits, and except for village police officers, who shall
reside within a 35-mile radius of the village limits. This section shall not
apply to employees until they have successfully completed their probationary
period. The Village Board may in its discretion grant no more than two 6-month
extensions to an employee in the case of hardship.
(1983 Code, § 1-12-1) (Ord. 04-15, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 31.72 STATE GIFT BAN ACT.
   (A)   Adoption.
      (1)   The State Gift Ban Act is hereby adopted as required by 5 ILCS 430.
      (2)   The solicitation or the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act is prohibited by any elected or appointed
official or any employee of the Village of Kirkland. All nonsalaried appointed
or elected officials are exempted from the Act and the provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Ethics Officer. To the extent authorized by law and the extent
required by 5 ILCS 430 the Village President is appointed to serve as the
“ethics officer” of the Village of Kirkland. The Ethics Officer’s duties shall
be as provided in 5 ILCS 430.
   (C)   State Legislative Ethics Commission; complaints. All complaints for
violations of the Act and this section shall be filed with the State
Legislative Ethics Commission (created by 5 ILCS 430/25-5).
   (D)   Future amendments. Any amendment to the State Gift Ban Act that
becomes effective after the passage of this section shall be incorporated into
this section by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation and
acceptance of gifts. However, any amendment that makes provisions optional for
adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this section by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
   (E)   Future declaration of unconstitutionality.
      (1)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the State Gift Ban Act
unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the
date that the Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any
further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without
further action by the corporate authorities of the village if the Act is found
unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.
      (2)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the State Gift Ban
Act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the
Act or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act
as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the village.
(1983 Code, § 1-12-2) (Ord. 99-11, passed 7-6-1999)
Cross-reference:
   Similar provisions, see §
34.17
Statutory reference:
   State Gift Ban Act, see 5 ILCS 430/10-10 et seq.
§ 31.73 PAID LEAVE RIGHTS.
   (A)   All regular, full-time employees of the village will, at all times, be
provided no less than 40 hours of any form of paid leave for every consecutive
12 month period of their employment.
   (B)   All part-time, temporary, and seasonal employees of the village will,
at all times, be provided no less than one hour of any form of paid leave for
every 40 hours worked, up to a minimum of 40 hours.
   (C)   The village through its Personnel Policies may make adjustments to
eligibility and accrual rates for various forms of paid leave, including sick
leave, on an ongoing basis without impacting, affecting, or altering this
section, but in no event shall the rights to paid leave provided to employees
be less than what is provided herein.
   (D)   The rights of employees working for non-municipal employers within the
village shall be as stated in the Paid Leave for All Workers Act, 820 ILCS 192/
1 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 23-03, passed 10-2-2023)
CHAPTER 32: VILLAGE DEPARTMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Community Center Advisory Commission
   
32.01   Commission established
   
32.02   Membership, terms, and officers
   
32.03   Meetings
   
32.04   Powers and duties
   
32.05   General provisions
Planning and Zoning Commission
   
32.15   Membership, appointments and term of office
   
32.16   Powers and duties
Police Department
   
32.45   Police Department established
   
32.46   Chief of Police
   
32.47   Power to arrest; serve process
   
32.48   Resisting Chief of Police
   
32.49   Neglect of duty
   
32.50   Auxiliary police - establishment; appointment; powers and duties;
uniforms
   
32.51   Part-time police - establishment; appointment; powers and duties;
uniforms
Tree Advisory Commission
   
32.60   Commission established
   
32.61   Membership, terms, officers
   
32.62   Meetings
   
32.63   Powers and duties
   
32.64   General provisions
Cross-reference:
   Ordinance Enforcement Department; administrative adjudication, see
Chapter 96
COMMUNITY CENTER ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 32.01 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   To further the goals of providing varied and diverse community focused
activities and educational, athletic, and cultural arts programming in the
village, the Community Center Advisory Commission is hereby established.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 32.02 MEMBERSHIP, TERMS, AND OFFICERS.
   (A)   Commission membership. The Commission shall be comprised of six
members including an appointed Chair. One of the six members shall be appointed
from among the Village Trustees. All members shall be residents of the village.
All members, including the Trustee position and the Chair, shall be appointed
by the President with the advice and consent of the Village Board.
   (B)   Term of office. The term of office for all members, including the
Chair, shall be for one year.
   (C)   Vacancy. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the initial
appointing authority with the consent of the Village Board, but only to the
unexpired portion of the vacated term.
   (D)   Chair. The Chair shall be appointed by the President with the advice
and consent of the Village Board in May of each year. It shall be the duty of
the Chair to conduct all meetings of the Commission and to represent the
Commission at Village Board meetings as from time to time may be necessary.
   (E)   Vice Chair. The Commission shall elect a Vice Chair from among its
membership at the first meeting of each year.
   (F)   Secretary. The Village Clerk shall serve as Secretary and maintain
minutes and records of regular and special meetings and regularly provide such
records to the Village Board.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 4-2-2018; Ord. 2019-07, passed 4-29-2019)
§ 32.03 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Commission shall meet from time to time as may be determined by
the Chair or a majority of the Commission.
   (B)   All meetings shall be held in compliance with the Illinois Open
Meetings Act.
   (C)   The Community Center Director or designee shall be permitted to attend
all meetings of the Commission.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 32.04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall serve only in an advisory capacity to the Village Board
and shall comply with all applicable provisions of state statutes and this
code, and shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To develop a mission statement for the Community Center that shall be
submitted to the Village Board for its comment and approval or revision;
   (B)   To recommend changes to the mission statement from time to time for
consideration by the Village Board for its comment and approval or revision;
   (C)   To regularly evaluate all aspects of the programs and offerings of the
Community Center consistent with the mission statement for the Community
Center;
   (D)   To provide to the Village Board any operational or governance
recommendations for use of the Community Center including, but not limited to,
recommendations for hours of operation, rental and user fees, or other
operational matters referred to or identified by the Commission;
   (E)   To assist, in an advisory capacity, the Village Board in the promotion
and use of the Community Center consistent with its mission statement;
   (F)   To promote and facilitate interaction among organizations and groups
who utilize the facilities of the Community Center;
   (G)   To prepare a written report to the Village Board at the end of each
calendar year, that at a minimum, contains the following information:
      (1)   An evaluation of the programs and policies governing the use of the
Community Center. At a minimum this evaluation should take into consideration
how the various programs and activities in the Community Center relate to other
commercial and educational programs in surrounding areas and how well the
Community Center is performing consistent with its mission statement;
      (2)   A recommendation to the Village Board of any necessary short and
long-term capital expenditures, capital improvements, and other facility needs
of the Community Center;
      (3)   A recommendation to the Village Board regarding any changes to the
offerings or operations of the Community Center;
      (4)   A recommendation to the Village Board regarding future budget
considerations for the Community Center including a basis for such
recommendation; and
   (H)   To consider, evaluate, and make recommendations pertaining to any
Community Center issue at the request of the Village Board.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 32.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The village shall provide reasonable assistance to the Community
Center Advisory Commission in order to assist the Commission with its various
duties. All requests for assistance are to be conveyed at the direction of the
Chair by the Village Trustee Commission Member to the Village President.
Neither the Commission nor any of its members shall give direction to any
member of the village staff and all recommendations of the Commission shall be
referred to the Village Board for consideration and implementation by the
village at the discretion of the Village Board.
   (B)   The Commission shall not have the authority to make any expenditure,
or cause to be made any purchase or contract, that directly or indirectly
results in a financial liability or lien against the village, without the
express prior approval of the President and Village Board.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 4-2-2018; Ord. 2019-07, passed 4-29-2019)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 32.15 MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENTS AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission (hereinafter "the Commission")
shall consist of a total of seven members appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Board of Trustees. The Mayor shall designate one member as
Chairperson of the Commission. Members of the Commission shall reside within
the village.
   (B)   Each member of the Commission shall serve for a term of five years.
The terms of Commission members shall be staggered such that one member's term
expires each year. All members shall serve until their successors have been
appointed and approved.
   (C)   Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   (D)   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation except
that, if the Board of Trustees deems it advisable, the Secretary may receive
such compensation as may be fixed by the Board.
(Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 32.16 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Commission shall exercise all powers and duties assigned by state
law to a zoning board of appeals pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq.
   (B)   The Commission shall exercise all powers and duties assigned by
Chapter 154 of this Code of Ordinances to the Commission, including without
limitation the authority for administration and enforcement provided therein.
   (C)   The Commission may prepare from time to time and recommend for
consideration and adoption by the Board of Trustees a statement of goals and
objectives to help guide growth and development in the village and its
environs.
   (D)   The Commission may prepare from time to time and recommend for
consideration and adoption by the Board of Trustees a Comprehensive Plan and
Map for the present and future development of and redevelopment of the
municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or
functional parts, each of which, when adopted by the Board of Trustees shall be
the Official Comprehensive Plan or part thereof.
   (E)   The Commission may review and make recommendations for neighborhood or
area renewals, conservation, redevelopment, urban aesthetics and civic design.
   (F)   The Commission may call upon any official of the municipality for aid
and advice upon any matter properly within the scope of interest of the
Commission and to provide aid to the officials of the municipality and other
governmental agencies charged with the direction of projects for improvements
included in the Official Map, to further the making of such improvements and to
generally promote the realization of the Official Comprehensive Plan. If the
Commission deems it advisable to secure technical assistance or service, it may
do so upon authority from and with appropriations made by the Board of
Trustees.
   (G)   The Commission may consult with municipal and county regional planning
commissions, state planning agencies and the Northeastern Illinois Planning
Commission so that coordinated planning for the village, county and
metropolitan area will be encouraged.
   (H)   The Commission may exercise such other powers germane to the powers
granted by state statutes and this subchapter as may from time to time be
conferred on the Commission by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.45 POLICE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established an executive department of the village
government to be known as the Police Department. This Department shall consist
of the Village President, Chief of Police and such police officers, special
police officers and watchmen and employees as may from time to time be lawfully
provided.
(1983 Code, § 1-11A-1)
§ 32.46 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   Appointment and term.  There is hereby created the office of Chief of
Police. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Village President with
the approval of the Board of Trustees and shall hold office at the will of the
Village President and the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Salary. The Chief of Police shall receive, as compensation for all his
or her services, a salary as negotiated with him or her and approved by a
majority of the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Duties. The Chief of Police shall be on duty at such times as the
Village President or the Board of Trustees may require or direct. It shall be
his or her duty to enforce and preserve the peace, order, safety and
cleanliness of the village and to execute and enforce all ordinances under the
supervision and control of the Village President and the Board of Trustees, to
protect every citizen in his or her rights, property and lawful enjoyment of
life; to enforce and secure the public order and welfare; to prevent
obstructions to public travel and intercourse, and preserve and secure to every
person his or her personal liberty.
(1983 Code, § 1-11A-2)
§ 32.47 POWER TO ARREST; SERVE PROCESS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police and every member of the Police Department shall
have power to arrest, with or without process, all persons within the village
who shall break the peace or be found violating any ordinance of the village;
to commit for examination, and, if necessary, to detain such person or persons
overnight or Sunday in a secure place, until they can be brought before the
proper court for trial.
   (B)   The Chief of Police and every member of the Police Department shall
have the power and authority within the corporate limits of the village to
serve and execute warrants or other legal process for the apprehension and
commitment of persons charged with or held for the commission of any crime or
misdemeanor, or for the violation of any law or ordinance of the village, and,
while serving or executing or assisting in the service or execution of any such
warrant or legal process, shall be vested with all the common law and statutory
power of constables for that purpose.
(1983 Code, § 1-11A-3)
§ 32.48 RESISTING CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Whoever shall resist the Chief of Police or any member of the Police
Department of the village in the discharge of his or her duty, or shall in any
way interfere with or hinder or prevent him or her from discharging his or her
duty, or shall endeavor to do so and whoever shall assist in any manner any
person in custody of any police officer or the Police Chief to escape or
attempt to escape from such custody, shall be fined as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code.
(1983 Code, § 1-11A-4)
§ 32.49 NEGLECT OF DUTY.
   Any police officer who shall neglect or refuse to perform any duty required
of him or her by law and ordinances of the village, or who shall, in the
discharge of his or her official duties, be guilty of any fraud, favoritism,
partiality, extortion, oppression or willful wrong and injustice shall be fined
as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code for each offense, the prosecution for such
offense to be conducted as in other cases of violation of any village
ordinance.
(1983 Code, § 1-11A-5)
§ 32.50 AUXILIARY POLICE - ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES;
UNIFORMS.
   (A)   Establishment and composition. A special police unit of auxiliary
officers is hereby established, which unit shall consist of a sufficient number
of such officers to serve the village as determined by the Chief of Police.
Such officers and unit shall be known and may be referred to for all purposes
as "auxiliary officers" and the "Kirkland auxiliary police", respectively.
Auxiliary officers shall not be members of the village's regular Police
Department, shall be considered "conservators of the peace" as defined by state
law, and shall not be utilized by the village to supplement members of the
regular Police Department of the village in the performance of their assigned
duties except as provided in division (C) of this section, or as otherwise
provided by law.
   (B)   Appointment; qualifications; training; term.
      (1)   Auxiliary officers, including the Auxiliary Police Commander, shall
be appointed by the Chief of Police. Kirkland auxiliary police shall serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor, and may be removed at the discretion of the Mayor
with or without notice and with or without cause. Auxiliary officers shall not
be commissioned as law enforcement officers. Prior to the appointment, each
applicant shall be fingerprinted and such fingerprints shall be submitted to
the Federal Bureau of Investigation or some other source of criminal history
information, as determined by the Chief of Police, for review of the
applicant's history. Each auxiliary officer shall meet the following minimum
qualifications:
         (a)   Be at least 18 years of age; and
         (b)   All auxiliary officers except the Auxiliary Police Commander
must reside within a 20 mile radius from the corporate limits of the village.
      (2)   Each auxiliary officer shall receive a course of training prior to
assuming the duties as set forth in division (C) of this section, in accordance
with Police Department directives.
   (C)   Duties. Auxiliary officers shall be subject to the direction and
control of the Chief of Police and shall be assigned to perform the following
duties and responsibilities, as assigned by the Chief of Police:
      (1)   Aiding or directing traffic within the village corporate limits;
      (2)   Aiding in the control of natural or man-made disasters;
      (3)   Aiding in the case of civil disorder as directed by the Chief of
Police;
      (4)   Normal and regular police duties as directed by the Chief of Police
when it is impractical for members of the regular Police Department to perform
such duties; and
      (5)   Any other duties authorized by Illinois Statute or other applicable
law.
   (D)   Uniforms. Auxiliary officers shall wear uniforms at all times when on
duty, and shall wear identification symbols which are different and distinct
from identification symbols worn by members of the regular Police Department.
   (E)   Status and compensation. Auxiliary officers shall be deemed employees
of the village serving on a volunteer basis and shall receive such compensation
for certain duties as determined by the Chief of Police and approved by the
Village President. However, auxiliary officers are not covered under, and are
therefore not entitled to, any of the benefits of the Illinois Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners Act, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1, et seq.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 32.51 PART-TIME POLICE - ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES;
UNIFORMS.
   (A)    Establishment and composition. There is hereby established a unit of
part-time police officers which unit shall consist of a sufficient number of
such officers to serve the village as determined by the Chief of Police. Such
officers and unit shall be known and may be referred to for all purposes as
“part- time police officers”. Part-time police officers shall be members of the
village's regular Police Department and shall be considered “conservators of
the peace” as defined by state law.
   (B)   Appointment; qualifications; training.
      (1)   Part-time police officers shall be appointed by the Chief of
Police. Kirkland part-time police officers shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor, and may be removed at the discretion of the Mayor with or without notice
and with or without cause. Prior to the appointment, each applicant shall be
fingerprinted and such fingerprints shall be submitted to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation or some other source of criminal history information, as
determined by the Chief of Police, for review of the applicant's history. Each
part-time police officer shall meet the following minimum qualifications:
         (a)   Be at least 21 years of age.
         (b)   Reside within a 100 mile radius from the corporate limits of the
village.
      (2)   Each part-time police officer shall be trained under the
Intergovernmental Law Enforcement Officer’s In-Service Training Act in
accordance with the procedures for part-time officers established by the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board prior to assuming the duties
as set forth in division (C) of this section. Nothing contained herein shall
prohibit an officer who has been trained as a full-time officer from being
appointed as a part-time officer for the village.
   (C)   Duties. Part-time police officers shall be subject to the direction
and control of the Chief of Police and shall have the power to arrest and serve
warrants and all other police powers in accordance with Illinois statutes and §
32.47.
   (D)   Limitation of hours. Each part-time police officer, as defined at 20
Ill. Administrative Code § 1770.102 b), who is employed by the village and any
other unit or units of local government shall work a total of 1,560 hours or
less per 12 month period beginning on January 1 of any calendar year. This
limitation on the number of hours worked shall not apply to full-time police
officers, as defined at 20 Ill. Administrative Code § 1770.102 b), who are
working part-time hours for the village.
(Ord. 11-07, passed 5-16-2011; Ord. 11-09, passed 7-5-2011; Ord. 13-01, passed
3-3-2013)
TREE ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 32.60 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   To further the goals of providing environmental, aesthetic, and other
benefits provided by the orderly preservation and placement of trees, also
understanding practical effects on infrastructure needs and other concerns for
the overall value and welfare of the community in the Village of Kirkland, the
Tree Advisory Commission is hereby established.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-17-2022)
§ 32.61 MEMBERSHIP, TERMS, OFFICERS.
   (A)   Commission membership. The Commission shall be comprised of seven
members. Five at large members shall be residents of the village, one member
shall be actively serving on the Village Board, and one member shall be the
Director of Public Works for the village. The Chair shall be a member actively
serving on the Village Board.
   (B)   Term of office. The term of office for all members, including the
Chair, shall be for one year.
   (C)   Vacancy. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the initial
appointing authority with the consent of the Village Board, but only to the
unexpired portion of the vacated term.
   (D)   Chair. The Chair shall be appointed by the President with the advice
and consent of the Village Board in May of each year. It shall be the duty of
the Chair to conduct all meetings of the Commission and to represent the
Commission at Village Board meetings as from time to time may be necessary.
   (E)   Vice Chair. The Commission shall elect a Vice Chair from among its
membership at the first meeting of each year.
   (F)   Secretary. The Village Clerk or appointed Village Trustee shall serve
as Secretary and maintain minutes and records of regular and special meetings
and regularly provide such records to the Village Board.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-17-2022)
§ 32.62 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Commission shall meet from time to time as may be determined by
the Chair or a majority of the Commission.
   (B)   All meetings shall be held in compliance with the Illinois Open
Meetings Act.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-17-2022)
§ 32.63 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall serve only in an advisory capacity to the Village Board
and shall comply with all applicable provisions of Illinois state statutes and
this code and shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To review various aspects of appropriate types of trees in various
locations around the village, to identify meaningful ways that trees can
coexist in public areas and right-of-ways, without unreasonably interfering
with immediate and longer-term infrastructure needs, and to recommend actions
for consideration by the Village Board for its comment and approval.
   (B)   To provide to the Village Board any recommendations for improvement in
policies or actions related to the placement, maintenance, and removal of trees
in public areas.
   (C)   To consider, evaluate, and make recommendations pertaining to any
tree-related issue at the request of the Village Board.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-17-2022)
§ 32.64 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   All requests for assistance from the Commission to the village are to
be conveyed by the Chair to the Village President. Neither the Commission nor
any of its members shall give direction to any member of the village staff, and
all recommendations of the Commission shall be referred to the Village Board
for consideration and implementation by the village at the discretion of the
Village Board.
   (B)   The Commission shall not have the authority to make any expenditure,
or cause to be made any purchase or contract that directly or indirectly
results in a financial liability or lien against the village, without the
express prior approval of the President and Village Board.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-17-2022)
CHAPTER 33: TAXATION AND FINANCES
Section
Taxes on Commodities
   
33.01   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax
   
33.02   Tax on use or consumption of electricity
   
33.03   Tax on sale of natural gas
Municipal Occupation Taxes
   
33.15   Municipal retailers’ occupation tax
   
33.16   Municipal service occupation tax
   
33.17   Municipal use tax
   
33.18   Municipal cannabis retailers’ occupation tax
   
33.19   Grocery retailers’ occupation tax and municipal grocery service
occupation tax
Administrative Fees; Credit or Debit Card Payment
   
33.30   Definitions
   
33.31   Acceptance following election
   
33.32   Payment of fees by card users or cardholders
   
33.33   Relief from underlying obligation
   
33.34   Liability
   
33.35   Booking and processing fee
   
33.36   Effective date
Deposits Required for Developers and Others
   
33.45   Payment and reimbursement
   
33.46   Deposit
   
33.47   Security
   
33.48   No staff review or meeting
   
33.49   Escrow account
   
33.50   Disbursement of funds
   
33.51   Replenishing account
   
33.52   Village Board discretion
   
33.53   Balance to be returned
   
33.54   Right of set off
   
33.55   Effective date
Accounts Payable Policy
   
33.65   Accounts payable policy
   
33.66   Employee purchases
Cable Television and Video Service Provider Fee
   
33.70   Annual fee
   
33.71   Quarterly payment
   
33.72   Calculation of fee
   
33.73   Gross revenues
 
   
33.99   Penalty
TAXES ON COMMODITIES
§ 33.01 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.
   (A)   A simplified municipal telecommunications tax is hereby imposed upon
the act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the
municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate or interstate
telecommunications by a person under the provisions of the Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act, P.A. No. 92-0526, being 35 ILCS 636, at a rate of
5% of the gross charges for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer.
   (B)   The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of
Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this
section.
   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by law,
provided, however, that division (A) of this section shall take effect for all
gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on and after July 1, 2004.
(Ord. 04-04, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 33.02 TAX ON USE OR CONSUMPTION OF ELECTRICITY.
   (A)   A tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate
limits of the municipality at the following rates, calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser:
                                                                                    $0.00555
      (1)    For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a monthper
                                                                                    kilowatt-
                                                                                    hour
                                                                                    $0.00364
      (2)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month per
                                                                                    kilowatt-
                                                                                    hour
                                                                                    $0.00328
      (3)    For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a monthper
                                                                                    kilowatt-
                                                                                    hour
                                                                                    $0.00319
      (4)    For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a montper
                                                                                    kilowatt-
                                                                                    hour
                                                                                    $0.00309
      (5)    For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a montper
                                                                                    kilowatt-
                                                                                    hour
                                                                                    $0.00291
      (6)    For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a moper
                                                                                    kilowatt-
                                                                                    hour
                                                                                    $0.00287
      (7)    For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a moper
                                                                                    kilowatt-
                                                                                    hour
                                                                                    $0.00282
      (8)    For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a moper
                                                                                    kilowatt-
                                                                                    hour
                                                                                    $0.00278
      (9)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a moper
                                                                                    kilowatt-
                                                                                    hour
                                                                                    $0.00273
      (10)    For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 per
kilowatt-hours in a month                                                           kilowatt-
                                                                                    hour
 
   (B)   The tax imposed by division (A) of this section shall take effect on
December 1, 2002, for residential and nonresidential customers.
   (C)   No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the use or consumption of electricity be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this section for such transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation
Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
      PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having
or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission
facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the
person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether the place
of business or agent or other representative is located in this state
permanently or temporarily, or whether the person, subsidiary or other
affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
      PERSONS. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions,
any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Has the meaning ascribed to it in the Public Utilities
Act, 220 ILCS 5/3-105, and shall include alternative retail electric suppliers
as defined in 220 ILCS 5/16-102.
      PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
      PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits
of the municipality, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
   (E)   This tax shall be collected from the purchaser by the person
maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers the electricity to
the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person
who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in
the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax
required to be collected pursuant to this section or any such tax collected by
a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to the village by
the person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering
electricity shall be allowed credit for the tax related to deliveries of
electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectable, and
provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering
supplier shall be obligated to remit the tax. For purposes of this division,
any partial payment not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be
deemed to be for the delivery of electricity. Persons delivering electricity
shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding the tax to the gross charge
for delivering the electricity, in the manner prescribed by the village.
Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to the gross
charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering
electricity for the expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
village upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the
tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax
directly to the village in the manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons
delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this division shall, at the
time of filing the return, pay the village the amount of the tax.
   (F)   (1)   Beginning on or before the last day of January each year, each
taxpayer shall make a return to the Village Treasurer for the month of December
of the previous year, stating:
         (a)   His or her name;
         (b)   His or her principal place of business;
         (c)   His or her kilowatt-hour usage during those months upon the
basis of which the tax is imposed;
         (d)   Amount of tax; and
         (e)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
      (2)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding one-month
period.
      (3)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the
time of making such return, pay to the Village Treasurer, the amount of tax
herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may,
if he or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total
billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return
is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of
later payments based upon any differences between the billings and the taxable
gross receipts.
   (G)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be credited against any tax due,
or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior
to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
   (H)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
such amount.
(Ord. 02-19, passed 10-7-2002; Am. Ord. 10-10, passed 11-1-2010) Penalty, see §
33.99
§ 33.03 TAX ON SALE OF NATURAL GAS.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption
within the corporate limits of the Village of Kirkland, and not for resale, at
the rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom.
   (B)   No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling
or transmitting gas be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section
for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the
provisions of the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS
5/8-11-1.
   (C)   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of
products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s business.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
      GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that
GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from the
definition of GROSS RECEIPTS in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2(d).
      PERSONS.  Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   (E)   This section shall take effect after publication and the tax provided
for herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined, actually
paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the first day of December,
2002.
   (F)   (1)   Beginning on or before the last day of January, 2003, each
taxpayer shall make a return to the Village Treasurer for the month of
December, 2002, stating:
         (a)   His or her name;
         (b)   His or her principal place of business;
         (c)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
         (d)   Amount of tax; and
         (e)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
      (2)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding one-month
period.
      (3)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the
time of making the return, pay to the Village Treasurer the amount of tax
herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may,
if he or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total
billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return
is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of
later payments based upon any differences between the billings and the taxable
gross receipts.
   (G)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited.
   (H)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of the
amount.
(Ord. 02-20, passed 10-7-2002; Am. Ord. 10-10, passed 11-1-2010) Penalty, see §
33.99
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
§ 33.15 MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons in the village in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail, at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business in accordance with
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file
on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by § 3 of An Act in Relation to a Tax upon
Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to
Purchasers for Use or Consumption, approved June 28, 1933, as amended, being 35
ILCS 120.
   (C)   At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
   (D)   The exclusion contained in § 2(d) of the Retailers Occupation Tax Act,
approved June 28, 1933, as amended, being 35 ILCS 120/2-5, shall not apply to
property within the village.
(1983 Code, § 3-1-1) (Ord. 512, passed 9-8-1969; Ord. 566B, passed 12-22-1980)
Statutory reference:
   An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling
Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption, see 35 ILCS
120
§ 33.16 MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the village in the business
of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of the cost price of all tangible
personal property transferred by the service people, either in the form of
tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a
sale of service in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.
   (B)   Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of this village shall file, on or before the
last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue
required by § 9 of the Service Occupation Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 115/9,
approved July 10, 1961, as amended.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue, the amount of tax hereby imposed on sales for the
preceding month.
   (D)   The exclusion contained in 35 ILCS 115/2(c), approved July 10, 1961,
as amended, shall not apply to property within the village.
(1983 Code, § 3-1-2) (Ord. 511, passed 9-8-1969; Ord. 566B, passed 12-22-1980)
§ 33.17 MUNICIPAL USE TAX.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-
11-6 upon the privilege of using in the municipality any item of tangible
personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a
retailer, and which is titled or registered with any agency of Illinois
government. The tax shall be at a rate of 1% of the selling price of the
tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the Use
Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 105, approved July 14, 1955.
   (B)   Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue for
all municipalities imposing tax and shall be paid before the title or
registration for the personal property is issued.
(1983 Code, § 3-1-3) (Ord. 538, passed 11-4-1974)
§ 33.18 MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS
5/8-11-22 upon all persons engaged in the business of selling cannabis, other
than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act, at retail in the village at the rate of 2% of the gross receipts from
these sales made in the course of that business.
   (B)   Such tax shall be remitted by such retailer to the Illinois Department
of Revenue. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by
this section and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be
remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue shall constitute a debt owed by
the retailer to the State. A retailer may reimburse itself for its seller's tax
liability hereunder by separately stating that tax as an additional charge,
which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with any State
tax that seller is required to collect.
   (C)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois
Department of Revenue. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power
to administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2019-13, passed 12-2-2019)
§ 33.19 GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE
OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   Municipal grocery retailers’ occupation tax imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business while this section is in effect. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (B)   Municipal grocery service occupation tax. A tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of
service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer
groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be
the same rate identified in division (A) above. The imposition of this tax is
in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (C)   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer both taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 9-15-2025)
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES; CREDIT OR DEBIT CARD PAYMENT
§ 33.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED OBLIGATION. Means in connection with the village, any fine (non-
court related), fee, charge, tax, or cost imposed by, owing to, or collected by
or on behalf of the village.
   CREDIT CARD. Any instrument or device, whether known as a credit card, bank
card, charge card, debit card, automated teller machine card, secured credit
card, smart card, electronic purse, prepaid card, affinity card, or by any
other name, issued with or without fee by an issuer for the use of the holder
to obtain credit, money, goods, services, or anything else of value.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 33.31 ACCEPTANCE FOLLOWING ELECTION.
   (A)   Following election of the village (by approval of this subchapter) to
accept credit card payments for authorized obligations, the village may enter
into agreements with one or more financial institutions or other service
providers to facilitate the acceptance and processing of credit card payments.
The agreements shall conform with the requirements of 50 ILCS 345/20(a) and are
subject to cancellation by the village upon giving the proper notice of intent
to cancel.
   (B)   The village may pay the amounts due a financial institution or other
service provider by paying upon receipt of the invoice or by allowing the
financial institution or other service provider to withhold the amount of the
fees from the credit card payment.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 33.32 PAYMENT OF FEES BY CARD USERS OR CARDHOLDERS.
   (A)   The village may impose a convenience fee or surcharge upon the
cardholder making payment of authorized obligations by credit card but said
convenience fee or surcharge shall not exceed the amount of any discount or
processing fee incurred by the village. No convenience fee for the issuance of
any license, sticker, or permit may exceed the lesser of $20 or 5% of the
principal amount charged for the authorized obligation. No convenience fee for
the payment of any administrative fine may exceed the lesser of $5 or 5% of the
principal amount charged for the authorized obligation. All other authorized
obligations not specifically stated in this section may be charged a minimum of
$1 as a convenience fee.
   (B)   The village hereby imposes a convenience fee of 2% upon those who use
a credit card for the issuance of any license, sticker, permit or any other
authorized fee; therefore, $2 for payments in the amount of $1 to $100, $4 for
payments in the amount of $101 to $200, $6 for payments in the amount of $201
to $300, $8 for payments in the amount of $301 to $400, $10 for payments in the
amount of $401 to $500, and so on, up until the maximum amount of $20 is
reached with respect to the purchases or fees.
   (C)   The village hereby imposes a convenience fee of 2% upon those who use
a credit card for the payment of any administrative fine; therefore, $2 for
payments in the amount of $1 to $100, $4 for payments in the amount of $101 to
$200, and a maximum convenience fee of $5 for payment of fines in the amount of
$201 and greater.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 33.33 RELIEF FROM THE UNDERLYING OBLIGATION.
   Any person who makes a credit card payment to the village for an authorized
obligation as provided herein shall not be relieved from liability of the
authorized obligation except to the extent that the village realizes final
payment of the authorized obligation in cash or the equivalent. If the credit
card payment is made by some party other than the credit card issuer or
guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, then the authorized
obligation shall survive and the village shall retain all remedies of law for
enforcement of the authorized obligation.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 33.34 LIABILITY.
   No village employee who accepts payment by credit card in accordance with
this subchapter shall incur any personal liability for the final collection of
the payment.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 33.35 BOOKING AND PROCESSING FEE.
   Any person arrested for violating a bailable violation of the village code,
state law, or federal law, who is processed at the Kirkland Police Department,
shall pay a $20 booking and processing fee.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 33.36 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This section shall be in full force and effect after its passage and
approval.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 2-4-2008)
DEPOSITS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPERS AND OTHERS
§ 33.45 PAYMENT AND REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   Property owners, petitioners and others seeking village plan approval
(applicants) shall enter into a written agreement and pay and reimburse the
village for any and all administrative expenses, special meeting, costs and any
and all fees, costs, salaries or compensation incurred by the village or
charged to the village by retained personnel or an outside consultant for work
in connection with the proposed subdivision of land, development of land,
construction of land or any other project or plan review where the village is
charged fees.
   (B)   RETAINED PERSONNEL shall be defined as any engineer, attorney,
planner, plan or code reviewer, economist, or other technical, professional or
expert paid or retained by the village to assist or advise the village,
directly or indirectly, in connection with any aspect of a proposed subdivision
of land, development upon land, or construction of land in the village.
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
§ 33.46 DEPOSIT.
   The applicant shall deposit with the Village Clerk at the time of
application a sum to be calculated as set forth below on the basis of the
amount of territory to be subdivided, developed or constructed to be used
toward defraying aforesaid expenses, costs, fees, salaries and compensation.
 
Acreage    Initial Deposit Minimum Balance
Up to 5    $3,000          $1,000
6 to 25    $10,000         $5,000
26 to 100  $15,000         $5,000
101 to 200 $25,000         $10,000
201 to 400 $40,000         $10,000
401 plus   $50,000         $10,000
 
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
§ 33.47 SECURITY.
   The deposit shall act as security to guarantee all expenses will be paid on
a timely basis.
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
§ 33.48 NO STAFF REVIEW OR MEETING.
   There shall be no staff review or meetings by or with any village officials
or retained personnel or consultants until such time as the retained personnel
deposit has been made.
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
§ 33.49 ESCROW ACCOUNT.
   The funds shall be deposited and maintained in a separate developer escrow
account, separate and apart from the general funds of the village; provided,
however, the funds may be commingled with other developer deposits in a single
bank account with separate accounting of each applicant's funds. Interest on
any such account or funds shall accrue to the village.
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
§ 33.50 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   The Village Clerk shall upon payment by the village of any fees or costs
related to the review, evaluation or processing of the application, promptly
reimburse the village for the payment from the pertinent deposit, and shall
render an accounting regarding same to the applicant. The village's payment of
any such fees or costs shall be conclusive evidence that such payment was due,
is for services actually rendered, and is a reasonable amount to be paid for
such services.
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
§ 33.51 REPLENISHING ACCOUNT.
   Whenever said funds shall have been disbursed, so as to reduce the funds on
account to or below the minimum balance described in §
33.46, the Village Clerk shall notify the applicant that the account must be
replenished to the initial required amount, and the applicant shall, nor more
than 15 days later, make a deposit with the Village Clerk to so replenish the
funds. If the applicant shall fail to replenish the account upon such written
notice, the village shall cease work on and processing of the subject
application until such time as the additional deposit has been received, unless
otherwise agreed by the Village Board.
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
§ 33.52 VILLAGE BOARD DISCRETION.
   The Village Board may, in its sole discretion, considering the size and
complexity of the proposed development:
   (A)   Require a larger initial deposit, and/or set a higher minimum balance
at which the account shall be replenished; and
   (B)   Reduce the amount of the initial deposit, and/or reduce the minimum
balance at which the account shall be replenished.
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
§ 33.53 BALANCE TO BE RETURNED.
   After payment of all reimbursements due to the village, any balance
remaining on account of the applicant shall be returned to the applicant.
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
§ 33.54 RIGHT OF SET OFF.
   The village shall set off any unpaid past due account of any applicant
against a new deposit by the same or an affiliated applicant. If the new
account falls below the initial deposit set forth in §
33.46, the applicant shall replenish the account to the full amount before any
work is done by the village.
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
§ 33.55 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval.
(Ord. 08-10, passed 6-2-2008)
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE POLICY
§ 33.65 ACCOUNTS PAYABLE POLICY.
   (A)   When invoices are received, they shall be date stamped and delivered
to the appropriate department head for review and approval. If approved, the
department head shall initial the invoice, and shall indicate which line item
(budgeted expense item number) this invoice is to be appropriated from. The
department head shall complete a purchase order ("PO") for the expense, and
return the PO along with the invoice to the Village Clerk.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the invoice and PO, the Village Clerk shall verify the
information received (due date, dollar amount, PO and invoice information) and
then include the item on the list of bills presented to the Finance Committee
at its monthly meeting. If invoices are received after the Finance Committee
has met for the month, then the Village Clerk shall verify the information
received (due date, dollar amount, PO and invoice information) and then include
the item on a separate list of bills presented to the Village Board for payment
at its next monthly meeting. Bills shall be paid after they are reviewed and
approved for payment by the Village Board. Upon approval by the Village Board,
the Village Clerk shall pay the invoice, and attach the check stub to the PO
and invoice and file it accordingly.
   (C)   All invoices are to be filed in a separate file folder until paid in
alphabetical order with the PO attached and with the line item (budgeted
expense item number) the invoice is to be appropriated from. Invoices shall be
available for review by the Finance Committee and Village Board during their
meetings.
   (D)   Any member of the Board of Trustees may inspect the bills, invoices
and files for accuracy at Village Hall during regular business hours. The check
stub which is filed with the PO and invoice should show the following
information:
      (1)   Payee;
      (2)   Amount paid;
      (3)   Check number;
      (4)   Invoice number or order number; and
      (5)   Items purchased (usually from the PO submitted).
   (E)   The check stub information may be verified and checked against the
information contained on the PO along with the merchant's invoice. In addition,
from time to time the Finance Committee shall review random invoices, both paid
and unpaid, and verify that all information is correct and that this procedure
is being followed. In addition, past invoices may also be pulled from files to
verify compliance with this procedure.
   (F)   Further, every month the Village Clerk shall print the account
activity from each and every account in QuickBooks, and give the information to
the Village Treasurer so that the Treasurer can reconcile the activity within
QuickBooks with each bank statement.
(Res. 09-03, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 16-12, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 33.66 EMPLOYEE PURCHASES.
   The head of each department of the village (being the Chief of Police,
Superintendent of Public Works and Village Clerk) shall each have the power to
enter into contracts and purchase goods and materials which cost up to $250,
without the prior approval of the Village President and Board of Trustees.
Contracts and purchases in excess of $250 shall require the prior approval of
the Village President and Board of Trustees. In all cases where the amount of a
contract or the cost to purchase goods and services is in excess of $250,
except in the case of an emergency as described in §
30.17, the department head shall make a request to the Board of Trustees in
writing to approve the purchase with information to substantiate the cost and a
brief explanation of why the purchase is necessary. Each requested contract or
purchase in excess of $250 shall be listed on the next agenda of a Board of
Trustees meeting for review and a vote. In addition, in case of an emergency, a
department head is authorized to make emergency purchases in excess of $250
with the consent of the Village President or the Chair of the appropriate
committee which oversees the department. The Village President or Committee
Chair shall notify the other members of the committee if an emergency
expenditure is authorized. In addition, if an emergency expenditure is
authorized, the department head shall promptly provide a report of the
expenditure to the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-3-2017; Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-4-2020)
CABLE TELEVISION AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
§ 33.70 ANNUAL FEE.
   Mediacom Illinois, LLC and any other cable television and video service
provider shall pay an annual service provider fee to the Village in an amount
equal to 5% of annual gross revenues derived from the provision of cable or
video service to households located within the village. The 12-month period for
the computation of the service provider fee shall be a calendar year.
(Ord. 15-08, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 33.71 QUARTERLY PAYMENT.
   The service provider fee payment shall be due quarterly and payable within
45 days after the close of the preceding calendar quarter. Each payment shall
be accompanied by a brief report prepared by a representative of the service
provider showing the basis for the computation. If mailed, the fee shall be
considered paid on the date that it is postmarked.
(Ord. 15-08, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 33.72 CALCULATION OF FEE.
   For purposes of the calculation of the service provider fee, GROSS REVENUES
shall mean consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation,
cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by Mediacom
Illinois, LLC or any other service provider for its operation of its cable
system to provide cable or video service within the village, including the
following:
   (A)   Recurring charges for cable service or video service.
   (B)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but
not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
   (C)   Rental of set-top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
   (D)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
   (E)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including but not limited to service order and service
termination charges.
   (F)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
   (G)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
local unit of government's jurisdiction. The allocation shall be based on the
number of subscribers in the local unit of government divided by the total
number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national
compensation arrangement.
   (H)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect
to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home
shopping" or similar channel, subject to division (I) below.
   (I)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
   (J)   The service provider fee set forth in §
33.70.
(Ord. 15-08, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 33.73 GROSS REVENUES.
   For purposes of the calculation of the service provider fee, GROSS REVENUES
shall not include:
   (A)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to §
33.72(F).
   (B)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount
of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued authorization to
the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable
service or video service.
   (C)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunications
services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing, or any other revenues attributed by the holder to non-
cable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
   (D)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the local unit of government's jurisdiction and pay
the fee permitted by this section with respect to the service.
   (E)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state-issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
   (F)   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
   (G)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for
merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable
service or video service.
(Ord. 15-08, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §
33.02 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $750 and in addition shall be liable in a
civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Ord. 02-19, passed 10-7-2002)
   (C)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §
33.03 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $750 and in addition shall be liable in a
civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Ord. 02-20, passed 10-7-2002)
CHAPTER 34: VILLAGE POLICIES
Section
Investment Policy
   
34.01   Investment policy adopted
Ethics
   
34.15   Definitions
   
34.16   Prohibited political activities
   
34.17   Gift ban
Interested Parties Registries (TIF)
   
34.30   Definitions
   
34.31   Establishment of registry
   
34.32   Maintenance of registry
   
34.33   Registration by residents
   
34.34   Registration by organizations
   
34.35   Determination of eligibility
   
34.36   Renewal and termination
   
34.37   Amendment to registration
   
34.38   Registries available for public inspection
   
34.39   Notices to be sent to interested parties
   
34.40   Noninterference
   
34.41   Amendment of registration rules
Personnel Policies
   
34.50   Employee holidays and Village Hall closing dates
   
34.51   Policy prohibiting sexual harassment
   
34.52   Retirement Fund participation; requirement adoption
   
34.53   Travel reimbursement policy
Identity Theft Prevention Policy
   
34.60   Background
   
34.61   Adoption
   
34.62   Purpose
   
34.63   Definitions
   
34.64   Identification of red flags
   
34.65   Detecting red flags
   
34.66   Preventing and mitigating identity theft
   
34.67   Updates
   
34.68   Administration
National Incident Management System
   
34.75   Adoption of National Incident Management System (NIMS)
 
   
34.99   Penalty
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 34.01 INVESTMENT POLICY ADOPTED.
   (A)   Purpose.  
      (1)   The Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois desires to comply
with the Public Funds Investment Act, 30 ILCS 235/1 et seq. (the Act);
      (2)   The Act mandates that all units of local government which invest
funds approve a formal investment policy; and
      (3)   The Village Board has recently reviewed the village’s investments
and desires to approve an investment policy in keeping with the Act.
   (B)   Policy adopted. The Village of Kirkland Investment Policy, which is
attached to Ordinance 05-02 as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference,
is hereby adopted as the Investment Policy of the village. Copies are available
through village offices.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 3-7-2005)
ETHICS
§ 34.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE.    Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of Presidential or
Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative
or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in the Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in the
Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, 5 ILCS 315/3.
   COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
subchapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a
leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not
fixed, COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on
premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer
or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF.  Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in the Election
Code, 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
   EMPLOYEE.  A person employed by the Village of Kirkland, whether on a full-
time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to
the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of
how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent
contractor.
   EMPLOYER.  The Village of Kirkland.
   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value, including but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive
compensation for employment, service credit towards pension benefits, and
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative
or administrative action;
       (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a County Clerk under the
Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/9-3, but only with regard to those activities that
require filing with the State Board of Elections or a County Clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
      (1)   Preparing for, organizing or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration or other political event;
      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting or other political event;
      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution;
      (4)   Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question;
      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question;
      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question;
      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls;
      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question;
      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office;
      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires;
      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question;
      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question;
      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question;
      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party
convention; and/or
      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:
      (1)   Is seeking official action by an officer or by an employee, or by
the officer or another employee directing that employee;
      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business with the officer or with an
employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
      (3)   Conducts activities regulated by the officer or by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
(Ord. 04-08, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 34.16 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined in §
34.15. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources
of the village in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity as part
of that officer or employee’s duties; as a condition of employment; or during
any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this subchapter.
   (E)   No person, either in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment, or in a position the salary for which is paid
in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal
Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-
in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club.
(Ord. 04-08, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 34.17 GIFT BAN.
   (A)   Regulation. Except as permitted by this subchapter, no officer or
employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer
or employee (collectively referred to herein as “recipients”), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined
herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited
source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (A) above is not applicable to the following:
         (a)   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public;
         (b)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse
or immediate family member, pays the fair market value;
         (c)   Any contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code,
or activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate;
         (d)   Educational materials and missions;
         (e)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business;
         (f)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather or grandmother of the
individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiancé or fiancee;
         (g)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship, unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
            1.   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
            2.   Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
            3.   Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar
gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family
members.
         (h)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a
single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are either:
consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared; or
catered. For the purposes of this section,  CATERED means food or refreshments
that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means;
         (i)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances;
         (j)   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose
of this Act, INTRAGOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and INTERGOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any
gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity;
         (k)   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; or
         (l)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
      (2)   Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive
and independent of every other.
   (C)   Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee does not violate
this subchapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a
gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount
equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income
taxation under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, being U.S.C.
Title 26, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered or succeeded.
(Ord. 04-08, passed 4-19-2004)
Cross-reference:
   Similar provisions, see §
31.72
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRIES (TIF)
§ 34.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ACT.  The Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act, 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
   CLERK. The Village Clerk.
   INTERESTED PARTY(IES.)
      (1)   Any organization(s) active within the village;
      (2)   Any resident(s) of the village; and
      (3)   Any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the Act to
register in the interested parties registry who has registered in such registry
and whose registration has not been terminated in accordance with these
registration rules.
   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA. A REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA that:
      (1)   Is intended to qualify or that has previously or subsequently
qualified as a “redevelopment project area” under the Act; and
      (2)   Is subject to the “interested parties registry” requirements of the
Act.
   REGISTRATION FORM. The form appended to these registration rules, or such
revised form as may be approved by the department consistent with the
requirements of the act.
   REGISTRY OR REGISTRIES. Each interested parties registry, and all such
registries, collectively, established by the village pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-
74.4-4.2 for a redevelopment project area.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Kirkland, an Illinois municipal corporation.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-1) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.31 ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY.
   The village shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each
redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of
these rules or hereafter established.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-2) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.32 MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY.
   The registries shall be maintained by the Clerk, who has a principal
business office located at 511 West Main Street, Kirkland, Illinois. The
village may transfer the responsibility for maintaining the registries to such
other department, provided that the village: gives prior written notice to all
interested parties not less than 30 days prior to the transfer; and publishes
notice of the transfer in a newspaper of general circulation in the village.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-3) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.33 REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS.
   An individual seeking to register as an interested party with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
Clerk. Such individual must also submit a copy of a current driver’s license,
lease, utility bill, or such other evidence as may be acceptable to the Clerk
to establish the individual’s current residency.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-4) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.34 REGISTRATION BY ORGANIZATIONS.
   An organization seeking to register as an interested party with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
Clerk. Such organization must also submit a copy of a one-page statement
describing the organization’s current operations in the village.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-5) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.35 DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY.
   All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting
documentation complies with these registration rules shall be registered in the
applicable registry within ten business days of the Clerk’s receipt of all such
documents. The Clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant confirming
the registration. Upon registration, interested parties shall be entitled to
receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under these rules or
as otherwise required under the Act with respect to the applicable
redevelopment project area. If the Clerk determines that a registrant’s
registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not
comply with these rules, the Clerk shall give written notice to the registrant
specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to correct any
defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting documentation.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-6) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.36 RENEWAL AND TERMINATION.
   An interested party’s registration shall remain effective for a period of
three years. At any time after the three-year period, the Clerk may provide
written notice by regular mail to the interested party stating that the
registration shall terminate unless the interested party renews the
registration within 30 days of the Clerk’s mailing of written notice. To renew
the registration, the interested party shall, within the 30-day period,
complete and submit the same registration form and supporting documentation
then required of initial registrants in order to permit the Clerk to confirm
the person’s residency or the organization’s operations in the village. The
registration of all individuals and organizations whose registration form and
supporting documentation is submitted in a timely manner and complies with
these regulation rules shall be reviewed for an additional, consecutive three-
year period. If the Clerk determines that a registrant’s renewal registration
form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with
these registration rules, the Clerk shall give written notice to the registrant
at the address specified in the renewal registration form submitted by the
registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to
correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting
documentation within 30 days of receipt of the Clerk’s notice. If all defects
are not corrected within 30 days of the interested party’s receipt of the
Clerk’s notice, the interested party’s registration shall be terminated. Any
interested party whose registration is terminated shall be entitled to register
again as if a first-time registrant.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-7) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.37 AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION.
   (A)   An interested party may amend its registration by giving written
notice to the Clerk by certified mail of any of the following:
      (1)   A change in address for notice purposes;
      (2)   In the case of organizations, a change in the name of the contact
person; and
      (3)   A termination of registration.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such notice, the Clerk shall revise the applicable
registry accordingly.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-8) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.38 REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal village
business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone
number of each interested person and, for organizations, the name and phone
number of a designated contact person.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-9) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.39 NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES.
   Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices
required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project
area:
   (A)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(a), notice of the availability of a
proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including how to obtain
this information; such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period
of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the public hearing for the
proposed redevelopment plan;
   (B)   (1)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(a), notice of changes to
proposed redevelopment plans that do not:
         (a)   Add additional parcels of property to the proposed redevelopment
project area;
         (b)   Substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the
redevelopment plan;
         (c)   Substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the
redevelopment project; or
         (d)   Increase the number of low or very low income households to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area, provided that measured from the
time of creation of the redevelopment project area the total displacement of
the households will exceed ten.
      (2)   The notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten days following
the village’s adoption by ordinance of such changes.
   (C)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(c), notice of amendments to previously
approved redevelopment plans that do not:
      (1)   Add additional parcels of property to the redevelopment project
area;
      (2)   Substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment
plan;
      (3)   Substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project;
      (4)   Increase the total estimated redevelopment project costs set out in
the redevelopment plan by more than 5% after adjustment for inflation from the
date the plan was adopted;
      (5)   Add additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of
redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan; or
      (6)   Increase the number of low or very low income households to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area, provided that measured from the
time of creation of the redevelopment project area the total displacement of
households will exceed ten; such notice shall be sent by mail not later than
ten days following the village’s adoption by ordinance of any such amendment.
   (D)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9), for redevelopment plans or
projects that would result in the displacement of residents from ten or more
inhabited residential units or that contain 75 or more inhabited residential
units, notice of the availability of the certified audit report described in 65
ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9), including how to obtain the certified audit report;
such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after
completion of the certified audit report;
   (E)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-6(c), notice of the preliminary public
meeting required under the act for a proposed redevelopment project area that
will result in the displacement of ten or more inhabited residential units or
which will contain 75 or more inhabited residential units, the notice shall be
sent by certified mail not less than 15 days before the date of the preliminary
public meeting.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-10) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.40 NONINTERFERENCE.
   These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise
interfere with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to
register for receipt of information to which they are entitled under the Act.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-11) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 34.41 AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION RULES.
   These registration rules may be amended by the Village Board, subject to and
consistent with the requirements of the Act.
(1983 Code, § 1-14-12) (Ord. 00-08, passed 6-5-2000)
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 34.50 EMPLOYEE HOLIDAYS AND VILLAGE HALL CLOSING DATES.
   (A)   Purpose.  
      (1)   The Village Board of Trustees is authorized to establish holidays
for employees and dates when Village Hall shall be closed; and
      (2)   As the village has grown it has hired more employees, and the
Village Board desires to standardize holidays for all of its employees and to
close Village Hall on the days established herein.
   (B)   Dates. The dates the following holidays are observed by the federal
government shall be the official holidays of the village, and Village Hall
shall be closed in observance of the holidays as follows:
      (1)   New Year’s Day;
      (2)   Martin Luther King Day;
      (3)   Presidents’ Day;
      (4)   Memorial Day;
      (5)   Independence Day;
      (6)   Labor Day;
      (7)   Veterans’ Day;
      (8)   Thanksgiving Day;
      (9)   Day after Thanksgiving Day;
      (10)   Christmas Eve Day; and
      (11)   Christmas Day.
(Ord. 05-06, passed 6-6-2005)
§ 34.51 PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   Prohibition on sexual harassment. It is unlawful to harass a person
because of that person's sex. The courts have determined that sexual harassment
is a form of discrimination under Title VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of
1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a right to work in an environment
free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is unacceptable misconduct which
affects individuals of all genders and sexual orientations. It is a policy of
the village to prohibit harassment of any person by any municipal official,
municipal agent, municipal employee or municipal agency or office on the basis
of sex or gender. All municipal officials, municipal agents, municipal
employees and municipal agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually
harassing any person, regardless of any employment relationship or lack
thereof.
   (B)   Definition of sexual harassment. This policy adopts the definition of
sexual harassment as stated in the Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently
defines SEXUAL HARASSMENT as:
      (1)   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment;
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
         (c)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
      (2)   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
         (a)   Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor,
and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature;
         (b)   Non-verbal: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls," "smacking"
or "kissing" noises;
         (c)   Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites;
         (d)   Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault; and
         (e)   Textual/electronic: "sexting" (electronically sending messages
with sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of
electronic communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line
postings, blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and
Twitter).
      (3)   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a "reasonable person."
   (C)   Procedure for reporting an allegation of sexual harassment.
      (1)   If any Supervisory Personnel as described in this policy learns of
an incident of alleged harassment, it is that individual's responsibility to
immediately report the incident to the appropriate person and/or conduct an
investigation. An investigation of the allegations of all complaints will be
made as soon as practicable and, to the extent practicable and appropriate
under the circumstances, confidentiality will be maintained.
      (2)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes
herself/himself to be the object of sexual harassment is encouraged to deal
with the incident(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly
communicating her/his position to the offending employee, in addition to
notifying Supervisory Personnel. In the event an employee is not comfortable or
feels threatened by the offending employee, the employee is encouraged to
report promptly to Supervisory Personnel. It is not necessary for sexual
harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
      (3)   The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct.
      (4)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including:
         (a)   Electronic/direct communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
         (b)   Contact with Supervisory Personnel. At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem may be reported to Supervisory
Personnel. Supervisory Personnel includes a department head, the Village
President, Village Trustee(s), or the Village Attorney.
         (c)   Confidential communications. Employees may report to Supervisory
Personnel concerning any conduct which is believed to be sexual harassment. Any
reported allegations of harassment will be investigated promptly. Village
personnel will make a reasonable effort to maintain confidentiality, only
disclosing information on a need-to-know basis. However, absolute
confidentiality cannot be guaranteed.
      (5)   Resolution outside municipality. The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within 180 days of the alleged
incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must
be filed within 300 days.
      (6)   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report
(what was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not
limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone
messages.
      (7)   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
      (8)   The village encourages prompt reporting of complaints so that rapid
response and appropriate action may be taken. Thus, all complaints should be
reported as soon as possible but within six months of the alleged harassment.
Delayed reporting of complaints will not, in and of itself, preclude the
village from taking remedial action.
   (D)   Prohibition on retaliation for reporting sexual harassment
allegations. 
      (1)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee's:
         (a)   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
policy;
         (b)   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy; or
         (c)   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
      (2)   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee's involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
      (3)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
      (4)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein,
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides
whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge,
suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in
retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
         (a)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a
public body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, state
agency, or other state employee that the state employee reasonably believes is
in violation of a law, rule, or regulation;
         (b)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, state agency or other state
employee; or
         (c)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
      (5)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer
may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a state or federal law, rule, or regulation. (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
      (6)   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it
is a civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to
conspire, to retaliate against a person because he/she has opposed that which
he/she reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in
employment, because he/she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified,
assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the
Illinois Human Rights Act.
      (7)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge, due within 180 days (IDHR) or 300 days (EEOC) of the
alleged retaliation.
   (E)   Consequences of a violation of the prohibition on sexual harassment.
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, and/or collective
bargaining agreements, any person who violates this policy or the Prohibition
on Sexual Harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65, may be subject to a fine of
up to $5,000 per offense, applicable discipline or discharge by the
municipality and any applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to
local ordinance, state law or federal law. Each violation may constitute a
separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the municipality shall be separate
and distinct from any penalty imposed by an ethics commission and any fines or
penalties imposed by a court of law or a state or federal agency.
   (F)   Consequences for knowingly making a false report.
      (1)   A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the
seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is
a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, and/or collective
bargaining agreements.
      (2)   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report
alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a
state's attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official
is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an
administrative fine of up to $5,000 against any person who intentionally makes
a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
(Ord. 2017-13, passed 12-4-2017)
Editor’s note:  With the passage of Resolution 20-03 on March 2, 2020, the
village adopted a revised anti-harassment policy.
§ 34.52 RETIREMENT FUND PARTICIPATION; REQUIREMENT ADOPTION.
   (A)   The President and Board of Trustees elects to exclude from
participation in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund all officials and
employees in positions normally requiring performance of duty for less than
1,000 hours per year.
   (B)   This exclusion shall apply only to officials and employees who first
occupy offices or positions under the Fund after adoption of this section.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 34.53 TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT POLICY.
   Policy governing reimbursement of employee and officer travel, meal and
lodging expenses.
   (A)   Purpose. The Board of Trustees of the village will reimburse employee
and officer travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred in connection with pre-
approved travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred on behalf of the village.
Employees and officers are expected to exercise the same care in incurring
expenses for official business as a prudent person would in spending personal
funds.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
      ENTERTAINMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
      TRAVEL. Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the village or by wards or charges of the village involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.
   (C)   Authorized types of official business. 
      (1)   Travel, meal and lodging expenses shall be reimbursed for employees
and officers of the village only for purposes of official business conducted on
behalf of the village, which includes but is not limited to off-site or out-of-
town meetings related to official business and pre-approved seminars,
conferences and other educational events related to the employee's or officer's
official duties. If you are unsure whether an expense is reimbursable, please
contact the Mayor to discuss the proposed travel.
      (2)   Employees and officers may be authorized to attend professional
conferences and meetings on work related topics. Employees shall submit
requests for conference or meeting attendance requiring overnight accomodations
to the Board of Trustees for approval. Approval for conferences is subject to
budgetary constraints and the Board's discretion. The Board may pre-approve
expenses for conferences and travel by including them in the annual budget and
appropriation ordinance.
   (D)   Categories of expenses.
      (1)   Airfare. Travelers are expected to obtain the lowest available
airfare that reasonably meets business travel needs. Travelers are encouraged
to book flights at least 30 days in advance to avoid premium airfare pricing.
Only coach or economy tickets will be paid or reimbursed. The traveler will pay
for the difference between higher priced tickets and coach or economy tickets
with his or her personal funds.
      (2)   Personal automobiles. Mileage reimbursement will be based on
mileage from the work location office to the off-site location of the official
business, not from the employee's or officer's residence. When attending a
training event or other off-site official business directly from an employee's
or officer's residence, no reimbursement will be made if the distance is less
than the mileage of a normal commute to the workplace. If the distance is
higher than the employee's or officer's normal commute, reimbursement will be
paid based on the differential of the commute less the mileage of a normal
commute to the workplace. An employee or officer will be reimbursed at the
prevailing IRS mileage rate. The traveler will only be reimbursed up to the
price of a coach airfare ticket if they drive to a location for which airfare
would have been less expensive.
      (3)   Automobile rentals. Travelers will be reimbursed for the cost of
renting an automobile including gasoline expense only as provided in this
section. Travelers using rental cars to conduct official business are required
to purchase insurance through the rental agency. Car rental insurance will
cover the vehicle during personal use, e.g., using the vehicle after the
conference has ended. Compact or mid- size cars are required for two or fewer
employees or officers traveling together and a full-size vehicle may be used
for three or more travelers. The traveler must refuel the vehicle before
returning it to the rental company.
      (4)   Public transportation. In the case of local training or official
business where an employee or officer chooses to use public transportation,
reimbursement for use of public transportation shall be the cost of the public
transportation plus any mileage in accordance with this policy.
      (5)   Other transportation. The traveler should utilize hotel shuttle
service or other shuttle services, if available. If none are offered, the use
of the most economic transportation is encouraged.
      (6)   Hotel/motel accommodations. The traveler will be reimbursed for a
standard single-room at locations convenient to the business activity. Hotel/
motel accommodations are to be reserved in advance and secured at a moderate or
conference rate. Reimbursement for lodging shall be limited to the number of
nights required to conduct the assigned village business. If a conference, for
example, opens on a Sunday evening and closes Thursday noon, reimbursement for
Sunday through Wednesday night would be allowed. In the event of a change in
plans or a cancellation, the traveler must cancel the hotel/motel reservation
so as not to incur cancellation charges. Cancellation charges will not be
reimbursed by the village unless approved by a vote of the Board of Trustees.
      (7)   Meals. Meal expenses and reimbursements are limited to the per diem
rate of $50. Receipts shall be submitted to substantiate all expenses within 14
days after expenses are incurred. Any amount of the per diem allowance which
was not spent by the traveler shall be returned to the township at the time
receipts are submitted. Meals provided by a conference or seminar should be
deducted from the per diem allowance. Partial reimbursement may be made for
departure and return days based on time. Meals during in-state travel that are
not part of an overnight stay will be reimbursed at the actual cost not to
exceed the GSA meal rate.
      (8)   Vacation in conjunction with business travel. In cases where
vacation time is added to a business trip, any cost variance in airfare, car
rental, lodging and/or any other expenses must be clearly identified on the
Travel, Meal, and Lodging Expense Report form and paid by the traveler.
      (9)   Accompanied travel. Family members may accompany the traveler when
traveling on official village business. However, no expenses attributable to
any family member will be reimbursable. All expenses will be calculated as if
the traveler were traveling alone, using the minimum costs to the village for
lodging, meals, and transportation.
      (10)   Parking. Parking fees at a hotel/motel or incidental to other
travel will be reimbursed only with a receipt.
      (11)   Entertainment expenses.  No employee or officer of the village
shall be reimbursed for any entertainment expense, unless ancillary to the
purpose of the program, event or other official business.
   (E)   Approval of expenses.
      (1)   Expenses for members of the Board of Trustees, officials or
employees. Travel, meal, and lodging expenses to be reimbursed to any member of
the Board of Trustees or any official or employee must be approved by roll-call
vote at an open meeting of the Village Board. Documentation of expenses must be
provided in accordance with divisions (C), (D) and (F) of this section. The
expenses may be included on the list of bills presented to the Board for
approval. Any excess from the per diem allowance must be repaid as provided in
this policy.
      (2)   Other expenses. All other expenses that do not fall within
divisions (E)(1) and (2) are subject to the Village Board's approval.
   (F)   Documentation of expenses. 
      (1)   Before an expense for travel, meals, or lodging may be approved
under division (E) of this section, the following minimum documentation must
first be submitted, in writing, to the Village Clerk on a Travel, Meal, and
Lodging Expense form:
         (a)   An estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging if expenses
have not been incurred or a receipt of the cost of the travel, meals, or
lodging if the expenses have already been incurred;
         (b)   The name of the individual who received or is requesting the
travel, meal, or lodging expense;
         (c)   The job title or office of the individual who received or is
requesting the travel, meal, or lodging expense; and
         (d)   The date or dates and nature of the official business for which
the travel, meal, or lodging expense was or will be expended.
      (2)   All documents and information submitted under this section are
public records subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.
   (G)   Travel, Meal, and Lodging Expense Report Form. The village hereby
adopts as its official standardized form for the submission of travel, meal,
and lodging expenses the Travel, Meal, and Lodging Expense Report form attached
to Ordinance 16-11 as Attachment 1 and incorporated herein.
   (H)   Maximum reimbursement. The maximum total amount the village will
reimburse a traveler for a single trip is $3,000. The maximum amount may be
increased because of emergency or other extraordinary circumstances when
approved by the Village Board at a roll call vote at a meeting.
(Ord. 16-11, passed 12-19-2016)
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION POLICY
§ 34.60 BACKGROUND.
   Identity theft has become the number one consumer fraud issue in the
country. In 2007, more than 10,000 identity theft complaints were filed with
the Federal Trade Commission ("FTC") by Illinois residents. The Village of
Kirkland ("village") recognizes that the risk to the village, its employees,
residents, and customers from data loss and identity theft is a significant
concern to the village, which this Identity Theft Prevention Program
("program") seeks to address.
(Res. 09-02, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 34.61 ADOPTION.
   The village developed the program in an effort to battle identity theft. The
program was developed with oversight and approval of the Village President and
Village Board. After consideration of the size and complexity of the village's
operations and customer account systems, and the nature and scope of the
village's activities, the Village President and Village Board determined that
this program was appropriate for the village, and therefore approved the
program on March 2, 2009.
(Res. 09-02, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 34.62 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The village adopts the program to help protect employees, customers,
contractors, and itself from harm and damage related to, or caused by, the loss
or misuse of sensitive information. The program also will assist the village in
detecting, preventing, and mitigating identity theft. The program does so by
identifying certain "red flags" that suggest or indicate the possibility of
identity theft, and by providing guidelines on how the village should respond
once it detects any such red flags. Further, the program will:
      (1)   Define sensitive information;
      (2)   Describe the physical security of data when it is printed on paper;
      (3)   Describe the electronic security of data when stored and
distributed; and
      (4)   Place the village in compliance with state and federal law
regarding identity theft protection.
   (B)   The program has been tailored to the size, complexity and the nature
of the village's operations. The program also has been designed in order to:
      (1)   Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts
and incorporate those red flags into the program;
      (2)   Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program;
      (3)   Allow the village to respond appropriately to any red flags that
are detected to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and
      (4)   Ensure that the program is reviewed periodically, and updated, if
necessary, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and
soundness of the village from identity theft.
(Res. 09-02, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 34.63 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   COVERED ACCOUNT.
      (1)   An account that the village offers or maintains, primarily for
personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit
multiple payments or transactions, such as a utility account; and
      (2)   Any other account that the village offers or maintains for which
there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and
soundness of the village, including financial, operational, compliance,
reputation, or litigation risks.
   CREDIT. The right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt
or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and
defer payment therefore.
   CREDITOR. Any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any
person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of
credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the
decision to extend, renew, or continue credit, including utility companies.
   CUSTOMER. A person that has a covered account with a creditor.
   IDENTITY THEFT. A fraud committed or attempted using identifying information
of another person without authority.
   PERSON. A natural person, a corporation, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association.
   RED FLAG. A pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.
   SENSITIVE INFORMATION. Any name or number that may be used, alone or in
conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,
including, but not limited to, a person's credit card account information,
debit card information, bank account information, driver's license information,
Social Security number, mother's birth name, date of birth, electronic
identification number, computer Internet Protocol address, and routing code.
   SERVICE PROVIDER. A person that provides a service directly to the village.
(Res. 09-02, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 34.64 IDENTIFICATION OF RED FLAGS.
   In order to identify relevant red flags, the village considers the types of
accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open its
accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous
experiences with identity theft. The village identifies the following red
flags, in the following listed categories:
   (A)   Notifications and warnings from credit reporting agencies - red flags.
      (1)   Report of fraud accompanying a credit report;
      (2)   Notice or report from a credit agency of a credit freeze on a
customer or applicant;
      (3)   Notice or report from a credit agency of an active duty alert for
an applicant; and
      (4)   Indication from a credit report of activity that is inconsistent
with a customer's usual pattern or activity.
   (B)   Suspicious documents - red flags.
      (1)   Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered
or otherwise inauthentic;
      (2)   Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or
physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the document;
      (3)   Other documentation with information that is not consistent with
existing customer information (e.g. a person's signature on a check appears
forged); and
      (4)   Application for service that appears to have been altered or
forged.
   (C)   Suspicious personal identifying information - red flags.
      (1)   Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other
information the customer provides (e.g. inconsistent birth dates);
      (2)   Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other
sources of information (e.g. an address not matching an address on a credit
report);
      (3)   Identifying information presented that is the same as information
shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent;
      (4)   Identifying information presented that is consistent with
fraudulent activity (e.g. an invalid phone number or an answering service, or
fictitious billing address, mail drop or prison);
      (5)   Social Security number presented that is the same as one given by
another customer;
      (6)   An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of
another person;
      (7)   A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information
on an application when reminded to do so; and
      (8)   A person's identifying information is not consistent with the
information that is on file for the customer.
   (D)   Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account - red flags.
      (1)   Change of address for an account followed by a request to change
the account holder's name;
      (2)   Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account;
      (3)   Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use (e.g.
very high activity);
      (4)   Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as
undeliverable;
      (5)   Notice to the village that a customer is not receiving mail sent by
the village;
      (6)   Notice to the village that an account has unauthorized activity;
      (7)   Breach in the village's computer system security; and
      (8)   Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information.
   (E)   Alerts from others - red flags. Notice to the village from a customer,
identity theft victim, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or is
maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft.
(Res. 09-02, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 34.65 DETECTING RED FLAGS.
   (A)   New covered accounts. In order to try and detect any of the red flags
identified in § 34.64 associated with the opening of a new covered account,
village personnel should take the following steps to obtain and verify the
identity of the person opening the covered account:
      (1)   Require certain identifying information such as name, date of
birth, residential or business address, principal place of business for an
entity, driver's license or other identification;
      (2)   Verify the customer's identity (e.g. review a driver's license or
other identification card);
      (3)   Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity;
and
      (4)   Independently contact the customer if appropriate.
   (B)   Existing covered accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags
identified in § 34.64 for an existing covered account, village personnel will
take the following steps to monitor transactions with a covered account:
      (1)   Verify the identification of customers if they request information
(in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email, or otherwise);
      (2)   Verify the validity of requests to change billing addresses; and
      (3)   Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment
purposes.
(Res. 09-02, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 34.66 PREVENTING AND MITIGATING IDENTITY THEFT.
   (A)   Securing sensitive information.
      (1)   Village personnel are encouraged to use common sense judgment in
securing sensitive and confidential information. Furthermore, in exercising
such judgment, consideration should be given to the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act ("FOIA"). If an employee is uncertain of the sensitivity of a
particular piece of information, the employee should contact their supervisor
or the program administrator. Further, if the village receives a FOIA or other
request seeking sensitive information, or documents containing sensitive
information, said requests should be forwarded to the Village President and the
Village Attorney.
      (2)   In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft
occurring with respect to village accounts, the village shall make reasonable
efforts to take the following steps with respect to its internal operating
procedures to protect customer identifying information:
         (a)   Take steps to ensure that the village's website is secure or
provide clear notice that the website is not secure;
         (b)   Attempt to ensure destruction of paper documents and computer
files containing sensitive information;
         (c)   Keep file cabinets, desk drawers, cabinets, and any other
storage space containing documents with sensitive information locked when not
in use;
         (d)   Lock storage rooms containing documents with sensitive
information and record retention area at the end of the work day or when
unsupervised;
         (e)   Attempt to ensure that office computers with access to covered
accounts and/or sensitive information are password protected and that computer
screens lock after a set period of time;
         (f)   Keep workstations, work areas, and offices clear of papers
containing sensitive information;
         (g)   Request only the last four digits of Social Security numbers (if
any);
         (h)   Attempt to ensure that computer virus protection is up to date;
         (i)   Require and keep only the kinds of sensitive information that
are necessary for the village's purposes; and
         (j)   Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall only
include the last four digits of the credit card, debit card, or the bank
account used for payment of the covered account.
   (B)   Electronic distribution. Each employee, service provider, or
contractor performing work for the village will comply with the following
policies:
      (1)   With respect to internal electronic distribution, sensitive
information may be transmitted using approved village electronic mail; and
      (2)   With respect to external electronic distribution, sensitive
information should only be transmitted in an encrypted format and should
contain a statement such as this:
      "This message may contain sensitive, confidential and/or proprietary
information and is intended for the person/entity to whom it was originally
addressed. Any use by others is strictly prohibited."
   (C)   Responses when red flags detected. In the event village personnel
detect any identified red flags, such personnel should take one or more of the
following steps, depending on the degree of risk posed by the red flag:
      (1)   Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft;
      (2)   Contact the customer;
      (3)   Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access
to covered accounts;
      (4)   Decline or otherwise refuse to open a new covered account;
      (5)   Close an existing covered account;
      (6)   Reopen a covered account with a new number;
      (7)   Notify the program administrator for determination of the
appropriate step(s) to take;
      (8)   Notify law enforcement; or
      (9)   Determine that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances.
(Res. 09-02, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 34.67 UPDATES.
   This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to try and reflect
changes in risks to customers and the soundness of the village from identity
theft. At least once a year, the program administrator will consider the
village's experiences with identity theft, changes in identity theft methods,
changes in identity theft detection and prevention methods, changes in types of
accounts the village maintains and changes in the village's business
arrangements with other entities. After considering these factors, the program
administrator will determine whether changes to the program, including the
listing of red flags, are warranted. If warranted, the program administrator
will update the program or present the Village President and Village Board with
his or her recommended changes and the Village President and Village Board will
make a determination of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to
the program.
(Res. 09-02, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 34.68 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Oversight. Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating
this program lies with the Identity Theft Committee. The Committee shall be
headed by the program administrator or his or her appointee. Two or more other
individuals appointed by the corporate authorities shall comprise the remainder
of the committee membership. The program administrator will be responsible for
the program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of village staff
on the program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red
flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining
which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular
circumstances and considering periodic changes to the program.
   (B)   Staff training and reports. Village staff responsible for implementing
the program shall be trained either by or under the direction of the program
administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be
taken when a red flag is detected. Further training shall also be provided on a
yearly basis or as needed to address changes in the program.
   (C)   Service provider arrangements. In the event the village engages a
service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered
accounts, the village will take the following steps to ensure the service
provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies and
procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity
theft.
      (1)   Require, by contract, that service providers have such policies and
procedures in place; and
      (2)   Require, by contract, that service providers review the village's
program and report any red flags to the program administrator.
   (D)   Specific program elements and confidentiality. For the effectiveness
of identity theft prevention programs, the red flag rule envisions a degree of
confidentiality regarding the village's specific practices relating to identity
theft detection, prevention and mitigation. Therefore, under this program,
knowledge of such specific practices is to be limited to the program
administrator or identity theft committee and those employees who need to know
them for purposes of preventing identity theft. Because this program is to be
adopted by a public body and thus publicly available, it would be
counterproductive to list these specific practices here. Therefore, only the
program's general red flag detection, implementation and prevention practices
are listed in this document.
(Res. 09-02, passed 3-2-2009)
NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
§ 34.75 ADOPTION OF NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS).
   The Board of Trustees declares that the National Incident Management System
(NIMS) is established as the village's standard for incident management.
(Res. 09-09, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of §
34.16 may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in
an amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (2)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of §
34.17 is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more
than $5,000.
      (3)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of §§
34.15 through
34.17 to the local enforcement authorities, the State’s Attorney or any other
law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (4)   A violation of §
34.16 shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the Village
of Kirkland by filing in the Circuit Court an information, or sworn complaint,
charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules
of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt
of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
      (5)   A violation of §
34.17 may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the
village or, if an Ethics Commission has been created, by the Commission through
the designated administrative procedure.
      (6)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of §§
34.16 or
34.17 is subject to discipline or discharge.
(Ord. 04-08, passed 4-19-2004)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   GARBAGE, REFUSE AND LITTER
         
51.   UTILITY FEES
         
52.   WATER REGULATIONS
         
53.   SEWER REGULATIONS
         
54.   CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE, REFUSE AND LITTER
Section
Waste Collection
   
50.01   Garbage receptacle required
   
50.02   Deposit of litter
   
50.03   Dumping of garbage and rubbish restricted
   
50.04   Scavenging of recyclable waste prohibited
   
50.05   Time for placement of waste containers
   
50.06   Storage of waste containers
Collection Fees
   
50.15   Fees for refuse and garbage collection
Open Burning
   
50.30   Open fires
   
50.99   Penalty
WASTE COLLECTION
§ 50.01 GARBAGE RECEPTACLE REQUIRED.
   Every boarding house, hotel, restaurant, saloon, fruit store, butcher shop,
market, grocery and bakery shall have a garbage receptacle for receiving
garbage and other refuse matter. Garbage receptacles shall also be placed at
all other places of business and manufacturing and any or all private
residences when so directed by written notice from the Health Officer and all
garbage and refuse matter about such places shall be in the receptacles. Any
person, owner, occupant or agent for the premises as shall fail to comply with
the provisions of this section, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in §
50.99.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-1) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.02 DEPOSIT OF LITTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, cause to be deposited or
permit to be deposited any litter, glass, cans, waste material, papers, garbage
or refuse in or upon any public street or alley within corporate limits of the
village.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-2) (Ord. 510, passed 11-2-1968) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 DUMPING OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH RESTRICTED.
   The dumping of rubbish will be prohibited within the corporate limits of the
village, except in such place as shall be designated as a municipal dump ground
by the Village Board of Trustees.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-3) (Ord. passed 5-5-1952) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 SCAVENGING OF RECYCLABLE WASTE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Ownership of recyclable waste material. After recyclable waste
material has been placed in a designated container for that purpose at a
designated recycling collection location for collection by the waste hauler
retained by the village or its authorized agent, the recyclable waste material
shall become the property of the waste hauler retained by the village or its
authorized agent.
   (B)   Unauthorized collection prohibited.  During the 24-hour period
commencing at 6:00 p.m. on any day preceding a day designated for collection of
recyclable waste material, no person, other than a village employee or the
village’s authorized agent, shall remove recyclable waste material from a
designated container which has been placed at a designated recycling collection
location. Each collection in violation of this section from each separate
designated recycling collection location during that period shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation punishable as provided in §
50.99.
   (C)   Right of individual to dispose of recyclable waste material.  Nothing
in this section shall limit the right of an individual person, organization or
other entity to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of recyclable waste material,
if the disposal does not violate any applicable statute, regulation or
ordinance.
   (D)   Civil action by authorized recycling contractor or village. Nothing in
this section shall be deemed to limit the right of an authorized agent or the
village to bring a civil action against any person who violates this section,
nor shall a conviction for the violation exempt any person from a civil action
brought by an authorized recycling contractor or the village.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-4) (Ord. 91-2, passed - -) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 TIME FOR PLACEMENT OF WASTE CONTAINERS.
   All solid waste containers including, but not limited to, plastic toters,
metal or plastic cans, plastic bags, recycling bins, landscape waste bags, or
other receptacles for trash, that are placed at the curb for pickup by licensed
collectors, shall be set out no earlier than 3:00 p.m. on the day preceding the
day on which pickup is scheduled and shall be removed as soon as possible but
in no event later than 7:00 p.m. on the day of pickup.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 50.06 STORAGE OF WASTE CONTAINERS.
   All solid waste containers, including but not limited to, plastic toters,
metal or plastic cans, plastic bags, recycling bins, landscape waste bags or
other approved receptacles or other trash shall be stored in the garage or in a
shed or in the side yard or the rear yard immediately adjacent to a structure
upon premises zoned for residential use.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 9-8-2009)
COLLECTION FEES
§ 50.15 FEES FOR REFUSE AND GARBAGE COLLECTION.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to enter a contract
with a garbage collection and disposition service provider and set, from time
to time, a reasonable fee necessary for the costs of refuse and garbage
collection and disposition in the village, including reasonable administrative
costs, to be paid by residents receiving refuse and garbage collection and
disposition services ("fee").
   (B)   The Board of Trustees may decide to have the fee billed directly by
the service provider to the residents, or may decide to allocate the fee as a
separate item on the water bill.
   (C)   The fee to be paid by residents receiving refuse and garbage
collection and disposition service each month shall be in accordance with the
in-force contract entered by the village with the service provider, which will
vary from time-to-time.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-5) (Ord. 95-5, passed - -; Ord. 99-7, passed 5-3-1999; Ord.
03-14, passed 10-6-2003; Ord. 09-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 15-06, passed 8-3-
2015; Ord. 2019-06, passed 4-29-2019; Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-6-2021)
OPEN BURNING
§ 50.30 OPEN FIRES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to burn paper or other combustible refuse, waste,
rubbish, garbage or any other material except wood in any open fire or burn
barrel. Leaves may be burned between March 1 and April 30 and between September
15 and December 15 of each year between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The burning of
leaves is prohibited on the hard surface or asphalt portion of any street,
curb, gutter or alley. Leaf fires shall be supervised by an adult at all times.
The Police Department is authorized to prohibit, stop, cause or order any fire
be extinguished if it determines that due to the size, location, wind or other
atmospheric conditions, it poses a threat to the safety of persons or property.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to yard waste burned by the
village.
   (B)   Recreational fires supervised by an adult and contained in a fire-safe
vessel or pit not exceeding 24 inches in diameter and of similar duration of a
small campfire are permitted, but may be limited or stopped by the Police
Department as set forth above.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-7) (Ord. 97-10, passed 8-4-1997) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, owner, occupant or agent for such premises as shall fail
to comply with the provisions of §
50.01 shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $750 for
each offense.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-1)
   (C)   Any person violating the terms of §
50.02 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-2)
   (D)   Penalty for violation of §
50.03 shall be not less than $50 nor more than $750.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-3)
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §
50.04 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-4)
   (F)   Persons violating §
50.30 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(1983 Code, § 4-2-7)
(Ord. passed 5-5-1952; Ord. 510, passed 11-2-1968; Ord. 91-2, passed - -; Ord.
97-10, passed 8-4-1997; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 51: UTILITY FEES
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Water user service charges
   
51.03   Sewer user service charges
   
51.04   Review of water and sewer rates
   
51.05   Bills and liability for payment
   
51.06   System of accounts and audit
   
51.07   Notice of rates
   
51.08   Effective date of rates
   
51.09   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.10   Additional utility fees
   
51.11   Utility service payment prior to transfer of real property
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC USER CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period by all public
waterworks and sewage works users for payment of operation and maintenance
costs plus replacement of the waterworks and sewerage works of the village.
   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand, which is defined as the quantity of oxygen
used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20°C,
determined by standard laboratory test procedures and expressed in mg/l.
   CONNECTION FEE. The amount to be paid by all new users for connecting to the
waterworks and sewerage works of the village.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specifically designed and constructed for
sampling and metering industrial wastes discharged to a public sewer.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.  The amount to be paid each billing period by all
public waterworks and sewerage works users for payment of principal and
interest of outstanding bonds and to provide bond reserve funds required by
bond ordinances of the village.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq.) as amended by the Federal Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub.
L. No. 92-500 and Pub. L. No. 93-243) and the Clean Water Act of 1977 (Pub. L.
No. 95-217).
   INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   (a)   1.   For the purpose of industrial cost recovery any
nongovernmental, nonresidential user of publicly-owned sewerage works which
discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary
wastes and which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented,
under one of the following divisions:
               a.   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
               b.   Division B - Mining;
               c.   Division D - Manufacturing;
               d.   Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas
and Sanitary Services; and
               e.   Division I - Services.
            2.   Also any other nongovernmental user as defined as an
INDUSTRIAL USER in 40 C.F.R. § 35.905.
         (b)   In determining the amount of a user’s discharge for purposes of
industrial cost recovery, the village will exclude domestic wastes or
discharges from sanitary conveniences. After applying the sanitary waste
exclusion of this division, discharges in the above divisions that have a
volume exceeding 25,000 gpd or the weight of BOD or suspended solids equivalent
to that weight found in 25,000 gpd of sanitary waste are considered INDUSTRIAL
USERS.
         (c)   Sanitary wastes, for purposes of this calculation of
equivalency, are wastes containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.22 pounds of
suspended solids per 100 gallons of wastewater per day.
      (2)   For the purpose of user charges, INDUSTRIAL USERS shall include
manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials or substances into other products. These activities occur in
establishments usually described as plants, factories or mills and
characteristically use power-driven machines and material handling equipment.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The wastewater discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or
process, or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural
resource as distinct from employees’ wastes or wastewater from  sanitary
conveniences.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user that has a flow of 50,000
gallons or more per average work day, or has a flow greater than 10% of the
flow carried by the sewerage works receiving the waste; or has in its waste a
toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under § 307(a)
of the Federal Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a); or is found by the permit
issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the
publicly-owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that
treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
   MAY. The action referred to is permissive.
   MG/L. Milligrams per liter.
   MOBILE HOME and MOBILE HOME PARK. Defined as provided in 210 ILCS 115/2.1
and 2.5.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document to regulate the discharge of
pollutants pursuant to § 402 of the Federal Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   PERSON.  Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, public or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed in gram molecular weight (moles) per liter.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other wastes on a treatment works or stream. One POPULATION EQUIVALENT is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.22 pounds of
suspended solids.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights of connection and use, and is operated, maintained and controlled by the
village or other public agencies.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures for purchasing and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
sewerage works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works
were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
replacement.
   RESIDENTIAL or COMMERCIAL or NON-INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user of the sewerage
works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user.
      (1)   Residential user.  Any private building or part of a building used
for residential dwelling purposes and each mobile home located within a mobile
home park. Each dwelling unit of a residential building having two or more
dwelling units and each mobile home located in a mobile home park shall be
considered a separate and individual sewer user.
      (2)   Commercial user.  Any private building or part of a building used
for commercial establishments, including but not limited to retail stores,
business services, restaurants, taverns, automobile service stations and
garages, hotels and motels, and the like with dry weather wastewater flow less
than 25,000 gallons per day. Each commercial establishment of a building having
two or more commercial establishments shall be considered a separate and
individual sewer user.
      (3)   Nonindustrial user. Any private or public building, or part of a
building used for nonindustrial purposes, except for residential and/or
commercial uses, including but not limited to churches, schools, hospitals,
libraries, clubs or lodges, nursing homes, research laboratories, and the like
with dry weather wastewater flow less than 25,000 gallons per day.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage and polluted industrial wastes,
and to which storm water, surface drainage, ground water or unpolluted
wastewater are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the wastewater from residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional buildings together with the ground water
infiltration and surface water inflow that may be in the sewers.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. An arrangement of devices, structures and processes
for the treating and disposing of sewage.
   SEWER USER SERVICE CHARGE. The total amount to be paid each billing period
by public sewer users including the basic user charge, the debt service charge
and a surcharge, if applicable.
   SEWERAGE WORKS. All facilities of the village for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage and industrial wastes.
   SHALL. The action referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of sewage, industrial waste or other wastewater which,
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
   STATE ACT. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act effective July 1, 1970,
being 415 ILCS 5/1 through 51.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Public Works of the village or his or
her duly authorized deputy or representative.
   SURCHARGE.  The amount to be paid each billing period by certain public
waterworks and sewerage works users in addition to the basic user charge and
the debt service charge.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, industrial wastes, or in other wastewaters; the
quantity of which is determined by standard laboratory filtering test
procedures and referred to as nonfilterable residue expressed in mg/l.
   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the sewerage works will be
operated from the date of start-up of any facilities constructed with a state
grant.
   USER CLASS. The type of user either “residential or commercial”
(nonindustrial) or “industrial” as defined herein.
   VILLAGE.  The Village of Kirkland of DeKalb County, Illinois.
   WATER USER SERVICE CHARGE. The total amount to be paid each billing period
by public waterworks users including the basic user charge, the debt service
charge, and a surcharge if applicable.
   WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE REVENUE FUND. The principal accounting designation
for all revenue received for the operation of the waterworks and sewerage works
of the village.
(1983 Code, § 7-3-1) (Ord. 581, passed - -1982; Ord. passed - -1983)
§ 51.02 WATER USER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   There shall be and there are hereby established water user service
rates and charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the village
waterworks, based on the amount of metered water usage read to the lowest
increment of 1,000 gallons.
   (B)   The basic user service charge to be paid every two months (each two
month interval being a “billing period”), by all metered water users within the
village corporate limits shall be:
      (1)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2025, $5.79 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
      (2)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2026, $5.96 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
      (3)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2027, $6.14 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
      (4)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2028, $6.32 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
      (5)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2029, $6.51 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
   (C)   In addition to the basic user services charges contained in division
(B) above, effective September 1, 1995, a debt service charge of $1.71 per
1,000 gallons of metered water usage for purposes of retiring the bonds of the
water tower shall be paid quarterly by all users. The surcharge shall be
discontinued when the debt service is retired.
   (D)   The water user service charge for all users outside the village
corporate limits shall include a surcharge of 50% of the water user service
charges for users within the village corporate limits.
   (E)   In addition to any other fee, charge or surcharge provided for in this
chapter, and notwithstanding any other inconsistent provision in the chapter,
each owner of each respective dwelling unit, residence, building or other
structure connected to the village’s water system for which no water is used
from the village’s water system for a two-month interval shall pay to the
village a water system base charge in the amount of $25, which is to be paid by
each owner of each dwelling unit, residence, building or other structure
connected to the village’s water system, whether or not such dwelling unit,
residence, building or other structure utilizes any water from such village
system or is vacant or has no tenant for a two-month interval. In the event
that there is more than one owner of each such respective dwelling unit,
residence, building or other structure connected to the village’s water system,
such owners shall be jointly and severally liable and responsible to pay such
charge to the village.
   (F)   An additional surcharge will be added to the water bill for every week
that the user has not responded to the village to schedule a time to inspect
the service line, within ten days of one or more written requests from the
village to do so, in the amount of $25 (per week).
   (G)   An additional surcharge will be added to the water bill for every
month that the user has not responded to the village to inspect and/or replace
a water meter reader, within ten days of one or more written requests from the
village to do so, in the amount of $25 (per month).
(1983 Code, § 7-3-2) (Ord. 95-1, passed - -; Ord. 95-9, passed - -; Ord. 95-17,
passed - -; Ord. 97-5, passed - -; Ord. 00-7, passed 6-5-2000; Ord. 04-01,
passed 1-5-2004; Ord. 08-24, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 14-04, passed 3-3-2014;
Ord. 2017-07, passed 6-19-2017; Ord. 2019-06, passed 4-29-2019; Ord. 2023-05,
passed 12-4-2023; Ord. 2025-01, passed 5-5-2025; Ord. 2025-02, passed 6-2-2025)
§ 51.03 SEWER USER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   There shall be and there are hereby established sewer user service
rates and charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the village
sewerage works which shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and
maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge, and a surcharge if
applicable. Each sewer user shall be notified, at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment service.
   (B)   The basic sewer user service charge, not including surcharges
previously adopted, to be paid every two months (each two month interval being
a “billing period”), by all metered sewer users within the village corporate
limits shall be:
      (1)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2025, $6.32 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
      (2)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2026, $6.51 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
      (3)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2027, $6.71 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
      (4)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2028, $6.91 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
      (5)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2029, $7.11 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
      (6)   Effective for bills generated after May 1, 2024, $6.14 for each
1,000 gallons, or part thereof, of metered usage during the billing period.
   (C)   The basic user charge shall be determined by the amount of revenue
funds required to operate and maintain the sewage works and to provide funds
for the replacement of component parts of the sewerage works for each fiscal
year.
   (D)   The debt service charge shall be determined by the amount of revenue
funds required for the principal and interest payments due for all outstanding
bonds authorized and issued by the village for financing improvements to the
sewerage works and to provide bond reserve funds.
   (E)   Reserved.
   (F)   Reserved.
   (G)   Whenever the Superintendent determines that a nonmetered sewer user is
discharging more than 30,000 gallons per quarter, the Superintendent may
require the nonmetered sewer user to install metering devices on the building
water supply or building sewer to measure the volume of wastewater discharged
to the public sewers.
   (H)   A treatment service surcharge shall be levied to all sewer users whose
wastewater exceeds the normal concentrations of 200 mg/l of BOD as determined
by waste sampling which shall be performed as often as deemed necessary by the
Superintendent and shall be binding as the basis for computing the surcharge.
The surcharge rate shall be $0.17 per pound of BOD in excess of 0.17 pounds per
100 gallons.
   (I)   Each user of the public sewerage works located outside the village
corporate limits shall pay the sum of $100 per year as a fixed surcharge
payable in advance or in quarterly payments of $25 at the customer’s option.
This surcharge is for depreciation and shall be used for the maintenance and
replacement of the sanitary sewer system and sewage treatment plant, and shall
be in addition to the regular rates and charges for sewage collection and
treatment service.
(1983 Code, § 7-3-3)
   (J)   Each user of the public sewerage works shall pay a permit fee
surcharge for the payment by the village of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System fee as imposed by the State of Illinois, calculated as
follows:
         The annual fee shall be divided by six, to determine the portion of
the total surcharge to be added to each bi-monthly sewerage bill. The resulting
amount shall be divided equally by the number of sewerage users registered by
the village as of the date on which bills are to be distributed. The resulting
amount shall be added to each bill as the individual surcharge for each user.
(Ord. 581, passed - -1982; Ord. passed - -1983; Ord. 93-10, passed - -; Ord.
97-04, passed - -; Ord. 97-07, passed - -; Ord. 03-15, passed 10-6-2003; Ord.
03-16, passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 08-25, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 14-05, passed 3-
3-2014; Ord. 2019-06, passed 4-29-2019; Ord. 2025-01, passed 5-5-2025)
§ 51.04 REVIEW OF WATER AND SEWER RATES.
   The adequacy of the water and sewer user service rates and charges shall be
reviewed annually by the certified public accountants for the village in their
annual audit report. If, at any time, the rates and charges are not sufficient
to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, to provide adequate funds for
replacement, and to pay the principal and interest of outstanding bonds and
provide bond reserve funds required by bond ordinances, the Village Board of
Trustees shall forthwith increase the rates and charges so that the same are
sufficient to provide adequate revenues for those purposes.
(1983 Code, § 7-3-4)
§ 51.05 BILLS AND LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.
   (A)   Water and sewer user service charges shall be billed on a bi-monthly
basis to all users. Payment shall be due not less than 15 days after the date
of the bill. If payment of the entire amount of the bill for water and/or sewer
user service charges is not received by the village on or before the due date,
then a late payment penalty of 20% of the unpaid balance of the bill shall be
added thereto and become due and payable.
   (B)   The owner or occupant of a property who has not paid the water and/or
sewer bill when due shall be sent a notice indicating that a penalty is due in
addition to the delinquent bill. The owner or occupant shall have ten days from
the date of the notice to pay the delinquent bill and penalties in full.
   (C)   If the water and/or sewer user service charges, including any penalty
then due, are not paid in full by the date specified in the delinquency notice,
the service shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be
reinstated until all past due bills including the penalties thereon are paid in
full, together with an additional payment of $100 for shutting off and
reinstating the services.
   (D)   In the event the water and/or sewer user service charges including any
penalty then due are not paid by the date specified in the delinquency notice,
the charges and penalty shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be
delinquent, and thereafter the village may file a notice of lien claim with the
County Recorder of Deeds. This notice of lien claim shall include the legal
description of the property to which sewer service was provided, the amount of
the unpaid user service charges and penalties, and a notice that the village
claims a lien for the stated amount as well as for all water and sewer service
user charges and penalties, subsequent to the period for which the bill was
rendered. Wherever the person whose user service charges are delinquent is not
the owner of the property to which service was provided by the village, and the
village has previously received notice of this, notice of delinquency and lien
shall be mailed to the owner of the property if his or her address is known by
the village. The failure of the village to record the lien with the County
Recorder of Deeds, or to mail the notice of delinquency and lien to the owner
of the property, or failure of the owner to receive the notice shall not affect
the right of the village to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in
the section.
   (E)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid water and/or sewer user service
charges may be foreclosed in the same manner as mortgages and judgments on or
against real estate are foreclosed.
   (F)   In addition to filing a notice of lien, the village may file a civil
suit against owners or occupants whose utility bills have been delinquent for
at least 30 days. In addition to all delinquent amounts and fees, the owner or
occupant shall pay the village's actual attorney's fees and costs in seeking
recovery for nonpayment for such utility services.
   (G)   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the
water and/or sewer service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the
service to the premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the
village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and
user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.
(1983 Code, § 7-3-5) (Ord. 92-13, passed - -; Ord. 94-6, passed - -; Ord. 11-
02, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 51.06 SYSTEM OF ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the
combined waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident
to the operation of the system as the same may be delivered to him or her and
deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the Village of Kirkland
Waterworks and Sewerage Fund, and the Treasurer shall administer these funds in
every respect in the manner provided by the provisions of Combined Waterworks
and Sewerage System, being 65 ILCS 5/11-139-1, and all laws amendatory thereof
and supplementary thereto.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall keep or cause to be kept full and complete
books of accounts separate and apart from any other records of the village
showing in detail all monies received by him or her with data and sources and
all matters pertaining to his or her office in a clear and methodical manner.
He or she shall also keep such other books as the Village Board of Trustees may
from time to time direct. All the books, accounts and papers pertaining to that
office shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the Board of
Trustees, any member thereof, the holder of any outstanding waterworks and
sewerage revenue bonds, or any duly authorized agent or agents of the holder.
The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system.
   (C)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the sewerage
works including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer user service charges
and industrial cost recovery charges do in fact comply with this chapter. In
this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall
include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons of wastewater flow for the fiscal
year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (4)   Number of users connected to the sewerage works;
      (5)   Number of nonmetered users; and
      (6)   A list of users discharging industrial wastes and volume of waste
discharged.
   (D)   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized
representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of
the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges or
industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts
and transactions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and
general conditions to the state grant.
(1983 Code, § 7-3-6)
§ 51.07 NOTICE OF RATES.
   A copy of the provisions of this chapter, properly certified by the Village
Clerk, shall be filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DeKalb County,
Illinois, and shall be deemed public notice to all persons of the rates and
charges of the village for water and sewer service and industrial cost
recovery.
(1983 Code, § 7-3-7)
§ 51.08 EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES.
   The rates and charges established for water and sewer user service and for
industrial cost recovery shall be effective as of October 1, 1982, and on bills
to be rendered for each succeeding quarter thereafter.
(1983 Code, § 7-3-8)
§ 51.09 POWERS AND AUTHORITIES OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village,
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted at all reasonable times to enter all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Superintendent or his or
her representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)    While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
village shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to
the village employees and the village shall indemnify the company against loss
or damage to its property by village employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and
growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused
by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required
by §
53.05(H), concerning sewerage system regulations.
   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village
bearing proper credentials and identifications shall be permitted to enter all
private properties at all reasonable times through which the village holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to inspection,
observation, measurements, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the sewerage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(1983 Code, § 7-3-9)
§ 51.10 ADDITIONAL UTILITY FEES.
   (A)   Each metered water user whose water is provided by the village shall
pay a fee of $8.34 per billing cycle to fund the Bull Creek stormwater project.
   (B)   A water/sewer improvement fund fee of $6.00 shall be paid by each
metered water and/or sewer user for each billing cycle.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 4-29-2019)
§ 51.11 UTILITY SERVICE PAYMENT PRIOR TO TRANSFER OF REAL PROPERTY.
   In the event real property or control over same is sold, transferred or
assigned to another (hereinafter referred to as the "transferee") by any person
or entity theretofore responsible for payment of changes (hereinafter referred
to as the "transferor"), it shall be the responsibility of both the transferor
and transferee to notice, in writing, the village of the intended transfer no
less than five working days prior to the date of the intended transfer of the
real property with a final meter reading. After the village has verified the
meter reading a final bill will be issued for all charges owed the village
under §
51.02, §
51.03, and §
51.05. The village certification shall be obtained for all real property that
is sold and connected to the village potable water system and/or sewer system.
Such certification shall be evidence that all fees owed the village have been
paid in full at the time of issuance of such certification. It is the
obligation of both the owner and prospective buyer of the relevant real estate
to obtain a village certification. Upon full payment thereof, the transferor
shall thereafter be relieved of any further responsibility for such service. In
the event the village is not so notified of such transfer, the transferee shall
be deemed jointly and severally liable with the transferor for all unpaid
charges of the premises incurred up to and including the date of the transfer,
as well as thereafter. No existing service shall be deemed transferable without
a new application being submitted to the village and payment in full of all
outstanding charges and fees assessed to the existing account for the subject
property.
(Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall
be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice,
permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount no less than $25 nor more than
$750 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village by reason of the violation.
(1983 Code, § 7-3-10) (Ord. 581, passed - -1982; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 52: WATER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Waterworks established
   
52.02   Private water wells prohibited
   
52.03   Village not liable for damages in interruption of service
   
52.04   Right to change rents, rates, system, plant reserved
Meters
   
52.15   Water meter required; deposits
   
52.16   Meters
Connections
   
52.30   Connections with water plant; application; report of plumber
   
52.31   Permit to make connections
   
52.32   Tap mains, fees
   
52.33   Superintendent to keep records of connections
   
52.34   Material and work specifications
   
52.35   Permit to open streets required
   
52.36   Fixtures; repair
   52.37   Water shut off boxes required
Use of Water
   
52.50   Public hydrants
   
52.51   Use of water
   
52.52   Water turned off
Enforcement
   
52.65   Superintendent and inspectors to have access to premises
   
52.66   Prohibited acts, conditions
   
52.67   Violations
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 WATERWORKS ESTABLISHED.
   The system of water supply and distribution heretofore established, built
and constructed by the village is hereby continued as the property of the
village and under its control, jurisdiction and management. The system and
plant shall, at all times, be maintained, repaired, altered, changed,
controlled and extended under the authority and ownership of the village. The
system shall be under the jurisdiction of the Superintendent of Public Works as
established herein.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-1)
§ 52.02 PRIVATE WATER WELLS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No water well shall be drilled, constructed, sunk, maintained or
operated on any parcel of land within the corporate limits of the village if a
water main constituting a part of the village’s public water supply system is
within 400 feet of the nearest property line of the property upon which the
well would be drilled, constructed, sunk or otherwise provided and/or to which
the well would provide service.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the operation and maintenance of wells
constructed and in operation prior to June 1, 1995, except that all the wells
shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal,
state, county and local laws, ordinances and regulations.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-18) (Ord. 95-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 VILLAGE NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES IN INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   All connections and water applied for hereunder and all the water used
hereunder shall be upon the express condition that the village shall not be
liable, nor will any claim be made against it for damage or injury caused by
reason of the breaking of any main, connections, branches, service pipe or
apparatus or appurtenances connected therewith, or any part or portion of the
system or plant, or for any interruption of the supply or by reason of the
breakage of machinery, or by reason of stoppage for repairs, alterations or
extensions or renewals.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-10)
§ 52.04 RIGHT TO CHANGE RENTS, RATES, SYSTEM, PLANT RESERVED.
   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village from changing or altering
the provisions hereof, and the village shall have and retain authority from
time to time to alter, change, increase, decrease or improve the system and
plant, or any part or portion thereof, or to establish or prescribe new or
different rates, rents, regulations or provisions concerning the use of the
water or the water system or plant or to change the source of supply, or to
alter, amend, change or repeal the provisions of this chapter.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-16)
METERS
§ 52.15 WATER METER REQUIRED; DEPOSITS.
   (A)   All persons desiring water service within the village shall apply to
the Village Clerk for water service and a meter with which to measure the water
used in the premises, and shall at the time of the application pay to the
Village Clerk a sum equal to the actual cost, to the village, of the water
meter to be installed. The water meter to be installed shall be of a type and
in accordance with specifications as shall be required by the village under
resolution of the Village Board as then in effect. Nothing contained herein
shall require the village to install a water meter where the Village Clerk
deems the installation thereof to be difficult or impossible.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from the facilities
of the village without first having installed, in the premises upon which the
water shall be used, a suitable water meter approved and furnished by the
village authorities, unless the Village Clerk previously deems the installation
thereof to be difficult or impossible.
   (C)   Water meters installed under the provisions of this section shall at
all times remain the property of the village. By making application for a meter
the applicant does permit, allow and consent to the proper representative of
the village to enter in at all reasonable times and upon the premises where the
water meter is installed for the purpose of removing, repairing and reading the
water meter without further notice and without further process of law.
   (D)   Upon the discontinuance of the use of water service by the applicant
and upon notification to the Village Clerk by the applicant of his or her
discontinuance of the water service and removal from the premises wherein the
water meter is installed, the water service will be discontinued and the
deposit herein provided for shall be refunded to the applicant subject only to
the payment to the village of all then existing water and sewer charges unpaid
at the time of the discontinuance of the water service.
   (E)   When the user and the depositor hereunder is also the owner of the
premises for which the deposit is made and the depositor shall have paid all
charges assessed for water and sewer rentals within 60 days of the date charges
therefor are submitted by the village for a period of four successive quarters,
the village shall refund the deposit so made, provided that in the event the
ownership or occupancy of the premises shall change thereafter, the deposit
requirements thereof shall be reinstated.
   (F)   Those persons receiving water service where no water meter is
installed shall be charged the minimum charge for water and sewer service.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-2) (Ord. 87-3, passed - -; Ord. 02-13, passed 6-3-2002)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.16 METERS.
   (A)   (1)   All buildings using the public waterworks and sewerage works
shall have a water meter furnished by the village, installed in a location that
has easy access for reading, maintenance and replacement, except mobile homes
located within a tract required to be licensed as a mobile home park.
      (2)   Each mobile home park required to be licensed by the State of
Illinois pursuant to 210 ILCS 115/3, shall have a water meter furnished by the
village installed in a location that has easy access for the reading,
maintenance and replacement.
   (B)   The Superintendent or his or her authorized representative shall be
permitted entry to buildings using the public waterworks and sewerage works to
read all water meters used in the village at such reasonable times as necessary
to determine billing charges for water and sewer service.
   (C)   The village will remove and test water meters if requested by a
waterworks and sewerage works user upon receiving payment of a $5 testing fee.
If the tested meter is not within 3% of accuracy, the village will repair or
place the meter at no additional cost and refund the $5 testing fee to the
user.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-12) (Ord. 581, passed - -1982; Ord. passed - -1983)
CONNECTIONS
§ 52.30 CONNECTIONS WITH WATER PLANT; APPLICATION; REPORT OF PLUMBER.
   (A)   Any person desiring to make any connection with the system and plant,
or use water therefrom, shall first make application to the Superintendent for
that purpose upon a blank form or forms to be furnished by him or her. Every
applicant shall state specifically and in detail the place, location and kind
of connection and appendages sought, the purpose for which the water is to be
used, and all the plumbing and plumbing work in any manner or way connected
therewith.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the plumber installing the work to report to
the Superintendent everything done in connection therewith and any departure
from or violation of the permit. Every person so making the connection with the
system or plant or using water therefrom shall make connection and use the
water subject at all times to the provisions and conditions of the ordinances
of the village in force or to become in force at any time during the period the
connections are maintained or the water is used, and shall in all respects
conform to the provisions and conditions of this chapter.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-3)
§ 52.31 PERMIT TO MAKE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   When the applicant hereunder has complied with all the provisions of
the ordinances of the village, a permit shall then be issued by the
Superintendent authorizing the connection to be made and all plumbing and
plumbing work in any manner or way connected therewith to be done. Nothing in
the permit contained shall be construed to permit or authorize any such
connection or use of water to be made, had or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, nor shall it be understood to authorize anything
not explicitly and truthfully stated in the application.
   (B)   A special permit must be obtained for each connection serving a single
building, residence, premises or place.
   (C)   (1)   When branch connections are used to serve additional buildings,
residences, premises or places, a permit must be obtained for each branch
serving a single building, residence, premises or place. No branch shall,
however, extend more than 30 feet on either side from the connection. No
branches shall be used or installed unless it can be done without impairing the
convenience and ability to extinguish fires, and for this purpose no permit for
a branch shall be issued unless first approved by the Committee on Fire and
Water.
      (2)   Whenever branches are used with any such connection, the applicant
for the main connection or the person in his or her successor or suing the same
shall be responsible for all the branches and the payments of the water rents
or rates herein required and for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter in the placing, using and maintenance of the branches.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-4)
§ 52.32 TAP MAINS, FEES.
   (A)   Whenever any permit for a connection with a water main is issued, the
Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designee shall tap the main where
the connection from the main and point of junction to the village cock and
insert the cock and place the cast iron cut-off box thereon. The customer for
whom the tap is made shall be solely responsible for any and all required
excavation, backfill and street repair. All applicants shall be charged $500,
and shall pay the same at the time the application is made.
   (B)   Beginning January 1, 1998, the fees shall be increased in an amount to
be determined by the Village Board from time to time. For January 1, 2007, the
fee is $2,457.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-5) (Ord. 94-1, passed - -; Ord. 97-8, passed - -)
§ 52.33 SUPERINTENDENT TO KEEP RECORDS OF CONNECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent at the time application as herein
required is made, to enter in a book to be kept for that purpose the statements
and representations of the applicant as to places, location, kind and extent of
the connection to be made, the purpose for which the water is to be used, and
all the plumbing and plumbing work in any manner or way connected therewith as
by this chapter required of the applicant to be given specifically and in
detail.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-6)
§ 52.34 MATERIAL AND WORK SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Drain and waste cock. There shall be a drain and waste cock attached
to every supply pipe at the point where it enters the building in such a manner
as to admit of the water being shut off in cold or freezing weather, and the
pipes being emptied.
   (B)   Kind and quality of copper pipe.  
      (1)   The connection from the main and all authorized branches to the
inside line of the building or house shall be placed at least five and one-half
feet below the surface of the ground, and shall be made of copper pipe of the
quality known in commerce as “extra strong.” It shall be laid sufficiently
waiving so that it shall be at least one foot longer than if laid straight, and
placed in such a manner as to prevent rupture or breakage from settling of the
ground. All copper pipe used for interior plumbing shall be of the same quality
known in commerce as “extra strong.”
      (2)   For interior plumbing work beyond the inside of the building or
house, galvanized iron pipe, joints and couplings shall be of a quality known
in commerce as “standard.” Other interior plumbing may be of such kind as the
applicant or owner may direct, but it and all other must stand a pressure of
300 pounds to the square inch. All drain cocks used in connection with the
waterworks system or plant shall be made of brass and shall be of a quality
known in commerce as “standard,” and shall be strong enough to resist the
pressure of water in all cases.
   (C)   Size of connections. No connections shall be made with the mains in
freezing weather unless special circumstances make the same safe, and then only
when approved by the Superintendent. All connections where the same join the
main shall be at least 24 inches apart. The opening or tap for any connection
in a four-inch main shall not be larger than to receive a five-eighths-inch
connection; for a six-inch main no larger than to receive a three-fourths-inch
connection; and all above six-inch mains no larger than to receive a one-inch
connection, except in mains above six inches under special circumstances
rendering it safe, and then only when first permitted by the Committee on Fire
and Water, a tap to receive a larger connection than one inch may be made.
   (D)   Height of public hydrants and street washers. All public hydrants and
street washers shall extend at least five feet in the ground and shall have a
good and sufficient drip well surrounded with rubble stone, so as to allow free
drainage of water from the bottom thereof.
   (E)   Approval by Superintendent. All plumbing and plumbing work shall be
done subject to the approval of the Superintendent and no work underground
shall be covered up until examined by him or her or some person or persons
under his or her direction.
   (F)   Access to premises. The Superintendent and the person or persons
authorized by him or her shall be permitted to enter and have free access at
all reasonable hours to buildings, premises or places containing any such
connections, branches, plumbing or plumbing work in any manner or way connected
with the system or plant to ascertain the location and condition thereof and
all fixtures connected therewith. If upon the inspection or otherwise it is
found that on account of negligence or for want of repairs there is a waste of
water in the connections, branches, plumbing work or plumbing, and the owner or
person in charge or possession thereof fails to have the defects immediately
remedied and the waste stopped, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent or
some person directed by him or her to leave a notice of the waste of water at
the premises with some person in possession thereof, or if no one is found in
possession by posting the same upon the premises. If the defects are not
remedied and the waste stopped within 24 hours after giving or posting the
notice, the water shall be shut off and shall not again be turned on until the
sum of $1 in addition to all rents due has been paid to the village.
   (G)   Return of work. It shall be the duty of all plumbers to make a return
in writing to the Superintendent showing in detail all plumbing or plumbing
work, including repairs, done or installed by them in the village connected
with the water system or plant, and the number and size of all openings therein
through which water can be taken. When any connection or branch is put in
hereunder, it shall be the duty of the plumber doing or installing the plumbing
or plumbing work connected therewith to make the return before the water is
turned on and permitted to enter the connection or branches, and it shall be
unlawful to turn on the water until the return is made. Any plumber failing or
refusing to make any such return within five days after the completion of the
work, or making misrepresentations therein, shall not thereafter be permitted
to act as a plumber or do plumbing work in the village.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-7)
§ 52.35 PERMIT TO OPEN STREETS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No street, alley, avenue, public ground or place shall be disturbed or
opened, nor shall any material, excavation, article or thing be placed or kept
therein hereunder unless a permit to do so is first obtained from the Committee
on Streets and Alleys. Before any permit is issued, the person desiring the
same shall first file with that Committee a good and sufficient bond payable to
the village with surety or sureties to be approved by the Committee,
conditioned that the person shall faithfully observe the ordinances of the
village and make and repair the openings and place, keep and remove the
material, excavations, articles and things under the direction and to the
satisfaction of the Committee, and shall save and keep harmless the village
from all damages, costs, expenses and attorney’s fees arising in any manner or
way from the granting of the permit or the disturbance or opening or the
repairing of any such street, avenue, alley, public ground or place, or the
placing, keeping, removing of any of the materials, excavations, articles or
things therein. When the work is done by the village or the Superintendent, no
bond shall be required. So long as the provisions of the ordinances concerning
plumbers and the doing of the work by them shall remain in force and are
complied with by any plumber, the plumber need not in addition comply with the
provisions hereof.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every person disturbing or opening any street,
avenue, alley, public ground or place, or placing or keeping any material,
excavations, articles or things therein, to do the same in such a manner as to
be safe at all times to persons and property, and the person or corporation
shall at all times do the work and repair the openings and disturbances in the
streets, alleys, avenues, public grounds and places, and remove all the
material, excavations, articles or things therefrom under the direction and to
the satisfaction of the Committee on Streets and Alleys, and shall save and
keep harmless the village from all damages, expenses, costs or attorneys fees
that may arise in any manner or way by reason thereof. The Superintendent shall
make the openings and restore the same and do the work to the satisfaction of
the Committee.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-11)
§ 52.36 FIXTURES; REPAIR.
   Persons taking village water shall do so at their own expense and must keep
all pipes, stop cocks and fixtures in good repair. The buffalo or shut-off box,
connections, village cock, valves and service pipe shall be furnished,
installed and maintained, in perpetuity, by and at the expense of the customer,
as shall all labor for trenching, pushing or backfilling, from the buffalo or
shut-off box to the premises being served. No reduction from any water bill
shall be made on account of any leak in any pipes or fixtures. All repairs for
or replacement of the buffalo or shut-off box or of the service pipes from the
buffalo or shut-off box to the premises being served shall be made by and at
the expense of the owner of the premises served. The village may, in case of
emergency, repair any service pipes and assess the cost of the repair against
the owner of the premises served.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-17) (Ord. 92-7, passed - -)
§ 52.37 WATER SHUT OFF BOXES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Each property which receives water service from the village shall have
a separate shut off box or B-Box of the brand specified by the village, which
shall be located within a village public utility easement. In addition, each
multi-family structure or multiple unit residential or commercial structure
shall have a separate water shut off box or B-Box of the brand specified by the
village which shall be located in a village public utility easement.
   (B)   Each building with units which do not have separate shut off boxes or
B-Boxes shall have until December 1, 2009 to install the separate shut off
boxes or B-Boxes at the expense of the property owner and a municipal utility
easement shall be granted to the village in the form required by the village if
the shut off box or B-Box is not located within an existing municipal utility
easement. If a property owner fails to install the required shut off boxes or
B-Boxes by December 1, 2009, the village shall provide a final notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested to the last owner of record as
specified in the DeKalb County tax records and a notice shall also be posted
upon the front door of each unit located on the property. If the shut off boxes
or B-Boxes are not installed within 21 days of the date of the notice, then the
village shall have the option to shut off the water and install the shut off
boxes or B-Boxes. If the village is forced to do the installation, the water
shall remain shut off until the village's cost of installation, including labor
and materials, is paid. Nothing herein shall prohibit the village from entering
into payment plans or extending the time to install the shut off boxes or B-
Boxes with property owners.
   (C)   Any person, firm, corporation or other business entity which fails to
comply with this section by December 1, 2009, shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $200 per day. Each day the offense continues shall constitute a
separate offense. Upon a finding of guilty, the court shall assess a fine in an
amount provided in this section and shall order the installation of the shut
off boxes or B-Boxes as provided in this section. Nothing herein shall prohibit
the village from seeking injunctive or other relief mandating a property owner
to install a shut off box or B-Box as required herein.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 8-17-2009)
USE OF WATER
§ 52.50 PUBLIC HYDRANTS.
   (A)   No permit shall be required for the placing of public hydrants, fire
hydrants, public fountains or public fixtures or work connected with the water
system or plant, but the same shall be put in, in the manner as and when
directed by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   No person except members of the Fire Department in the line of their
duties, or the Chief of Police, shall take any water from any public hydrant,
fire plug or other public fixtures connected with the system or plant, and as
to those excepted such water shall only be taken or used by them for public or
corporate purposes. All water from public hydrants or faucets shall only be
taken therefrom for immediate use and consumption at the public hydrants or
faucets and shall not otherwise be used for private purposes in any way.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-8) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.51 USE OF WATER.
   (A)   Building purposes. Persons desiring to use village water for building
purposes shall make application therefor to the Superintendent on a form
provided by him or her for that purpose. Upon a permit being granted, the
service pipe shall be carried, at the expense of the applicant, to the inside
of the curb line, where a proper village cock with cast iron box shall be
placed with pipe leading to the surface and a faucet placed at the end thereof
above the surface. The faucet shall be kept covered, and when not in use
locked. When the building is completed, the faucet and pipe shall be taken up
as far as the village cock, and the water shut off at that point. All
connections and branches and plumbing and plumbing work fixtures in any manner
joined or attached thereto shall at all times be kept in good repair and
protected from damage and injury at the expense of the applicant or person or
corporation using the same. This shall not be construed to prevent the person
being responsible hereunder for the branches and all plumbing and plumbing work
and fixtures connected therewith.
   (B)   Water to be used by person having connection. No person other than the
one paying for the use of the water through any such connections including the
family of the person, shall take or use any water passing through the
connection. It shall be unlawful for the person so paying for the water to
suffer or permit any such other person or corporation to take or use the water
unless first permitted to do so by the Superintendent. This division shall not
apply to persons taking and immediately drinking the water, nor shall it apply
to connections where the water passes through a meter and is paid for at meter
rates.
   (C)   Permission to turn on.  No water shall be turned on for a connection
except when meters are used until the applicant shall have paid the rent or
rate due. All plumbers are strictly prohibited from turning the water into the
connections unless first permitted to do so by the Superintendent. This shall
not be construed to prevent any plumber admitting the water temporarily to test
the pipes and plumbing work, for which purpose only the water may be turned on.
   (D)   Permit required to use hose. No hose shall be used unless a permit to
use the same shall have been first obtained from the Superintendent. No such
hose shall be more than three-fourths of an inch in diameter. Except when
meters are used and all water used is paid for at meter rates, no street,
sidewalk, lawn or garden sprinkling shall be done for more than five hours in
any one day, and only between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. in the
morning and 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. in the afternoon.
   (E)   Water not to run except when used. No water shall be permitted to run
through any hydrant, tap, hose, plumbing or plumbing work or fixture of any
kind when the same is not in use unless the water passing through the
connection supplying the same shall be provided with a meter and all water paid
for at meter rates. The village at all times reserves the right to place a
meter so that all water passing through any such connection may be measured and
paid for at meter rates.
   (F)   Term of taking water. Every person or corporation obtaining water
hereunder except where meters are used shall do so upon the express condition
that the term of this taking shall not be less than one year commencing on
March 1 in each year. All connections made prior to March 1 shall be charged
pro rata from the day the water is turned on until March 1 following, in
addition to the term of one year. Persons or corporations desiring to
discontinue the use of the water shall give notice thereof in writing to the
Superintendent on or before the day to which the rent has been paid, otherwise
the rent for the ensuing quarter shall be charged and paid for by them.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-9) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.52 WATER TURNED OFF.
   (A)   Water to be shut off in case of fire or alarm of fire. If, when during
the hours sprinkling is permitted hereunder or the time the fountains may be in
operation, or the time water is used for that purpose, there is a fire or an
alarm of fire, it shall be the duty of every person or corporation responsible
for such use of the water or in charge or control thereof to immediately stop
and shut off the flow of the water until the fire has been extinguished or
until it has been ascertained that the alarm was false.
   (B)   In case of conflagration or calamity of fire, other use of water
prohibited. In case of conflagration or grave calamity of fire impending, the
President of the Board of Trustees shall have the right and authority by
proclamation posted in five public places in the village to wholly suspend and
prohibit for such length of time as the exigency may require, the drawing or
using of water for public or private purposes other than to meet the exigency.
   (C)   In case of drought or other exigency, use of water may be limited;
procedure.  Whenever in the judgment of the President of the Board of Trustees
public exigency may require it, he or she shall have the right and authority by
proclamation published in some newspaper printed in the village or by posting
the proclamation in five public places therein to limit in respect of time or
wholly suspended or prohibit for the length of time as such exigency shall
require, the drawing or using of water for public or private fountains, for
street or yard sprinkling, for washing houses, windows, verandas or vehicles,
or for any other purpose except for immediate domestic use, and it shall be
unlawful for any person or corporation to draw or use any water in violation of
the proclamation.
   (D)   Water may be shut off for violation of chapter. For any violation of
the provisions of this chapter, or refusal or neglect to observe the provisions
of this chapter, including but not limited to the provisions of this chapter
relating to the payment of water meter deposits and water and sewer charges,
the Superintendent shall have power and he or she is hereby given authority to
shut off the supply of water, and the same shall not be turned on again until a
reconnection fee of $100 be paid to the village in addition to any and all
delinquent deposits or fines due. Unless otherwise provided by law, water shall
be reconnected only during normal business hours established by the Department
of Public Works. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to other
penalties provided in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person or
corporation to turn or cause to be turned on any water or sewer connection
without first having obtained a permit to do so from the Superintendent of
Public Works.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-15) (Ord. 87-3, passed - -; Ord. 07-07, passed 7-2-2007)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.65 SUPERINTENDENT AND INSPECTORS TO HAVE ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The Superintendent and every person and inspector under his or her direction
shall have ready access to the place, premises or buildings where any meters
are located for the purpose of reading, examining, testing and repairing the
same, and examining the consumption, use and flow of the water, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the Superintendent or any
other person or inspector acting under him or her in their work hereunder.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-13) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.66 PROHIBITED ACTS, CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Unlawful to obstruct hydrant.  No person shall in any manner obstruct
the access to any drain cock, hydrant or valve, or any public faucet or opening
in any street, avenue, alley, public ground or place connected with or a part
of the system or plant, nor pile or place any lumber, brick or building
material or other article, thing or hindrance whatsoever so as to in any manner
interfere with the access.
   (B)   Water, water supply not to be obstructed. It shall be unlawful for any
person or corporation in any manner to interfere with or obstruct the flow,
retention, storage or authorized use of water in the water system or plant, or
to interfere with or obstruct in any manner the supply or source of supply of
the water, or to pollute in any manner the water or the sources of supply, or
to throw or place therein or mix therewith any foreign substance whatever, or
cause, suffer or permit the same to be done.
   (C)   Injure, destroy property. It shall be unlawful for any person or
corporation to injure, break, mar, deface, tear down, remove or displace in
whole or in part any water main, hydrant, fountain, valve, engine or building
or any part thereof connected with the water system or plant or any part,
parcel, appurtenance or appliance of the system or plant.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-14) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.67 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of every village officer to immediately report to the
Superintendent upon discovery any or all violations of this chapter or any part
thereof, and the Superintendent shall thereupon see that the provisions hereof
are enforced.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-20)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise indicated, any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine or penalty not less than $50 nor more than
$750 for each offense, and a like fine or penalty for each day the violation
continues.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-20)
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
52.02 shall be fined not less than $750 and a like fine for each day the
violation continues.
(1983 Code, § 7-1-18) (Ord. 95-12, passed - -; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Use of public sewers required
   
53.03   Private sewage disposal
   
53.04   Building sewers and connections
   
53.05   Use of the public sewers
   
53.06   Protection of sewerage works from damage
   
53.07   Connection to storm drainage system prohibited
   
53.08   Powers and authority of inspectors
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand, which is defined as the quantity of oxygen
used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20°C,
determined by standard laboratory test procedures and expressed in mg/l.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. The Building Commissioner of the village or his or
her duly authorized deputy or representative.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specifically designed and constructed for
sampling and metering industrial wastes discharged to a public sewer.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq.) as amended by the Federal Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub.
L. No. 92-500 and Pub. L. No. 93-243) and the Clean Water Act of 1977 (Pub. L.
No. 95-217).
   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   GARBAGE, PROPERLY SHREDDED. Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
   INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of publicly-owned sewerage
works which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd)
of sanitary wastes and which is identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemented, under one of the following divisions:
         (a)   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
         (b)   Division B - Mining;
         (c)   Division D - Manufacturing;
         (d)   Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
         (e)   Division I - Services.
      (2)   Also any other nongovernmental user as defined as an industrial
user in 40 C.F.R. § 35.905.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The wastewater discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or
process, or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural
resource as distinct from employees’ wastes or wastewater from sanitary
conveniences.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MG/L. Milligrams per liter.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface water.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document to regulate the discharge of
pollutants pursuant to § 402 of the Federal Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, public or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed in gram molecular weight (moles) per liter.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other wastes on a treatment works or stream. One POPULATION EQUIVALENT is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.22 pounds of
suspended solids.
   PRETREATMENT.   The treatment of wastewaters from sources before discharge
into the public sewer.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights of connection and use, and is operated, maintained and controlled by the
village or other public agencies.
   RESIDENTIAL or COMMERCIAL or NONINDUSTRIAL USER. Any user of the sewerage
works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user.
Each dwelling unit of a residential building having two or more dwelling units
shall be considered a separate and individual single-family residential user.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage and polluted industrial wastes,
and to which storm water, surface drainage, ground water or unpolluted
wastewater are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the wastewater from residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional buildings together with the ground water
infiltration and surface water inflow that may be in the sewers.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. An arrangement of devices, structures and processes
for the treating and disposing of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other wastewater,
including storm water, surface water and ground water drainage.
   SEWERAGE WORKS. All facilities of the village for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage and industrial wastes.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of sewage, industrial waste or other wastewater which,
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
   STATE ACT. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act effective July 1, 1970
(415 ILCS 5/1 through 51).
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A sewer that conveys storm water runoff and
surface water drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF.  That portion of precipitation which is not absorbed
into the ground and which is drained from the ground surface to a natural
outlet or watercourse.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Public Works of the village or his or
her duly authorized deputy or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, industrial wastes, or in other wastewaters; the
quantity of which is determined by standard laboratory filtering test
procedures and referred to as nonfilterable residue expressed in mg/l.
   UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER. Wastewater that would not cause any violation of
water quality standards of the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois when
discharged to a natural outlet or watercourse.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Kirkland of DeKalb County, Illinois.
   WASTEWATER. The wastewater from any domestic, commercial, industrial and
institutional uses.
   WATERCOURSE. Any stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, slough, gulch, ditch, reservoir, lake, pond or other natural or
manmade drainage way or into which storm water runoff and surface water
drainage flow either continuously or intermittently.
(1983 Code, § 7-2-1)
§ 53.02 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within any
area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or watercourse
within any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment recreation or other purposes situated within the village
and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way or easement in which there is
now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the
village, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the public
sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90
days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that the sewer is within
400 feet (121.9 meters) of the property line. However, no connections shall be
made to the public sanitary sewer unless the sewage treatment plant has
sufficient available capacity for the connections in accordance with allowable
loads and effluent limitations of the NPDES permit for the treatment works.
(1983 Code, § 7-2-2) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
53.02(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Building
Commissioner. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished
by the village which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the Building
Commissioner. A permit and inspection fee as required by the village shall be
paid at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Building Commissioner. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Building Commissioner when the work is ready for final inspection,
and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 72 hours of the receipt of written notice by the Building Commissioner.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all requirements of the State of Illinois Private
Sewage Disposal Licensing Act, being 225 ILCS 225, and Code and the State of
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any
private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area lot is less than 15,000 square feet (1,394 square meters). No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet
or watercourse.
   (E)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the village.
   (F)   At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
53.02(D), the building sewer shall be connected to the sewer within 90 days and
the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with
sand or gravel.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the building or zoning
authority having jurisdiction over the property.
(1983 Code, § 7-2-3)
§ 53.04 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, repair, maintain or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Superintendent.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater to any public sanitary
sewer except those wastewaters in compliance with standards promulgated
pursuant to the Federal Act, or the State Act, or any rules, regulations,
ordinances or standards of the village.
   (C)   (1)   There shall be two separate classes of building sewer permits:
for residential or commercial service, and for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent
shall make application on a special form furnished by the village. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A
permit and inspection fee of $500 for a building sewer permit shall be paid to
the village at the time the application is filed. Each industry, as a condition
of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater
constituents, characteristics and type of activity.
      (2)   Beginning January 1,1998, the fees shall be increased in an amount
to be determined by the Village Board from time to time. For January 1, 2007,
the fee is $2,457.
   (D)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
works, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities have
sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional
anticipated waste load.
   (E)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The person installing the
building sewer for the owner shall be a plumber or sewer contractor and he or
she shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation. Before a building sewer permit is
issued, the plumber or sewer contractor shall file with the Village Clerk an
indemnity bond in the amount of $10,000, with corporate surety licensed to do
business in the State of Illinois, on bond form supplied by the village. In
addition thereto, the plumber or sewer contractor shall file with the Village
Clerk a certificate of insurance covering public liability insurance in the
amount of $100,000/$300,000 for bodily injury and $50,000 covering property
damage.
   (F)   All costs and expenses associated with the repair, replacement and
maintenance of the building sewer from the connection at the main to the
premises being served shall be at the expense of the owner of the premises
served, as shall all costs and expenses for trenching, pushing or backfilling
from the connection at the main to the premises served.
   (G)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (H)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the Superintendent to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
   (I)   Building sewers shall not be less than six-inch diameter size pipe
installed at a minimum invert slope of 0.125 inch per foot, or not less than
four-inch diameter size pipe in lengths of not less than ten feet installed at
a minimum invert slope of 0.25 inch per foot. Building sewers shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Superintendent as to
trench excavation and backfilling, installation of pipe and fittings and
testing.
   (J)   Building sewers shall be constructed using one of the following listed
materials:
      (1)   Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) sewer pipe and fittings with
solvent welded joints or compression type rubber ring gasket joints conforming
to the latest revision of ASTM Specification D2751 installed in accordance with
the manufacturer’s recommendations;
      (2)   Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) type PSM sewer pipe and fittings, SDR 35,
with compression type rubber ring gaskets and coupling joints conforming to the
latest revision of ASTM Specification D3035, installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommendations; or
      (3)   Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe and fittings conforming to the
latest revision of CISPI Specification HS-67 with compression type rubber ring
gasket joints, conforming to the latest revision of ASTM Specification C564,
installed in accordance with the latest revision of the Illinois State Plumbing
Code.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the branch fitting, if one is available at a suitable location. If the
public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located branch
fitting is available, the owner shall, at his or her expense, install a branch
fitting in the public sewer at the location specified and installation provided
by the Superintendent.
   (L)   All building sewers shall be bedded on a layer of gravel or crushed
stone, size #67, conforming to the latest revisions of ASTM Specification D448,
to provide a minimum thickness of four inches under and supporting the full
bottom quadrant of the pipe. Backfill materials shall be placed and tamped by
hand in six-inch layers around the pipe to a height of 12 inches over the top
of pipe.
   (M)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid
parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be
weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sewage carried by the drains shall be lifted by approved pumping
devices and discharged to the building sewer.
   (N)    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (O)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his or her representative.
   (P)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village. Prior to any
excavation, the public or sewer contractor shall notify all public and private
utility companies.
(1983 Code, § 7-2-4) (Ord. 92-8, passed - -; Ord. 94-2, passed - -; Ord. 97-9,
passed - -) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any public sanitary
sewer.
   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of
the Superintendent, to a storm water sewer or natural outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5,
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works; or
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as but not limited to ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public
sanitary sewer the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes
if it appears likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that the waters or
wastes, singly or by interaction with other wastes, can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process, or equipment; can cause an adverse effect on the
receiving stream in violation of Chapter 3 of the Water Pollution Rules and
Regulations adopted by the Illinois Pollution Control Board pursuant to the
Illinois Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/13 or in violation of the
effluent limitations of the NPDES permit; or can otherwise endanger the life,
limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming this opinion as to
the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration
to such factors as the quantities of the waters or wastes in relation to flows
and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of the sewers, nature
of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree
of treatablity of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l) or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F
and 150°F (0°C and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 ph metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any industrial wastes containing substances exceeding the following
maximum concentrations of pollutants:
Pollutant Maximum Concentration (mg/l) Pollutant Maximum Concentration (mg/l)
Pollutant        Maximum              Pollutant            Maximum
                 Concentration (mg/l)                      Concentration (mg/l)
5-day BOD        300                  Iron                 10.0
Total suspended  350                  Lead                 0.1
solids
Total dissolved  1,000                Manganese            1.0
solids
Chemical oxygen  500                  Mercury              0.005(2)
demand
Ammonia          50                   Nickel               1.0
Arsenic          0.1                  Oil (Hexane soluble) 50.0
Borate           1.0                  Phenols              0.5
Cadmium          1.0                  Phosphorus           25.0
Chromium         0.25                 Selenium             1.0
(Hexavalent)
Chromium (total) 0.25                 Silver               1.0
Copper           1.0                  Zinc                 0.1
Cyanide          0.025(1)
NOTES:
(1) IPCB Regulations, Chapter 3, § 703(a).
(2) IPCB Regulations, Chapter 3, § 702(a).
 
      (6)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations;
      (7)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations;
      (8)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted
by the village in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations or inert suspended solids (such as but
not limited to Fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to receiving waters.
   (E)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sanitary sewer, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in division (D) herein, and/or which are
in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in current EPA rules
and regulations as amended, and which in the judgment of the village may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
water, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Superintendent may reject the wastes; require pretreatment to an
acceptable condition for discharge to the public sanitary sewer; require
control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or require payment to
cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of division (K) of this
section. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
wastewater flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (F)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his or her expense.
   (H)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together
with the necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. This manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the village. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or
her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (I)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of
laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the
village, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete
analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that
compliance with the federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner
shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the village
at such times and in a manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall
bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the
village. At such times as deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to
take measurements and samples for analysis.
   (J)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
“USEPA Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants”
pursuant to 40 C.F.R. pt. 136, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and
property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite sample or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally,
but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour
composite samples, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.)
   (K)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor by
the industrial concern; provided, the payments are in accordance with the sewer
user service charge ordinance of the village, as set forth in
Chapter 51 of this title.
(1983 Code, § 7-2-5)
§ 53.06 PROTECTION OF SEWERAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is part of the sewerage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct and damaging
public property.
(1983 Code, § 7-2-6) (Ord. 580, passed - -1982) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07 CONNECTION TO STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected any
drain carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool,
industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging pollution substances, to
any storm water drain in the village. Any person violating this section shall
be subject to the provisions of §
53.99.
(1983 Code, § 7-2-7) (Ord. passed 5-19-1980) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.08 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village,
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Superintendent or his or her representative shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil
refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or
facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
village shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to
the village employees and the village shall indemnify the company against loss
or damage to its property by the village employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as they may be
caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as
required in §
53.05(H).
   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village
bearing proper credentials and identifications shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of but not limited to inspection, observation, measurements,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying
within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(1983 Code, § 7-2-8)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter,
except §§
53.06 and
53.07, shall be served by the village with a written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the
notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any permit for
sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter.
      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A)(1) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not less than $25 nor more than
$750 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village by reason of the violation.
(1983 Code, § 7-2-9)
   (B)   Any person violating §
53.07 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during
which a violation continues or exists.
(1983 Code, § 7-2-7)
(Ord. passed 5-19-1980; Ord. 580, passed - -1982; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 54: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
   
54.01   Purpose and scope
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Annual registration required
   
54.04   Permit required; application and fees
   
54.05   Action on permit applications
   
54.06   Effect of permit
   
54.07   Revised permit drawings
   
54.08   Insurance
   
54.09   Indemnification
   
54.10   Security
   
54.11   Permit suspension and revocation
   
54.12   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
   
54.13   General construction standards
   
54.14   Traffic control
   
54.15   Location of facilities
   
54.16   Construction methods and materials
   
54.17   Vegetation control
   
54.18   Removal, relocation, or modification of utility facilities
   
54.19   Clean-up and restoration
   
54.20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
54.21   Variances
   
54.22   Small wireless facilities deployment regulations
   
54.23   Enforcement
 
   
54.99   Penalty
§ 54.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights-of-way and the village as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of- way in the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways, and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired, and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license, or
similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license, or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license, or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license, or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license, or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license, or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 54.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term
not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92
Illinois Administrative Code, § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas, or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE. The Municipal Code of the Village of Kirkland.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification, or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Village Director of Public Works or his or her
designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes
a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use.
Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other
cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment,
devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of
the soil; and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a
manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but
not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this chapter.
For purposes of this chapter, the term FACILITY shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health,
or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives, or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute, or regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures, and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   IDOT. The Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ICC. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches, or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over, or under a right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
54.04 and
54.05 of this chapter.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible, or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state, or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land, or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate, or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures, and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to §
54.10.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices, and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service, and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of TELECOMMUNICATIONS by a
TELECOMMUNICATIONS service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable
Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter
amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules
of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. Parts 76.1500 et seq.), as
now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Means any person that installs, owns, operates,
or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in the Illinois Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
   VILLAGE. The Village of Kirkland.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 54.03 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies a right-of-way within the village shall register
on January 1 of each year with the Engineer, providing the utility's name,
address, and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one
or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way, and a 24-
hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as
required in §
54.08 in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.04 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in §
54.02) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any
village right-of-way which changes the location of the facility; adds a new
facility; disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in §
54.02); or materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, under, across, or within the right-of- way,
without first filing an application with the Village Engineer and obtaining a
permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the
right- of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses, and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      (6)   Drawings, plans, and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
54.08;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
54.10;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see §
54.21); and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service, or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public
convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District (or other local or state entities with jurisdiction), have been
satisfied;
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed; and
      (6)   In the case of the installation of small cell antenna/towers on
either new or existing poles or structures, the provisions of this chapter
governing small wireless facilities at §
54.22 also shall apply, and, in the event of any conflict, those provisions
shall control.
   (E)   Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee that shall be determined by the Village Board from time
to time. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility
that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, and applicants
for small cell facilities shall be subject only to the fees described in §
54.22.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.05 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Village
Engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the Village Engineer shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the Village Engineer is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Engineer shall
issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be
the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Additional village review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation, and not less than 30 days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Engineer shall specify
the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used,
and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Village Engineer fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either ten
days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer
in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction; or 25 days
after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may
commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
54.04, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications, and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Additional village review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided
the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and
regulations.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.06 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time, and place designated by the village with
such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.07 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings, and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with §
54.21. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility
so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.08 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying the right-of-way or constructing any facility
in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed below:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
            1.   Five-million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
            2.   Five-million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
            3.   Five-million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of
liability;
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess, or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
required policies to the village within ten days following receipt of a written
request from the village.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
         It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt
by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested,
of a written notice addressed to the Village President of such intent to cancel
or not to renew.
         Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and
in no event later than ten (10) days prior to cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A) of this section, or the requirements of divisions
(B), (C), and (D). A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division (A), such
as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers'
compensation act.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self- insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.09 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify, and hold the village and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents, and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses, and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs
of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of
or result from, the negligent, careless, or wrongful acts, omissions, failures
to act, or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors, or subcontractors, in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed, or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses, or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct, or breach of this
chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, or
representatives.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.10 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The security fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits, and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter, including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this division shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
state at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if
the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the village, with each phase consisting of construction of
facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where
construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Engineer
may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single
amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction
under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall
be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this division for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this division, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the
permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the 14- day
notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs, or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in division
(C).
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C).
   (G)   Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss, or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation,
provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss, or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding, or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall
affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.11 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      (3)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the village, providing written proof of such
removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
      (2)   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this division.
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A) of
this section.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of division (C) of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village: correct the deficiencies; upon
not less than 20 days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities
or equipment; or after not less than 30 days' notice to the permittee of
failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the
village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all
costs of removal.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.12 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less
than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-
of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or
the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules,
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right-
of-way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.13 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment, and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Illinois
Administrative Code, § 545);
      (7)   Flagger's Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Village Engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.14 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices, and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business,
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business, or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
54.20, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.15 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this division.
      (1)   No interference with village facilities. No utility facilities
shall be placed in any location if the Village Engineer determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with, the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right- of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of- way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (for example, a new cable may be installed in existing
conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-ground
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage
facilities.
      (3)   Ninety degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90° angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Illinois Administrative Code, § 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 C.F.R. Part 192.707).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports,
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure, or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.16 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village
Engineer (Director of Public Works) from the edge of the pavement. Pits for
boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring
or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced,
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Village Engineer.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Village Engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and
properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk,
curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Village
Engineer.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this division (A)(4)
is permitted under §
54.21, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Village Engineer;
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village;
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth; and
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair; and
            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility.
 
Type of Facility                       Minimum Cover
Electric lines                         30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable, or video service 18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by
lines                                  the village)
Gas or petroleum products              30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                             Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                       protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or        Sufficient cover to provide freeze
drainage line                          protection
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights-of- way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code, § 305
(formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
"Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the
National Electrical Safety Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities.
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               A.   The crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip
augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
               B.   The installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution, and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192:
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. Part 192), IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines, or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      (6)   Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Village Engineer. With the approval of the
Village Engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place
of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be
painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village Engineer.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or
other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from
the village.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Village Engineer when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in Chapter 4-1-4 of this code.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence
and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the
rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying
possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220
ILCS 50/1 et seq.).
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.17 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities: compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable state laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities: tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable state laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire, or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall
spray, inject, or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs, or
vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects, or disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Village Engineer that such spraying is the only practicable method of
vegetation control.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.18 REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATION OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change, or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change, or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate,
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within 90
days. Following receipt of such notice, the village may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Engineer determines
that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety,
and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.19 CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged, or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made
using materials and methods approved by the Village Engineer. Such clean-up and
repair may be required to consist of backfilling, re-grading, re-seeding, re-
sodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the
Village Engineer for good cause shown.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.20 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades, or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Village Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the Village Police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.21 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Village Engineer
as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision
of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a
variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Village Engineer shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified
in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Village Engineer may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations, or facilities
that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Village Engineer may require the utility requesting
the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of
this chapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision, or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Village
Engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to
the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The
application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk
within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision, or
determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal
at the Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days
after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the
appeal.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.22 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES DEPLOYMENT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and scope.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations,
standards, and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Illinois Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (P.A. 100-0585).
      (2)   Conflicts with other ordinances. This section supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
      (3)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
section, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
section to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws
or regulations.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACT. The Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (P.A. 100-
0585), as may be subsequently amended.
      ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
      APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or
Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
      APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.
      APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
      COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole.
      COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.  CABLE SERVICE, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6),
as amended; INFORMATION SERVICE, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended;
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended;
MOBILE SERVICE, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(33), as amended; or wireless
service other than mobile service.
      COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A CABLE OPERATOR, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 522(5), as amended; a PROVIDER OF INFORMATION SERVICE, as defined in
47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended; a TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
      FEE. A one-time charge.
      HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either:
         (a)   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list
properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with §§ VI.D.1.a.i through VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement codified at 47 C.F.R. Part 1, Appendix C; or
         (b)   Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or
historic district by an ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a
preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office, or where
such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office is pending.
      LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation,
order, or local ordinance or resolution.
      MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in
height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
      MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village
in public rights-of-way.
      PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village to perform an
action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
      PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government,
the state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
      RATE. A recurring charge.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include village-owned aerial lines.
      SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.
         (a)   A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
            1.   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
            2.   All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility
pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume.
         (b)   The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not
included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment
elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures,
grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable
runs for the connection of power and other services.
      UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
      WIRELESS FACILITY.
         (a)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
            1.   Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
            2.   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
         (b)   WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS
FACILITY does not include:
            1.   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or
            2.   Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable
that is between wireless support structures or utility poles, or coaxial or
fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
      WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles, and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
      WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider.
      WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including
a particular class of customers, and made available on a non-discriminatory
basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or
mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
      WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
      WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
   (C)   Regulation of small wireless facilities.
      (1)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, but not subject to zoning
review or approval if they are collocated:
         (a)   In rights-of-way in any zoning district; or
         (b)   Outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for
commercial or industrial use.
      (2)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
         (a)   Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the village, together with the village's small cell
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
            1.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal
utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that
term is defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
            2.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or
structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or
location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This should
include a depiction of the completed facility;
            3.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
            4.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
            5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of
each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
            6.   Certification that the collocation complies with the
collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the
applicant's knowledge; and
            7.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to
be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
         (b)   Application process. The village shall process applications as
follows.
            1.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
            2.   A.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, shall be processed on a
non-discriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the village fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application.
               B.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application.
               C.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
ninetieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day
after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of
the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the
permit request within the time limits as provided under this section.
            3.   A.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility
that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
non-discriminatory basis and deemed approved
if the village fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after
the submission of a completed application.
               B.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application.
               C.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
one-hundred twentieth day after submission of the complete application or the
tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The
receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial
of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this section.
            4.   A.   The village shall deny an application which does not meet
the requirements of this section.
               B.   If the village determines that applicable codes,
ordinances, or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or
wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation,
approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or
wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
               C.   The village shall document the basis for a denial,
including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the
denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the
day the village denies an application.
               D.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
village and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice
of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application
fee. The village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days
after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure
to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the
applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees and recommencement
of the village's review period.
               E.   The applicant must notify the village in writing of its
intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
which may be submitted with the revised application.
               F.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
            5.   Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
village and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement,
provided by the village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole
by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant
shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
         (c)   Completeness of application.
            1.   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the village
shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant.
If an application is incomplete, the village must specifically identify the
missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the village
fails to provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all
documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the village's
permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the village.
            2.   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the village
sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the
missing information.
         (d)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled
by:
            1.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
village; or
            2.   A local, state, or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
         (e)   Consolidated applications.
            1.   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at the applicant's
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure.
            2.   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities,
the village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the
application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which
incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The village may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
         (f)   Duration of permits.
            1.   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less
than five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations
unless the village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the
new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable village codes or
any provision, condition, or requirement contained in this section.
            2.   If the Act is repealed as provided in § 90 therein, renewals
of permits shall be subject to the applicable village code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
         (g)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information, and notices to the village by personal
delivery at the village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
      (3)   Collocation requirements and conditions.
         (a)   Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve space
on municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
         (b)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall
install, maintain, repair, and modify its small wireless facilities in safe
condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and
conditions of this section. The wireless provider shall ensure that its
employees, agents, or contractors that perform work in connection with its
small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with
all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations.
         (c)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
            1.   The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications.
            2.   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency's communications equipment.
            3.   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured
in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
            4.   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC,
including 47 C.F.R. Parts 22.970 through 22.973, and 47 C.F.R. Parts 90.672
through 90.675.
            5.   The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless
facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in
compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in division 4. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
         (d)   1.   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution
or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole
or the electric supply zone of the pole.
            2.   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small
wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the village
utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the
wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of
the pole.
            3.   For purposes of this division, the terms COMMUNICATIONS SPACE,
COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY ZONE have the meanings
given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
         (e)   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and
local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
         (f)   The wireless provider shall comply with the following design
standards and any variations from these design standards may only be granted
pursuant to the variance provisions of this chapter at §
54.21.
            1.   Screening. Whenever any equipment or appurtenances are to be
installed at grade, screening must be installed to minimize the visibility of
the facility and shall not be permitted to obstruct sight lines or to create
other traffic or safety problems.
            2.   Color and stealth. All wireless facilities subject to this
section, including all related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color
that blends with the surroundings of the pole, structure tower, or
infrastructure on which it is mounted. The color must be comprised of non-
reflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the
surrounding area and structures. The applicant shall use good faith efforts to
employ reasonable stealth techniques to conceal the appearance of the wireless
facilities. Any pole extensions shall not be metallic or wood and shall blend
with the color of the pole upon which they are mounted.
            3.   Wiring and cabling. Wires and cables connecting the antenna to
the remainder of the facility must be installed in accordance with the National
Electrical Code and National Electrical Safety Code adopted by the village and
in force at the time of the installation of the facility. Any wiring must be
covered with an appropriate cover. No wiring and cabling serving the facility
will be allowed to interfere with any existing uses.
         (g)   Alternate placements.
            1.   Except as provided in this division (C)(3), a wireless
provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any
specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be
required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole.
However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless
facility associated with a new utility pole, the village may propose that the
small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which
the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure
on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure
does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by
the applicant.
            2.   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the
village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the
property rights, technical limits, or material cost reasons the alternate
location does not satisfy the criteria in this division.
         (h)   Height limitations.
            1.   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no
more than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
            2.   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support
structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the
higher of:
               A.   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure,
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
village, provided the village may designate which intersecting right-of-way
within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures
shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
               B.   Forty five feet above ground level.
         (i)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a
height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations
on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in the manner provided in §
54.21.
         (j)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall
comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and
a private property owner that concern design or construction standards
applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-
of- way.
         (k)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. Subject to the variance
provisions of §
54.21 and state law, the wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing
requirements in the provisions of this chapter concerning the location of
ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
         (l)   Undergrounding regulations. Subject to the variance provisions
of §
54.21 and state law, the wireless provider shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the
installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-
of- way without prior approval.
         (m)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit
is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit,
unless the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a
delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack
of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the village grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
      (4)   Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows.
         (a)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an
application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless
facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one
small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
structures.
         (b)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
         (c)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
         (d)   The village shall not require an application, approval, or
permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service
provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
            1.   Routine maintenance;
            2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless
facilities that are substantially similar, the same size or smaller, if the
wireless provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment type and model numbers for any of the
replacement equipment; or
            3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
         (e)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the village to
work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or
require lane closures.
      (5)   Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this section authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
         (a)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or
controlled by the village or another unit of local government that is not
located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless
support structure without the consent of the property owner;
         (b)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation, or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
         (c)   1.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-
7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public
commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in § 16-102 of the
Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter
rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this section do not apply
to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if
the facilities are being used, developed, and maintained consistent with the
provisions of § 16-108.5(i) of the Public Utilities Act.
            2.   For the purposes of this division, PUBLIC UTILITY has the
meaning given to that term in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement to
obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service; or to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this section.
      (6)   Pre-existing agreements.
         (a)   Existing agreements between the village and wireless providers
that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-
way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on village utility
poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small
wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to
applications submitted to the village before June 1, 2018, subject to
applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this section.
         (b)   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the
village on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees, and terms
that the village makes available under this section for the collocation of
small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application
submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying
the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees, and terms. The existing
agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for
the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the
village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the village
before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option
under this division.
      (7)   Annual recurring rate.
         (a)   A wireless provider shall pay to the village an annual recurring
rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility pole located
in a right-of-way that equals $200 per year; or the actual, direct, and
reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the village
utility pole.
         (b)   If the village has not billed the wireless provider actual and
direct costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first
annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
      (8)   Abandonment.
         (a)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of
written notice from the village notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
         (b)   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days
of such notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
         (c)   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the village
if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of
the village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the
new wireless provider.
   (D)   Dispute resolution. The Circuit Court of DeKalb County shall have
exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for
collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the
right-of-way, the village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on
its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility
pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
   (E)   Indemnification. A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the
village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or
property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use
or occupancy of the village improvements or right-of-way associated with such
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors
arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this section and the
Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless
against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall
further waive any claims that they may have against the village with respect to
consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the
theory of liability.
   (F)   Insurance.
      (1)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own
cost and expense, such insurance as is required by this chapter at §
54.08.
      (2)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification
and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
      (3)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the village. A wireless
provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-
insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds
under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability
to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the village.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.23 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when
the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and
this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No
other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a
utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-6-2018)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
71.   RULES OF OPERATION
         
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
         
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
         
74.   PARKING SCHEDULES
         
75.   ABANDONED, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
         
76.   SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
         
77.   GOLF CART USE ON ROADWAYS/REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Regulations
   
70.01   Adoption of Illinois Vehicle Code
   
70.02   Enforcement
Driver Restrictions
   
70.15   Operator age limit
Road Closures
   
70.30   Streets closed to travel due to climatic conditions
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Temporary parking restrictions, snow routes, see
Chapter 74, Schedule IV
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 70.01 ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE.
   The village hereby adopts the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et
seq., pursuant to the authority granted to the village by 625 ILCS 5/20-204.
(Ord. 04-12, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 70.02 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Police Department is hereby authorized, empowered and ordered to
exercise all powers and duties with relation to the management of street
traffic and to direct, control, stop, restrict and regulate the movement of
pedestrians, animals and vehicular traffic of every kind, in streets in the
village.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-1)
DRIVER RESTRICTIONS
§ 70.15 OPERATOR AGE LIMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is under 15 years, unless
accompanied by an adult person, to operate any motor vehicle upon any street.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-11) Penalty, see §
70.99
ROAD CLOSURES
§ 70.30 STREETS CLOSED TO TRAVEL DUE TO CLIMATIC CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Public Works is hereby authorized to prohibit
the operation of vehicles upon streets within the village’s jurisdiction, or to
impose restrictions upon the weight of vehicles to be operated on the streets,
for a total period of not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year whenever
the streets, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic
conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles
thereon is prohibited or the permissible weights thereon reduced.
   (B)   In making his or her decision pursuant to the provisions of division
(A) of this section to prohibit the operation of vehicles upon streets or to
impose restrictions upon their weight, the Superintendent of Public Works shall
consider the following factors:
      (1)   The design standards of the street in question and the age of the
street;
      (2)   The ambient air temperature at the time;
      (3)   The previous experience of the village in prohibiting the operation
of vehicles upon streets or imposing restrictions upon the weight of vehicles
to be operated upon the streets;
      (4)   The effect that the failure to prohibit the operation of vehicles
upon streets or to impose restrictions upon the weight of vehicles to be
operated upon those streets could have upon other streets within the
jurisdiction of the village;
      (5)   The weight of vehicles which normally use those streets; and
      (6)   Such other factors as the Superintendent of Public Works considers
relevant.
   (C)   (1)   After making a decision to prohibit the operation of vehicles
upon roads or to impose restrictions upon their weight, the Superintendent of
Public Works shall enter a written and dated order designating:
         (a)   The streets for which he or she is prohibiting the operation of
vehicles or imposing restrictions as to weight of vehicles to be operated
thereon; and
         (b)   The length of time for which the order is to be effective.
      (2)   The order shall also direct that signs be erected to enforce its
provisions at appropriate locations sufficient to give vehicle operators notice
of the weight restrictions.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse
to obey the instructions of any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of
division (C) of this section unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement
officer.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-18) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this title, unless
otherwise indicated, shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for
each violation.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-21)
   (B)   Upon a finding of guilty of any provision of §
70.01 as adopted by reference, all fines and penalties shall be as provided in
the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/5-1-100 et seq.) Upon a finding of guilty
for traffic offenses for which a fine or penalty is not provided in the
Illinois Vehicle Code (minor traffic offenses) all fines shall be not less than
$35 nor more than $1,000.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of
Chapter 73, unless otherwise designated, shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500 for each offense.
(1983 Code, § 6-3-6)
(Ord. 94-7, passed - -; Ord. 98-5, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 00-1, passed 2-7-2000;
Ord. 04-12, passed 7-6-2004)
Cross-reference:
   Penalty for speed limit violation in school zones, see §
71.30
CHAPTER 71: RULES OF OPERATION
Section
Prohibitions
   
71.01   Prohibited acts, conditions
   
71.02   Driving with respect to crosswalks, pedestrians
Vehicle Restrictions
   
71.15   Width of vehicles
   
71.16   Vehicle weight limit
Speed Limits
   
71.30   Speed limits in school zones
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Speed limits in Pioneer Park, see §
93.02
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.01 PROHIBITED ACTS, CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Noise-making devices prohibited. It shall be unlawful to operate any
vehicle equipped with a gong, siren or other noise-making device excepting when
the gong, siren or other noise-making devices are part of the equipment of the
fire apparatus or other emergency vehicles. It shall be unlawful to operate
upon the streets of the village any vehicle equipped with a gong, siren or any
other noise-making device.
   (B)   Clinging to vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person traveling
upon any vehicle to ride in any portion of the vehicle excepting the portions
intended for occupancy by persons, with the exception that persons may occupy
the inner portions of a truck or wagon box, and no person shall ride upon the
running board or fender of any vehicle.
   (C)   Parking on unimproved surfaces.  
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle
or recreational vehicle to park a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle or for
the owner of any property to allow a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle to
be parked upon premises zoned for residential use unless within a garage or
upon a paved or unpaved driveway leading directly from the roadway to the
garage or parking stall. No parking shall be allowed on any unimproved surface.
A motor vehicle or recreational vehicle must be parked in the owner or
operator’s own driveway, side yard near the side of the house or rear yard so
long as the parking of the motor vehicle or recreational vehicle does not
obstruct the view of any motor vehicle operating on a city street, obstruct the
view of any motor vehicle traffic, block the clear view of any street, street
intersection, alley or driveway, or obstruct the view or block the entrance to
any driveway. The improved surface shall consist of four inches of concrete
over a four-inch compacted gravel base, two inches of asphalt over a six-inch
compacted base, paving bricks designed for motor vehicle traffic, four-inches
of compacted gravel, or other surface as approved by the Village President.
Motor vehicles or recreational vehicles parked on an approved surface shall be
accessible without maneuvering over lawn, grass, or curbs.
      (2)   As used in this section:
         RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes, but is not limited to, camper trailer
(pop up), motor home, off-road vehicle, open trailer, pickup camper,
snowmobile, travel trailer and watercraft.
         UNIMPROVED SURFACE includes but is not limited to grass and dirt
surfaces.
      (3)   It shall not be a violation of this section if the vehicle is
parked on an IMPROVED SURFACE, defined as gravel, concrete, asphalt or other
surface as approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-17) (Ord. 99-13, passed 8-2-1999; Ord. 09-10, passed 8-17-
2009; Ord. 2017-10, passed 8-1-2017; Ord. 2022-06, passed 10-17-2022) Penalty,
see §
70.99
§ 71.02 DRIVING WITH RESPECT TO CROSSWALKS, PEDESTRIANS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive into any
crosswalk without the exercise of due and proper care in view of special use
made thereof by pedestrians.
   (B)   The operator of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk
when any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at the
crosswalk for the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.
   (C)   The operator of a vehicle shall not pass any other vehicle which has
been stopped at a crosswalk by a traffic signal or officer until the stopped
vehicle shall have crossed the crosswalk, except that where a vehicle has
stopped at the crosswalk for the purpose of making a turn in accord with
traffic regulations this provision shall not apply.
   (D)   At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the
most direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing any place other
than a crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS
§ 71.15 WIDTH OF VEHICLES.
   The maximum width of any vehicle and the load shall not exceed eight feet.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-9)
§ 71.16 VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMIT.
   (A)   No person may operate a vehicle, truck or other commercial vehicle on
Pearl Street or over the Pearl Street Bridge when the total weight transmitted
to the road surface exceeds ten tons.
   (B)   Any person in violation with this section shall be fined $75 per every
500 pounds or fraction thereof for any weight exceeding the weight provided
herein.
(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-18-2009) Penalty, see § 70.99
SPEED LIMITS
§ 71.30 SPEED LIMITS IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   On a school day when school children are present and so close thereto
that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity of the motorized
traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 miles
per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling on a roadway on public
school property or upon the public roadways where children pass going to and
from school, as set forth in
Chapter 73, Schedule I.
   (B)   This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are
posted and maintained on the streets provided herein which shall give proper
warning that a school zone is being approached and shall indicate the school
zone and the maximum speed limit in effect on school days when children are
present.
(1983 Code, § 6-3-1) (Ord. 06-03, passed 2-21-2006)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   A first violation of §
71.30 is a petty offense with a minimum fine of $150 and a second or subsequent
violation of this section is a petty offense with a minimum fine of $300. The
maximum fine for violating this section shall be not more than $750 for each
offense.
(1983 Code, § 6-3-1) (Ord. 06-03, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-
2012)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   No-parking zones
   
72.02   Truck parking restricted
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 NO-PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator or the registered owner of a
vehicle to park, or permit the parking of, a vehicle in opposition to the
direction of travel on the side of the street on which the vehicle is parked,
or a distance of more than 12 inches from the curb, or in any of the following
places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic sign or signal:
      (1)   In any marked no-parking zone;
      (2)   In any crosswalk;
      (3)   At or within 20 feet of any intersection;
      (4)   Within 50 feet of a traffic signal;
      (5)   At any place where the standing of the vehicle will reduce the
usable width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than 18 feet;
      (6)   At any curb within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or mailbox;
      (7)   At any place where the standing of any vehicle will block the use
of any driveway; and
      (8)   In those specific locations identified in
Chapter 74, Schedule II.
   (B)   Citations for violation of this section and §§
70.30,
71.01,
72.02, and
Chapter 74, Schedules
I,
III and
IV, may be issued in the following manner: The Police Department of the Village
of Kirkland or civilian personnel designated by the Village President shall
enforce the parking ordinances. If a violation of any of the parking ordinances
is observed, a parking citation shall be written and placed upon the front
windshield of the vehicle.
   (C)   The fact that a vehicle which is parked illegally is registered in the
name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that that person was in
control of the vehicle at the time of the violation, and it shall not be a
defense that the vehicle was, at the time of the violation, in the control of a
family member of the registered owner or that the registered owner had loaned
or leased the vehicle to another. This presumption is intended to be used for
all parking violations under each and every ordinance of the Village of
Kirkland.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-14) (Ord. 04-06, passed 4-5-2004; Ord. 04-10, passed 5-3-
2004; Ord. 07-04, passed 5-7-2007) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 TRUCK PARKING RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator or owner of any motor vehicle
except a passenger vehicle, public utility truck, and trucks licensed by the
state under the classification of an A through G license, to park such vehicle
on residential streets or residential areas in the village for a period of
longer than two hours.
   (B)   Further, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle weighing in excess
of 10,000 pounds gross weight, including vehicle and maximum load, within
residential areas of the village for a period of longer than two hours.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-15) (Ord. 571, passed 7-6-1981; Ord. 04-10, passed 5-3-2004)
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   The penalty for a violation of §
72.01 shall be a fine of not less than $30 nor more than $750, provided that
any fine paid to the Village Clerk within ten days of issuance shall be $30 (or
$50 for violations on Main Street), any fine paid to the Village Clerk after
ten days of issuance shall be $35 (or $50 for violations on Main Street), and
any fine requiring enforcement in the Circuit Court shall be not less than
$100.
   (C)   The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine of not
less than $30 nor more than $750, provided that any fine paid to the Village
Clerk within ten days of issuance shall be $30 (or $50 for violations on Main
Street), any fine paid to the Village Clerk after ten days of issuance shall be
$35 (or $50 for violations on Main Street), and any fine requiring enforcement
in the Circuit Court shall be not less than $100.
(Ord. 04-10, passed 5-3-2004; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   School zones; speed limitation
   
II.   Yield right-of-way intersections
   
III.   Stop intersections
   
IV.   U-turns
   
V.   Bicycle and skateboarding; restricted streets
SCHEDULE I. SCHOOL ZONES; SPEED LIMITATION.
   The following locations are designated as school zones and subject to the
speed limitation indicated below and to the provisions of §
71.30:
 
Street         Location                   Speed Limit (mph) Ord No. Date Passed
First Street   from Main Street (SBI 72)  20                531     2-4-1974
               to Hortense Drive
Hortense Drive from First Street to Third 20                06-03   2-21-2006
               Street
South Street   from First Street to Fifth 20                531     2-4-1974
               Street
 
(1983 Code, § 6-3-1) Penalty, see §
71.30
SCHEDULE II. YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The following street intersections or junctions in the village are
hereby designated as yield right-of-way intersections and junctions, and
traffic entering the same shall be controlled as hereinafter set forth:
Intersection Street to Yield Right-of-Way
Intersection                            Street to Yield Right-of-Way
Fourth Street, Fifth Street, and Sixth  the traffic on all these numbered
Street, and all other streets hereafter streets and those hereafter created and
created or opened to vehicular traffic  opened, to yield the right-of-way to
entering upon Hortense Drive            traffic on Hortense Drive
Benham Street and Third Street          the traffic on Benham Street to yield
Benham Street and Fourth Street         the traffic on Benham Street to yield
Benham Street and Fifth Street          the traffic on Benham Street to yield
Benham Street and Seventh Street        the traffic on Benham Street to yield
Fifth Street and North Street           the traffic on Fifth Street to yield
Hiawatha Drive and First Street         traffic on Hiawatha Drive to yield
Lawrence Drive and Sixth Street         traffic on Lawrence Drive to yield
North Street and Third Street           traffic on North Street shall yield
North Street and Fourth Street          traffic on Fourth Street shall yield
Oak Street and Birch Street             the traffic on Oak Street to yield
Prairie Street and Third Street         the traffic on Prairie Street shall
                                        yield
Prairie Street and Fourth Street        the traffic on Prairie Street shall
                                        yield
Prairie Street and Fifth Street         the traffic on Prairie Street shall
                                        yield
Prairie Street and Sixth Street         the traffic on Prairie Street shall
                                        yield
Prospect Street and Fifth Street        traffic on Prospect Street to yield
Prospect Street and Sixth Street        traffic on Prospect Street to yield
Second Street and South Street          the traffic on Second Street shall
                                        yield
South Street and Fourth Street          traffic on South Street shall yield
South Street and Fifth Street           the traffic on South Street to yield
South Street and Sixth Street           the traffic on South Street to yield
 
   (B)   There shall be erected at the intersections or junctions of the
streets set forth in this section “Yield Right-of-Way” signs in such manner and
places as to give effect and notice relative to the provisions of this section.
(1983 Code, § 6-3-2) (Ord. 92-4, passed - -; Ord. 97-2, passed 1-6-1997; Ord.
09-15, passed 11-16-2009) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   One-way stop intersections.
Traffic On Shall Stop at Intersection With Ord. No. Date Passed
Traffic On              Shall Stop at Intersection With Ord. No. Date Passed
Birch Drive             Forest Drive                    03-12    9-5-2003
Birch Drive             Willow Street                   03-12    9-5-2003
Cedar Street            Birch Drive                     03-12    9-5-2003
Cottonwood Boulevard    Kennedy Drive                   03-12    9-5-2003
Cottonwood Boulevard    Oak Drive                       03-12    9-5-2003
Elizabeth Court         Kennedy Drive                   03-12    9-5-2003
Evergreen Drive (South) Kennedy Drive (East-West)       03-12    9-5-2003
Oak Drive               Birch Drive                     03-12    9-5-2003
Walnut Drive (North)    Forest Drive                    03-12    9-5-2003
Willow Street (West)    Kennedy Drive                   03-12    9-5-2003
 
   (B)   Two-way stop intersections.
Traffic On Shall Stop At Intersection With
Traffic On                       Shall Stop At Intersection With
All streets entering on Route 72 Route 72
Byers Street                     Sixth Street
Hortense Drive                   First Street
Lincoln Drive                    Pearl Street
Maple Street                     First Street
North Street                     Pearl Street
North Street                     Sixth Street
Oak Street                       First Street
Park Street                      South Street
Pearl Street                     Forest Street
South Street                     First Street
Sixth Street                     Hortense Drive
Sixth Street                     Railroad Alley
Seventh Street                   Hortense Drive
 
(1983 Code, § 6-3-3A.)
   (C)   Three-way stop intersections. At each of the following intersections,
the traffic on each street shall stop before entering the intersection.
Streets Nature of Stop Ord. No. Date Passed
Streets                                 Nature of Stop Ord. No. Date Passed
Cedar Street and    Forest Drive        3-way stop     05-10    11-7-2005
North Street and    Third Street        3-way stop     521      7-10-1972
Kennedy Drive and   Evergreen Drive     3-way stop     03-12    9-2-2003
Kennedy Drive and   First Street (Pearl 3-way stop     03-12    9-2-2003
                    Street)
Kennedy Drive and   Walnut Drive        3-way stop     03-12    9-2-2003
Prospect Street and Sixth Street        3-way stop     09-15    11-16-2009
Third Street and    Hortense Drive      3-way stop     09-15    11-16-2009
Willow Street and   Birch Street        3-way stop     09-15    11-16-2009
 
(1983 Code, § 6-3-3B.)
   (D)   Four-way stop intersections.  The following intersections are hereby
declared to be four-way streets:
 
Intersection:                     Nature of Stop Ord. No. Date Passed
First Street and Hortense Drive   4-way          09-15    11-16-2009
Fourth Street and Prospect Street 4-way          508      10-2-1967
South Street and Fifth Street     4-way          508      10-2-1967
Third Street and Prospect Street  4-way          508      10-2-1967
Third Street and South Street     4-way          508      10-2-1967
 
(1983 Code, § 6-3-3C.)
   (E)   Railroad crossing. The railroad crossing on Third Street shall have a
stop sign posted on each side of the crossing until such time as the crossing
would become signalized.
(1983 Code, § 6-3-3D.)
(Ord. 88-4, passed - -; Ord. 92-3, passed - -; Ord. 97-1, passed 1-6-1997)
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE IV. U-TURNS.
   (A)   The following U-turns are prohibited:
 
Prohibited U-Turns on: Location                       Ord. No. Date Passed
Main Street            between Fifth Street and Sixth 508      10-2-1967
                       Street
 
   (B)   There shall be erected on Main Street signs giving notice and effect
of the provisions of this section.
(1983 Code, § 6-3-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE V. BICYCLE AND SKATEBOARDING; RESTRICTED STREETS.
   No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, rollerskate or rollerblade on
the following locations:
 
Location                    Between                  Ord. No. Date Passed
On the sidewalk adjacent to between Sixth Street and 96-1     5-6-1996
Route 72                    Fourth Street
 
(1983 Code, § 6-2-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 74: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Disabled parking
   
II.   No-parking zones
   
III.   Limited parking
   
IV.   Temporary restrictions; snow and parade routes
SCHEDULE I. DISABLED PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle not bearing a disabled license
plate or other disabled permit to park or stand the vehicle at the following
location:
 
Location                Ord. No. Date Passed
300 South Eighth Street 00-1     2-7-2000
 
   (B)   The penalty for violations of this schedule shall be as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code.
(1983 Code, § 6-3-5) (Ord. 00-1, passed 2-7-2000)
SCHEDULE II. NO-PARKING ZONES.
   The following locations are designated as no-parking zones for the village:
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street                  Location                    Ord. No.     Date Passed
Benham Street           south side                  07-04        5-7-2007
Benham Street west of   on the side of the street
Sixth Street            on which the mailboxes are  04-10        5-3-2004
                        located
                        on the side of the street
Birch Drive             on which the mailboxes are  14-06        3-19-2014
                        located
                        on the side of the street
Cedar Street            on which the mailboxes are  14-06        3-19-2014
                        located
                        on the side of the street
Cottonwood Boulevard    on which the mailboxes are  14-06        3-19-2014
                        located
                        on the side of the street
Eighth Street           on which the mailboxes are  04-10        5-3-2004
                        located
Eighth Street           west side                   07-04        5-7-2007
Elizabeth Court         (to be determined)          14-06        3-19-2014
                        on the side of the street
Forest Drive            on which the mailboxes are  14-06        3-19-2014
                        located
                        on the side of the street
Kennedy Drive           on which the mailboxes are  14-06        3-19-2014
                        located
Main Street (Illinois   along either side, except
Route 72) within the    as noted in Ch. 74, Sch.    02-21        10-7-2002
corporate limits of the III
village
North Pearl Street, on  from the railroad tracks to 04-06; 04-10 4-5-2004;
either side             the Kishwaukee River bridge              5-3-2004
                        on the side of the street
Oak Street              on which the mailboxes are  14-06        3-19-2014
                        located
Prospect Street         north side                  07-04        5-7-2007
Prospect Street west of on the side of the street
Sixth Street            on which the mailboxes are  04-10        5-3-2004
                        located
Seventh Street          east side                   07-04        5-7-2007
                        on the side of the street
Seventh Street          on which the mailboxes are  04-10        5-3-2004
                        located
                        on the side o the street on
Walnut Drive            which the mailboxes are     14-06        3-19-2014
                        located
                        on the side of the street
Willow Street           on which the mailboxes are  14-06        3-19-2014
                        located
 
(1983 Code, § 6-2-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III. LIMITED PARKING.
   (A)   The following locations are designated restricted parking locations
within the village:
 
Location                    Restriction                   Ord. No. Date Passed
                            On either side of the street
Main Street, within the 500 between the hours of 2:00     04-06;   4-5-2004;
block                       a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday    04-10    5-3-2004
                            through Saturday
513 West Main Street (SBI
72), for the 2 parking      15-minute limitation between
spaces adjacent to the post the hours the United States   -        -
office on the south side of post office lobby is open
West Main Street (SBI 72)
                            Designated parking lanes
                            between Sixth Street and
                            First Street.
                            Parking in this area shall be
                            parallel parking only,
                            diagonal parking being hereby
Main Street (Illinois Route expressly prohibited. Such
72, either side, within the parallel parking shall be so
corporate limits of the     executed that the wheels of   02-21    10-7-2002
village                     the vehicles nearest the curb
                            shall be not farther away
                            from the curb than 12 inches.
                            Parking will not be permitted
                            within the limits of
                            intersections as determined
                            by the state from
                            intersection studies
Fifth Street running north  On either side of the street
from the east-west alley    between the hours of 2:00
between Main Street and     a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday    2022-02  4-18-2022
South Street to Railroad    through Saturday
Road
 
(1983 Code, § 6-2-14)
   (B)   The penalty for a violation of the provision regarding 513 West Main
Street shall be as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-19)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the
Main Street prohibition of Ordinance 02-21 shall be as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code.
(Ord. 02-21, passed 10-7-2002; Ord. 04-10, passed 5-3-2004; Ord. 2022-02,
passed 4-18-2022)
SCHEDULE IV. TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS; SNOW AND PARADE ROUTES.
   (A)   Snow route; removal risk.  
      (1)   An emergency is automatically declared to exist within the village
whenever there is an accumulation of snow and/or ice of two inches or more, at
which time it shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain
parked and/or unattended, any vehicle (as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.) or any other item of personal property or material on
any improved or paved village street until the streets have been cleared of
snow and ice.
      (2)   In addition to the fines provided for in this section, any vehicle
(as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.) which is
parked in violation of this section may be towed or any other item of personal
property or material may be removed and disposed at the discretion of the
Police Department. All towing charges and disposal storage fees shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property.
      (3)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined
as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code for each offense. A vehicle (as defined in
the Illinois Vehicle Code 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.) which is parked and/or
unattended upon an improved or paved village street when there is an
accumulation of snow and/or ice of two inches or more shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section by the person in whose name the vehicle
(as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.) is
registered. In addition, any item of personal property or material which is
left unattended upon an improved or paved village street directly in front of
and on the same side of the street, shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section by the abutting property owner when there is an
accumulation of snow and/or ice of two inches or more.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-16)
   (B)   No-parking parade route. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park
on any street within the village that has been posted as “No Parking” for
parade purposes or designated as a detour route during a parade. Any vehicle so
parked may, in addition to a fine, be towed at the vehicle owner’s expense.
(1983 Code, § 6-2-20)
(Ord. 98-5, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 07-01, passed 1-2-2007; Ord. 08-21, passed
11-3-2008) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 75: ABANDONED, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
75.01   Definitions
   
75.02   Restrictions and prohibitions on abandoned, inoperable vehicles
   
75.03   Impounding
   
75.04   Vehicles shall be registered
   
75.05   Storage of inoperable motor vehicles
 
   
75.99   Penalty
§ 75.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is left at any place for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle reasonably to appear to have
been abandoned.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged
or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power. However, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a motor
vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its
own power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations, nor to any
motor vehicles that are kept within a building when not in use, to historic
vehicles over 25 years of age, nor to a motor vehicle on the premises of a
place of business engaged in wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY. Any real property within the village which is not a street or
highway.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power other than by human power designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and
transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
(1983 Code, § 6-4-1) (Ord. 00-12, passed 9-5-2000)
§ 75.02 RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Abandonment of vehicles. No person shall abandon any vehicle within
the village and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the
village for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle
reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.
   (B)   Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicles on street. No person shall
leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicles on any
public land and improvements, including land located adjacent to buildings,
grounds, parks, playgrounds, streets, sidewalks, parkways, rights of way and
similar property.
   (C)   Inoperable vehicles declared to be a nuisance.
      (1)   Inoperable motor vehicles as defined herein, whether on private
property, public land and improvements, including land located to buildings,
grounds, parks, playgrounds, streets, sidewalks, parkways, rights of way and
similar property, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
      (2)   All persons are required to dispose of any inoperable motor
vehicles under their control upon written notice received from the corporate
authorities or from the Chief of Police or any member of his or her Department
designated by him or her commanding such disposition of the inoperable motor
vehicle.
(1983 Code, § 6-4-2) (Ord. 08-05, passed 4-7-2008) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.03 IMPOUNDING.
   The Chief of Police or any member of his or her Department designated by him
or her is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any
place within the village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this
chapter or which reasonably appears to be lost, stolen or unclaimed, or which
is an inoperable vehicle as defined herein. The vehicle shall be impounded
until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/4-201
through 4-214.
(1983 Code, § 6-4-3) (Ord. 514, passed 11-3-1969)
§ 75.04 VEHICLES SHALL BE REGISTERED.
   All vehicles subject to this chapter must have all registration plates and
current registration sticker as required by law.
(Ord. 05-05, passed 6- -2005)
§ 75.05 STORAGE OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   All inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property
and in view of the general public, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. A fine
as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code shall be levied upon the failure of any
person to obey a notice received from the village which states that the person
is to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle under his or her control. Upon
the failure of any person to remove any inoperable motor vehicle or parts
thereof within seven days of the issuance of the notice from the village to
remove the same, the Village of Kirkland Police Department shall be authorized
to remove the inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof and charge the cost for
doing so to that person.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept
within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over 25 years
of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in
the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
(1983 Code, § 4-1-6) (Ord. 88-2, passed - -) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
75.01 through
75.03 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall
be fined in an amount not less than $50 nor exceeding $750. Each day the
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1983 Code, § 6-4-4) (Ord. 514, passed 11-3-1969; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 76: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
76.01   Definitions
   
76.02   Public nuisance declared
   
76.03   Seizure and impoundment of motor vehicles
   
76.04   Plea hearing/evidentiary hearing
   
76.05   Disposition of impounded motor vehicle
   
76.06   General regulations
   
76.07   Administrative review
§ 76.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
hereof, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have
the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall
indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the
plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number. The
words shall and will are mandatory and may is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   HEARING OFFICER. A licensed attorney, who is not an officer or employee of
the village, designated by the Mayor.
   OWNER OF RECORD. The record titleholder to a motor vehicle as registered
with the Secretary of State or any other applicable governmental agency.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 1-13-2014)
§ 76.02 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   (A)   A motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of
the owner of record or lessee, shall be declared a public nuisance and subject
to seizure and impoundment under this section where such motor vehicle is used
in the commission of any of the violations set forth in §
76.02(B) or when the commission of any of the violations set forth in §
76.02(B) makes impoundment of the motor vehicle reasonably necessary as a
community care taking function so that the motor vehicle does not jeopardize
public safety and the efficient movement of vehicular traffic.
   (B)   The administrative fee related to the village's administrative and
processing costs associated with the investigation, arrest, and detention of an
offender, or the removal, impoundment, storage, and release of the vehicle
shall be imposed upon any of the violations listed in 625 ILCS 5/11-208.7(b),
as amended, occurred. It shall not be necessary for criminal changes to be
filed, prosecuted, and/or proven in order to assess the administrative fee. The
violations set forth in 625 ILCS 5/11-208.7(b) are as follows:
      (1)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of or in the
attempt to commit an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to § 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012; or
      (2)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
§ 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; or
      (3)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of or in the
attempt to commit a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act; or
      (4)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of or in the
attempt to commit an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances
Act; or
      (5)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of or in the
attempt to commit an offense in violation of §§ 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1 of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; or
      (6)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to § 6-303 of the Code; except
that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the
suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to
comply with emission testing; or
      (7)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing,
or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as
defined by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act;
or
      (8)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's
license, in violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, if the period of
expiration is greater than one year; or
      (9)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a driver's license or permit, in violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's
license or permit due to a person's age: or
      (10)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated §§ 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code; or
      (11)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of or in the
attempt to commit an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the Criminal
Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; or
      (12)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of or in the
attempt to commit any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012 when so provided by this
code; or
      (13)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of § 11-503 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code:
         (a)   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
         (b)   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 1-13-2014; Ord. 16-04, passed 3-7-2016; Ord. 2020-01,
passed 2-3-2017)
§ 76.03 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Probable cause. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to
believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to
this chapter, the police officer shall cause the motor vehicle to be removed or
towed to a facility authorized by the village. When the motor vehicle is
removed or towed, the police officer shall notify or make a reasonable attempt
to notify the owner, lessee, or any person who is found to be in control of the
motor vehicle at the time of the alleged violation(s), if there is such a
person, of the fact of the seizure as provided in this section and of the
vehicle owner's or lessee's right to an administrative hearing. The police
officer shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle shall be impounded
pending the completion of the hearing provided for in this chapter, unless the
owner of record, lessee, or a lienholder of record of the motor vehicle posts
with the village a cash bond as set forth in this §
76.03 and pays for all towing and storage charges.
   (B)   Necessary and reasonable. A police officer who has probable cause to
believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to
this chapter shall first ascertain whether the seizure and impoundment is
necessary and reasonable under the circumstances. If in the judgment of the
police officer then present, a person authorized by the owner of record, lessee
or the operator of the motor vehicle is present and capable to legally provide
for the immediate removal of the motor vehicle, and said motor vehicle is not
required to be held as evidence in regard to the violation, the police officer
may allow that individual to promptly remove the motor vehicle without it being
subject to seizure and impoundment if seizure and impoundment of the motor
vehicle is discretionary pursuant to §
76.02 or seizure and impoundment of the motor vehicle is contemplated pursuant
to §
76.02.
   (C)   Posting bond. If a bond in the amount of $500 is posted with the
village, the impounded motor vehicle shall be released to the owner of record,
lessee, or a lienholder of record upon the payment of the towing and storage
costs to the applicable towing company. If an administrative fee is imposed
pursuant to §
76.04, the bond will be applied to said fee, provided that in the event that a
violation of this chapter is not proven, the bond shall be returned to the
person posting the bond. All bond money posted pursuant to this section shall
be held by the village until a hearing officer issues a decision, or, if there
is a judicial review, until a reviewing court issues a final decision.
   (D)   Preliminary hearing. Where the owner of record or a lessee of a motor
vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter makes a request in writing
and files with the Chief of Police or his/her designee, for a preliminary
hearing within 24 hours after the seizure of the motor vehicle, the Chief of
Police or his/her designee must conduct a preliminary hearing within 24 hours
after the request for a preliminary hearing is received by the village,
provided that if the date for the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, the preliminary hearing will be held on the next business day
following the Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. For purposes of this section,
the following shall apply:
      (1)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
be heard at the preliminary hearing.
      (2)   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the preliminary
hearing, and hearsay testimony shall be allowed, if it is the type commonly
relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
      (3)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the Chief of Police or
his/her designee determines that there is probable cause to believe that the
motor vehicle was used in the commission of a violation listed in §
76.02, the Chief of Police or his/his designee shall order the continued
impoundment of the motor vehicle, unless the owner of record, lessee, or a
lienholder posts a cash bond with the village in the amount of $500 and pays
the towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company, as set forth in
§
76.04.
      (4)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the Chief of Police or
his/her designee determines that there is not probable cause to believe that
the motor vehicle was used in the commission of a violation listed in §
76.02, the motor vehicle shall be returned to the owner of record, lessee, or
lienholder of record of the motor vehicle without any fees or other costs, but
the owner of record or lessee shall be responsible to pay any towing or storage
charges to the applicable towing company.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 1-13-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-3-2017; Ord. 2024-01,
passed 6-3-2024)
§ 76.04 PLEA HEARING/EVIDENTIARY HEARING.
   (A)   Notice of hearing. Within 10 days after a motor vehicle is impounded
pursuant to this chapter, the village shall notify the owner of record or
lessee and any lienholder of record of the date, time, and location of a plea
hearing that shall be conducted pursuant to §
76.04. Such notice shall be served by first class mail to the address
registered with the Secretary of State or by personal service to the owner of
record or lessee and any lienholder of record. The plea hearing shall be
conducted by a hearing officer designated by the Board of Trustees. The owner
of record or lessee may appear at a plea hearing and enter a plea of guilty or
not guilty. If a plea of guilty is entered, or if the owner of record or lessee
fails to appear, the cause shall be disposed of at that time, with an order or
a default order in favor of the village, which order or default order shall
require the payment to the village of the $500 administrative fee and the
payment of towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company, and the
continued impoundment of the motor vehicle until the owner of record, lessee,
or lienholder of record pays to the village the $500 administrative fee and
pays the towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company. If the
owner of record, lessee, or lienholder of record has previously posted the bond
authorized by §
76.03 and paid the applicable towing and storage costs to the towing company
for the release of the vehicle, then no further fees or costs shall be due. If
the owner of record or lessee pleads not guilty, an evidentiary hearing shall
be scheduled and held not later than 45 days after the motor vehicle was
impounded, unless continued by the hearing officer. All interested persons
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the evidentiary hearing.
At any time prior to the evidentiary hearing date, the hearing officer may, at
the request of either the village or the owner of record or lessee, direct
witnesses to appear and give testimony at the evidentiary hearing. The formal
rules of evidence shall not apply at the evidentiary hearing, and hearsay
evidence shall be admissible if it is the type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
   (B)   If, after the evidentiary hearing, the hearing officer determines, by
a preponderance of the evidence, that the motor vehicle was used in connection
with a violation set forth in § 76.02, the hearing officer shall enter an order
finding the owner of record or lessee of the motor vehicle civilly liable to
the village for an administrative fee in the amount of $500 and require the
motor vehicle to continue to be impounded until the owner of record, lessee, or
lienholder of record pays the administrative fee to the village and also pays
the applicable towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company. If
the owner of record or lessee fails to appear at the evidentiary hearing, the
hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor of the village, which
order shall require the payment to the village of the $500 administrative fee
and the payment of the towing and storage costs to the applicable towing
company, and the continued impoundment of the motor vehicle until the owner of
record or lessee pays the village the $500 administrative fee and pays the
towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company. If the owner of
record, lessee, or a lienholder of record has previously posted the bond
authorized by §
76.03 and paid the applicable towing and storage costs to the towing company
for the release of the vehicle, then no further fees or costs shall be due. The
$500 administrative fee shall be a debt due to the village, and the village may
seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment as provided by
law.
   (C)   If after a hearing the hearing officer finds no such violation
occurred, the hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the motor
vehicle to the owner of record, lessee, or lienholder of record without any fee
or other costs, or, if a cash bond has previously been posted, the cash bond
shall be returned. However, the village shall not be responsible for the
payment of towing or storage fees. If the hearing officer finds that the
village exceeded its authority in seizing and impounding a motor vehicle, the
village shall be liable to the owner of record or lessee of the motor vehicle
for the cost of storage fees and reasonable attorney's fees.
   (D)   At the evidentiary hearing, the citation setting forth the violation
shall be prima facie evidence that the violation was committed as provided in
the citation, and the burden of proof shall be upon the owner of record to
prove that the violation was not committed.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 1-13-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-3-2017; Ord. 2024-01,
passed 6-3-2024)
§ 76.05 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   If the administrative fee and other applicable fees are not paid within 35
days after an administrative fee is imposed against an owner of record or
lessee who defaults by failing to appear at the hearing provided in §
76.04, or who admits guilt at the plea hearing, the motor vehicle shall be
deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of unclaimed motor vehicles pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.,
as amended. In all other cases, if the administrative fee and applicable towing
and storage costs to the applicable tow company are not paid within 35 days
after an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the
village, the motor vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of
in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed motor vehicles
pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 1-13-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-3-2017)
§ 76.06 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Costs for towing and storage of a motor vehicle pursuant to this
chapter shall be those approved by the Chief of Police for all towing companies
authorized to tow for the Police Department.
   (B)   This chapter is in addition to and shall not replace or otherwise
abrogate any existing state or federal laws or any ordinance that relates to
the seizure or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any fee provided for in this
chapter shall be in addition to any and all penalties that may be assessed or
imposed by a court for any criminal charges.
   (C)   This chapter shall not apply:
      (1)   If the motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time
of the violation and the theft was reported to the appropriate police
authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered;
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is operated as a common carrier as defined by
applicable law and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in
control of the motor vehicle; or
      (3)   If the motor vehicle is subject to successful forfeiture
proceedings under 725 ILCS 150/1 et seq., as amended (Drug Asset Forfeiture
Procedure Act); 720 ILCS 5/36-1 et seq., as amended (Seizure and Forfeiture of
Vessels, Vehicles and Aircrafts), or other state or federal forfeiture laws.
   (D)   All fees collected by the village pursuant to this chapter shall only
be deposited and used for village traffic safety and enforcement expenditures.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 1-13-2014)
§ 76.07 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   Any owner of record, lien holder, or other person with a legal interest in
the motor vehicle shall have the right to appeal the decision of the hearing
officer to the circuit court of the 16th judicial circuit of the county
pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as
amended. The hearing in administrative review shall be limited to the record of
the hearing before the hearing officer. Any person seeking administrative
review of a final decision shall be required to reimburse the village for the
costs of preparing and certifying the record of proceedings. The failure of the
person seeking administrative review to reimburse the village shall be grounds
for the dismissal of a complaint for administrative review which is brought
pursuant to 735 ILCS 5/3-101. In the event the reviewing court reverses the
findings, decision, or order of the hearing officer, the village shall
reimburse the respondent for the costs for preparing and certifying the record
of proceedings.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 1-13-2014)
CHAPTER 77: GOLF CART USE ON ROADWAYS/REGULATIONS
Section
   
77.01   Policy statement
   
77.02   Golf cart regulations
§ 77.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   This chapter is adopted in the interest of public safety. This chapter is
not to be relied upon as a determination that the operation of golf carts on
streets is safe or advisable, even if done in accordance with this chapter. All
persons operating golf carts must be observant of and attentive to the safety
of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists,
bicyclists and pedestrians. All persons who operate or ride golf carts on
streets within the village do so at their own risk and peril. The village has
no liability under any theory of law for permitting golf carts to be operated
on village streets.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 77.02 GOLF CART REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definition of golf cart. A GOLF CART shall be as defined in the
Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-123.9, as may be amended from time to time,
and shall mean a vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purpose of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
   (B)   Operation of golf carts. Subject to the requirements of § 11-1426.1 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1, which is hereby adopted by the
village, and to the provisions of this chapter, both of which may be amended
from time to time, drivers properly licensed to operate motor vehicles on the
roadways of the village shall be authorized to register and, if approved,
operate golf carts on the streets under the jurisdiction of the village (hereby
excluding state and county roads, including but not limited to Illinois Route
72) having a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less. Golf carts may
not be operated on sidewalks or other public property not accessible to or
authorized to vehicular traffic, unless otherwise authorized by the Village
Board for special events. Golf cart operators must yield the right-of-way to
overtaking vehicles at all times. Golf carts shall not be operated in inclement
weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other
conditions. Each golf cart may transport only as many individuals as is the
number of seats designated by the golf cart manufacturer.
   (C)   Restrictions on crossing highways. A golf cart shall only be permitted
to cross a State Highway at the intersections of Fourth Street and Illinois
Route 72 and Fifth Street and Illinois Route 72. Otherwise, golf carts shall
not be permitted to cross any state highway.
   (D)   Safety requirements for golf carts. Golf carts that operate within the
village must be registered as provided for in division (E) below and said
vehicles must contain the following: brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, seat
belts for all passenger seats, a rearview mirror, red reflectorized warning
devices in the front and rear, a slow-moving emblem (as required of other
vehicles in § 12-709 of the Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-709) on the rear of the
golf cart, a headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front, a tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least 100
feet from the rear, brake lights, and turn signals. When operated on a roadway,
a golf cart shall have its headlight and tail lamps lighted as required by §
12-201 of the Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-201.
   (E)   Annual registration of golf carts. No golf cart shall be operated on
any roadway of the village unless the owner(s) thereof shall have first
registered the golf cart with the village in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Registration of golf carts shall be administrated by the Chief of
Police or his or her designee and applications for registration shall be made
on a form prescribed by the village, said form to include a waiver and release
of all claims against the village, a statement under oath or penalties of
perjury that the golf cart proposed to be registered meets the definition under
division (A) of this section and complies with the safety requirements provided
for in division (D) herein, and shall be accompanied by an annual registration
fee of $50 and proof of liability insurance for said golf cart having at least
the limits as required from time to time for motor vehicles under the mandatory
insurance law of the State of Illinois.
      (2)   Registered golf carts shall be issued a receipt which shall be kept
with the registered golf cart and which shall be produced upon request of law
enforcement or other village personnel.
      (3)   Registration shall be effective for a period of one year (May 1 to
April 30) and shall be renewed annually in the same manner as the original
registration. Registrations obtained after May 1 of a given year will still
expire on April 30, requiring a new registration, even if the initial
registration covered less than a full year.
      (4)   Registrations shall not be transferable in the event of change of
ownership. If it is desired that more than one person is registered to operate
a single golf cart, each person shall separately complete an application, be
approved, and sign the release, in substantially the form prescribed by the
village.
      (5)   Registrations shall be subject to revocation by the village in the
event of a violation of the requirements of § 11-1426.1 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1 or any of the provisions of this chapter. A
revocation shall be made in writing and shall set forth the provision(s) of
statute or ordinance found to be violated. Revocations may be appealed in
writing to the Village Board within 14 days from the issuance of the
revocation, and if appealed, the Village Board shall hold a public hearing at
which the affected owner may appear, present witnesses and evidence, and be
represented by an attorney. The Village Board shall uphold the revocation if it
determines by a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing that the
violation which was the basis for the revocation occurred. During the appeal
process, the revocation shall remain in full force and effect.
      (6)   In the event a registration is revoked due to a failure to maintain
the required liability insurance or a failure to maintain the condition of the
golf cart in compliance with this chapter, including but not limited to,
maintaining the required safety systems, the village, in its discretion, may
reinstate the registration upon documentation of reinstatement of the required
insurance or of the repair or modification of the golf cart necessary to cure
any deficiencies, as applicable, if the village determines that the violation
was not intentional and is not likely to recur.
   (F)   Inspection of golf carts. Golf carts registered, or proposed to be
registered, pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to inspection by the
Chief of Police or his or her designee, at any time to determine that said golf
cart meets, and continues to meet, the definition thereof as set forth in this
chapter, and meets the requirements of division (D) of this section, and
particularly that the required safety systems and equipment are in operating
condition.
   (G)   Mandatory insurance. The owner of any golf cart registered under this
chapter shall continuously maintain liability insurance for said golf cart
having at least the same limits as required from time to time for motor
vehicles under the mandatory insurance law of the State of Illinois.
   (H)   Operation limited to licensed drivers. No person who is not properly
licensed to operate motor vehicles on the roadways of the village shall operate
a golf cart within the village pursuant to state law, 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1(b-
5).
   (I)   Other laws, regulations and ordinances. Golf carts shall be operated
at all times in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
the rules of the road contained therein, and any other laws, regulations or
ordinances governing the operation of motor vehicles in the village, as well as
any laws, regulations or ordinances specifically pertaining to golf carts and
the operation thereof.
   (J)   Violations. In addition to the revocation of the registration for golf
carts as provided in this chapter, any person violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to revocation of any registration and a fine of not
less than $75 and not more than $150. The provisions hereof for prosecuting
violations of this chapter are not intended to supersede the Illinois Vehicle
Code, or to in any way impair prosecution of violations of the Illinois Vehicle
Code involving the operation of golf carts.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 6-5-2017)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   ANIMALS
         
91.   ENVIRONMENT AND NUISANCES
         
92.   TREES AND SHRUBS
         
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
         
94.   FAIR HOUSING
         
95.   ALARM SYSTEMS
         
96.   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Control of Dogs
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Running at large restricted
   
90.03   Muzzling required
   
90.04   Dog disturbing the peace
   
90.05   Restrictions on number of dogs
   
90.06   Kennels
   
90.07   Interfere with officer
Animals and Fowl
   
90.15   Keeping of animals
   
90.16   Abate nuisances
   
90.17   Dog and cat feces; nuisance
 
   
90.99   Penalty
CONTROL OF DOGS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOG.  All animals of the canine species, both male and female.
   KENNEL.  A place of business whereat dogs are sold, bred, raised, kept or
boarded for the purpose of resale, training or teaching and which business is
done commercially and for profit, as a hobby; provided, however, this
subchapter shall not apply to a KENNEL whereat not more than two dogs and their
litters are kept during any licensing year.
   LEASH. Includes a leather strap or metal type chain attached to a leather or
chain type collar located around the upper neck or chest area of a dog. The
LEASH shall not be longer than ten feet in length and must be controlled by the
owner or his or her designate.
   OWNER. Any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping or harboring
dogs.
(1983 Code, § 5-2-1)
§ 90.02 RUNNING AT LARGE RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No dog shall be suffered to run at large within the corporate limits
of the village.
   (B)   Any dog running at large shall be impounded by the Police Chief or his
or her representative and the DeKalb County Animal Control Officer will be
contacted for removal. Any person making claim to the dog shall be liable for
all board fees, pickup fees, license fees and rabies vaccination and
registration as may be required by law.
(1983 Code, § 5-2-2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 MUZZLING REQUIRED.
   No dog shall be suffered to run at large within the corporate limits of the
village unless securely muzzled when danger of hydrophobia shall be declared to
exist by the proclamation of the Village President.
(1983 Code, § 5-2-3) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 DOG DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge or control of
any dog or for any person who has the authority or power to prevent the same,
to suffer or permit any dog by barking, howling, crying or other distracting or
loud or unusual noise to disturb the peace or quiet of any place or
neighborhood or family or person in the village.
   (B)   The disturbing of the peace or quiet of any such place or neighborhood
or family or persons by any dog is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any such nuisance to
exist.
(1983 Code, § 5-2-4) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 RESTRICTIONS ON NUMBER OF DOGS.
   (A)   Not more than two dogs or two cats shall be allowed in the residence
or apartment of the owner who has custody of a dog or cat. Any residence may
contain both two dogs and two cats.
   (B)   The owner or person who has custody of a dog or cat may retain the
puppies or kittens, born of the dog or cat exceeding the permissible numbers
set forth in division (A) above for 12 weeks after the birth of the animals. If
after that time, there are more than two dogs and two cats in any one residence
or apartment, the owner or person in custody of the dogs or cats will be in
violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   Any person who lawfully owned more than two dogs or two cats prior to
the enactment of this subchapter may retain his or her animals, provided he or
she retains a special permit from the Chief of Police. The special permit shall
be for a term of one year and no renewal shall be issued without subsequent
inspection. If for any reason an animal is lost, sold, given away or dies and
there still remains in the residence or apartment two or more dogs or two or
more cats there can be no replacement of the lost, sold, given or deceased
animal. A special permit shall be issued if after an inspection it is
determined by the Chief of Police or his or her representative that:
      (1)   The animals in the owner’s possession are not creating a nuisance;
      (2)   There is adequate waste disposal; and
      (3)   There is no hazard to public safety, health and welfare.
(1983 Code, § 5-2-5) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 KENNELS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a
dog kennel commercially or for profit, or as a hobby within the village, unless
the person, firm or corporation shall have first obtained from the Village
Clerk a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The fee for a license to operate a dog kennel as herein defined shall
be the sum of $50 per year for a maximum of five dogs and $5 per year for each
additional dog, but no license fee shall be charged for any dog less than three
months of age. All licenses expire on January 1 of each year, and licenses
shall be issued by the Village Clerk, upon presentation of a certificate of
immunization that the dogs have been immunized against rabies for the current
year and a certificate signed by the Chief of Police stating that the
regulations set out in §
90.05 have been complied with.
   (C)   (1)   Any individual who obtains a license to operate a kennel for
business or profit is exempt from the requirements of §
90.05. The license shall be obtained from the Chief of Police after an
inspection and approval by the Chief of Police and determination that:
         (a)   The interior walls, ceilings, floor, partitions and
appurtenances of all such structures shall be painted annually or more often if
the Chief of Police finds that more frequent painting is necessary;
         (b)   The kennel is not a health hazard or nuisance; and
         (c)   The kennel complies with the public health, safety or general
welfare.
      (2)   The Chief of Police upon the complaint of any individual shall
inspect the kennel and issue any such order as may be necessary to carry out
the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Board of Trustees
whenever it may be determined that any licensee is operating and maintaining a
dog kennel in violation of any of the terms and provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   No kennel shall be located closer than 100 feet to the boundary of the
nearest adjacent residential lot.
(1983 Code, § 5-2-6) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 INTERFERE WITH OFFICER.
   No person shall in any way or manner prevent, or try to prevent, any officer
from performing his or her duty as required by this subchapter.
(1983 Code, § 5-2-7) Penalty, see §
90.99
ANIMALS AND FOWL
§ 90.15 KEEPING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, and is hereby declared a nuisance for any person
to keep or allow to be kept any animal of the species of horse, mule, swine,
sheep, goat, cattle, poultry (with the exception of hens as herein provided),
skunks, or poisonous reptiles within the corporate limits of the village except
upon properties zoned Agricultural.
   (B)   HENS shall mean the female of the species Gallus Gallus Domesticus.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to keep roosters within city limits.
      (2)   The number of hens allowed shall be no more than ten.
      (3)   Any structures housing hens shall be termed an “accessory building
or structure” as defined in Title XV,
Chapter 154 of this code as may be amended from time to time, and shall abide
by all requirements set forth in Title XV,
Chapter 154, §
154.019, “Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses”, as may be amended from
time to time.
      (4)   Any person keeping hens shall register with the Illinois Department
of Agriculture Livestock Premises Registration, and must have proof of
registration on-site.
      (5)   Care for hens shall follow the provisions set forth in this
section.
      (6)   Hens shall be kept in such a way so as not to cause a nuisance as
defined and enumerated in Title IX,
Chapter 91, §§
91.01 through
91.05 of this code as may be amended from time to time and shall be kept in
conformance with the following requirements:
         (a)   Hen yards and coops shall be constructed and maintained to
reasonably prevent the collection of standing water; and shall be cleaned of
hen droppings, uneaten or discarded feed, feathers, and other waste with such
frequency as is necessary to ensure the hen yard and coop do not become
nuisances as defined in Title IX,
Chapter 91, §§
91.01 through
91.05 of this code, as may be amended from time to time.
         (b)   Hens shall be kept in an enclosure which shall be maintained in
such a manner so as to protect the hens from predators and trespassers.
         (c)   Hen coops shall be built and kept in such a manner so as to
allow for easy ingress and egress for the hens and shall offer protection from
weather elements including cold temperatures.
         (d)   Hen coops and yards shall be large enough to provide at least
four feet per hen.
      (7)   Licenses for coops must be obtained and shall meet the rules of
this chapter where applicable.
         (a)   Prior to a license being granted to an applicant, the applicant
must show proof of notice to all adjacent landowners.
         (b)   A license shall not be granted unless the applicant has obtained
all necessary building permits and can show proof that a hen yard and coop that
comply with this section have been erected.
         (c)   Coop licenses shall not run with the land.
         (d)   Applications shall be submitted to the Village Clerk who shall
have the authority to enforce this section with the assistance of the village’s
Code Officer.
         (e)   An applicant who lives in an apartment or condominium building
is not eligible to receive a coop license.
         (f)   All chicken coops shall be subject to inspection at all
reasonable times by officials and agents of the village.
         (g)   A coop license shall be valid continually until the license is
revoked or relinquished, the license holder no longer controls the property
associated with the application, or the keeping and maintaining of chickens is
discontinued for six months. The fee for a coop license shall be $25. The coop
license fee shall be paid to the village prior to the village’s issuance of any
license. Any person who does not obtain a license, as required by this section,
shall pay a fine of $50, in addition to needing to obtain and pay the coop
license fee.
      (8)   No person shall slaughter any hen, or any other animal, within
village limits. Nothing in this section is to be interpreted as prohibiting any
establishment that is licensed to slaughter, from slaughtering for food
purposes any animals which are specifically raised for food purposes.
(Ord. 12-10, passed 7-16-2012; Ord. 2021-05, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-08,
passed 8-2-2021)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 ABATE NUISANCES.
   When any nuisance or anything likely to become a nuisance may be found upon
the premises, and the person causing the nuisance is unknown or cannot be
found, the owner, agent or occupant of the premises shall abate the same; and
if the owner, agent or occupant, whose duty is hereby made to abate the
nuisance, does not promptly abate the same, he or she shall be subject to the
provisions of §
90.99.
(1983 Code, § 5-1-2)
§ 90.17 DOG AND CAT FECES; NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog or cat to permit the dog
or cat to defecate on any street, sidewalk, alley or public place in the
village, or on any private property, other than that of the owner of the dog or
cat. Such defecation is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (B)   If any dog or cat shall defecate in violation of this section, the
owner or person having control of the dog or cat shall immediately clean up and
remove the defecation.
(Ord. 06-04, passed 3-6-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
90.01 through
90.07 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense, a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(1983 Code, § 5-2-8)
   (C)   Any person found to be in violation of §
90.15 shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750 for each offense.
In the event that an owner is adjudged to have three violations of §
90.15, the owner’s coop license shall be revoked. Each day an owner is not
compliant with §
90.15 shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §
90.16 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750 for
each offense.
(1983 Code, § 5-1-2)
   (E)   Any owner or person who fails to clean up and remove a dog’s or cat’s
defecation as required in §
90.17 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(Ord. 87-4, passed - -; Ord. 06-04, passed 3-6-2006; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-
2012; Ord. 12-10, passed 7-16-2012)
CHAPTER 91: ENVIRONMENT AND NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances
   
91.01   Nuisances defined
   
91.02   Enumeration of certain nuisances
   
91.03   Junk, keeping of restricted
   
91.04   Excessive noise
   
91.05   Duty of maintenance of private property
Vacant Buildings
   
91.10   Liens for property maintenance activities for vacant buildings
Abatement
   
91.15   Abatement of nuisances
   
91.16   Failure to abate nuisances
Motor Vehicles
   
91.30   Loudspeakers or sound trucks
   
91.31   Mufflers, unnecessary noise
Lawn Conditions and Diseased Trees
   
91.45   Title
   
91.46   Enactment
   
91.47   Weeds, bushes, grasses
   
91.48   Trees
   
91.49   Effective date
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see
Chapter 75 of this code of ordinances
NUISANCES
§ 91.01 NUISANCES DEFINED.
   It shall be a nuisance:
   (A)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal, or any offal, filth or
noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place in the
village;
   (B)   To obstruct or impede, without legal authority, the passage of any
navigable river or other stream or streams;
   (C)   To obstruct or encroach upon public streets or alleys or private ways;
   (D)   To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise
of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious
exhalations, offensive smells, or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the
health of individuals or of the public; and/or
   (E)   To allow or permit any condition or use of premises or of building
exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others, or which causes or
tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the
neighborhood in which such premises are located, or which may, directly or
indirectly, endanger, injure or impair the health or life of any person.
   (F)   To cause, allow, keep or permit an outdoor, unattended donation drop
box for clothes and/or other personal items to be placed or kept on property,
except as provided in § 91.02 of this code.
(1983 Code, § 4-1-1) (Ord. 11-04, passed 5-2-2011; Ord. 15-05, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 91.02 ENUMERATION OF CERTAIN NUISANCES.
   (A)   Pollution of water. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to pollute,
taint, corrupt or defile any stream, watercourse or standing or running water;
or to have, keep or suffer to permit, lie or be, or to place, throw or deposit
anywhere in the village any animal or vegetable matter, decayed or decomposed,
in whole or in part, containing elements, or capable of giving off elements
that may injuriously affect human beings, or which may injuriously affect
ordinary comfort physically or the lawful enjoyment of life.
   (B)   Offensive or unsafe matter.  It shall be unlawful for the owner,
occupant or the agent of any owner or occupant of lots, parcels or areas within
the village to permit the premises to become unsanitary or a fire menace by
allowing an offensive or unsafe matter to grow, accumulate or otherwise occupy
and remain upon the premises.
   (C)   Accumulation of junk and debris. It shall be unlawful for the owner,
occupant or the agent of any owner or occupant of lots, parcels or areas within
the village in a residential area to allow abandoned, discarded or unused
objects such as junk, disabled cars and trucks, trash, waste, furniture,
stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers, debris and old lumber to
accumulate and remain upon the premises and become stagnant and foul or be a
possible harborage for rats, snakes and other vermin.
   (D)   Keeping bees. It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to
keep or house bees within the village or within 500 feet of any residence or
dwelling house, except his or her own, or within 200 feet of any adjoining
property owned by the owner and keeper of the bees, or within 200 feet of any
street or alley.
   (E)   Obstructing sewer and the like. No person shall stop or obstruct the
passage or interrupt the flow of the contents of any gutter, watercourse,
public sewer, culvert, water pipe, conduit, hydrant, stream or the flow or
passage of any water, unless otherwise lawfully authorized to do so.
   (F)   Weeds, prohibited on premises. It shall be unlawful for any owner,
lessee, occupant or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such
owner, lessee or occupant having control of any lot or ground or any part of a
lot or ground situated in the village, and within 100 feet of any building
occupied as a residence by any such resident of the village, to allow or
maintain on any such lot any growth of weeds to a height of over ten inches, or
any burdocks, thistles, weeds or uncultivated shrubbery to mature or go to
seed. It shall be the duty of every owner, manager, lessee or occupant of any
property abutting upon any street in the village to keep the weeds cut down on
the property and to prevent the growth of any burdocks, thistles, weeds or
uncultivated shrubbery to mature or go to seed. Any such person who shall fail
to comply with the provisions of this section within five days after being
notified to do so by the Superintendent of Public Works of the village, shall
be deemed guilty of a violation of this section and upon conviction shall be
punished by a fine as set forth in §
91.99. Any such fine not paid within the time permitted by law shall, upon
proper recording thereof, become a lien upon the premises.
   (G)   Offensive trades. Whenever any trade, manufactory or work kept,
carried on or performed within the village, or any matter or thing of any kind
has been declared or shall hereafter be declared to be a nuisance by the
Village Board of Trustees on account of endangering the public health, the
Health Officer shall at once serve or cause to be served written notice on the
person carrying on the business or maintaining the matter or thing, requiring
the person to discontinue the nuisance; the person so failing to, shall be
subject to a fine as set forth in §
91.99.
   (H)   Compost piles. It shall be unlawful to permit, allow or keep any
compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit
unpleasant odors or harmful gas, or attract rodents, vermin or other disease-
carrying pests, animals or insects, provided that the presence of earthworms in
a compost pile shall not constitute a nuisance.
   (I)   Donation drop boxes. It shall be unlawful to cause, permit, allow or
keep any outdoor, unattended donation drop box for clothes and/or other
personal items in the village, unless the donation drop box:
      (1)   Is maintained in clean and good-working condition;
      (2)   Is emptied weekly and does not allow donated items or other debris
to accumulate outside the donation drop box;
      (3)   Lists the donation drop box owner’s name, mailing address,
telephone number, and email address where the owner may be contacted regarding
the condition of the box;
      (4)   Complies with all yard and bulk requirements and other restrictions
for accessory uses set forth in §
154.019;
      (5)   Is supported by a written decision of the Planning and Zoning
Commission as provided in §
154.023, determining that the proposed donation drop box use is similar to and
not more objectionable than the permitted accessory buildings, structures, and
uses listed in §
154.020; and
      (6)   Is located on property owned by the village, in the village’s sole
discretion, subject to a license agreement between the village and donation
drop box owner setting forth the terms of the license, including among other
provisions, the duration of the licensed use, restrictions on the location and
size of the donation box, and the donation drop box owner’s operational and
maintenance obligations.
(1983 Code, § 4-1-2) (Ord. 88-2, passed - -; Ord. 11-04, passed 5-2-2011; Ord.
15-05, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 JUNK, KEEPING OF RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or
materials which may be classified as junk adjacent to or in close proximity to
any schoolhouse, church, public parks, public grounds, business buildings or
residences without first providing proper and tight buildings for the storage
of the same.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-13) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 EXCESSIVE NOISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person to make,
continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or
unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the
village.
   (B)   It shall be declared a nuisance for any person to keep or harbor any
dog, cat or any other animal which by barking, howling, bawling or by any other
noises, shall disturb the peace and quiet of any family, individual or
neighborhood.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to emergency vehicles operating on
official business nor to municipal employees acting within the scope of their
official duties.
(Ord. 04-21, passed 12-6-2004) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 DUTY OF MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall
maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or
maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value
of the other property in the neighborhood in which the premises are located.
(1983 Code, § 4-1-5) (Ord. 88-2, passed - -) Penalty, see §
91.99
VACANT BUILDINGS
§ 91.10 LIENS FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES FOR VACANT BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Vacant building defined. A VACANT BUILDING is a building or portion of
a building as defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1 as an "abandoned residential
property," being a residential dwelling unit that has been unoccupied by any
lawful occupant or occupants for at least 90 days, and for which after such 90
day period the village has made good faith efforts to contact the legal owner
or owners of the property or, if known, the agent of the owner, and no contact
has been made.
   (B)   Nuisance declared. Vacant buildings which are indefinitely vacant and
in a state of disrepair or boarded are public nuisances in that they contribute
to the decrease in value of surrounding properties, precipitate disinvestment
by neighboring owners, provide a location for criminal activity, undermine the
aesthetic character of the neighborhood and village, and have other undesirable
effects.
   (C)   Nuisance abatement. The village is authorized to perform or provide
for property maintenance activities to abate the nuisance caused by a vacant
building, including the following: §
91.02 and by §§
91.45 through
91.48 and:
      (1)   Cutting and removal of neglected weeds, grass, trees, and bushes as
authorized by §§
91.45 through
91.48 and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7;
      (2)   Pest control activities, as may be authorized by this Code and 65
ILCS 5/11-20-8;
      (3)   Removal of infected trees as authorized by §
91.47 and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12;
      (4)   Removal of garbage, debris, and graffiti and related activities as
authorized by § 91.02 and other sections of this Code and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13;
and
      (5)   Removal, securing, and enclosing of abandoned residential
properties as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01.
   (D)   Charges for nuisance abatement. The village shall have the authority
to collect from the property owner the costs incurred in performing the
property maintenance activities to abate the nuisances described in this
section. The village shall send a bill for the cost to the property owner, his
agent, legal representative, or occupant in legal possession or control of the
premises.
   (E)   Traditional lien procedure. If a bill sent pursuant to division (D) of
this section is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of the bill, the
village shall have the authority to file and record a lien against the
property, pursuant to Section 11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS
5/11-20-15. If, for any one property, the village engaged in any nuisance
abatement activity described in division (C) of this section on more than one
occasion during the course of one year, then the village may combine any or all
of the costs of those activities into a single notice of lien. The lien must be
filed in accordance with the lien procedure established by the specific Code
provision of which the property is alleged to be in violation or, if no such
procedure exists, then the following procedure shall apply:
      (1)   Notice of lien.
         (a)   The village or the person performing the service by authority of
the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of lien in the
office of the recorder of deeds in the county in which the real estate is
located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one year after the cost and
expense is incurred.
         (b)   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
forth:
            1.   A description of the real estate that sufficiently describes
the parcel;
            2.   The amount of the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
activities; and
            3.   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by
the village or someone working on behalf of the village.
         (c)   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified
mail to the property owner, his agent or legal representative or occupant in
legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to the person
who received the tax bill for the preceding year.
      (2)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
      (3)   Foreclosure of lien. Subsequent to the filing of the above-
described lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure
of such lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the
premises or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the nature of an
intervening petition or cross-complaint the village may proceed in its
corporate name to foreclose such lien. An action to foreclose a lien under this
section must be commenced within two years after the date of filing notice of
lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this section shall be sold
for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to
pay the monies owing the village.
   (F)   Priority lien procedure for abandoned residential properties. The
priority lien procedure described in this division (F) shall apply only to
costs incurred for property maintenance activities performed on abandoned
residential properties, as defined in this section, and is an alternative to
the traditional lien authorized by division (E) of this section. If a bill sent
pursuant to division (D) of this section is not paid in full within 30 days of
the date of the bill, the village shall have the authority to file and record a
priority lien against the property, pursuant to Section 11-20-15.1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1, in the following manner:
      (1)   Notice of lien.
         (a)   The village or the person performing the service by authority of
the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of a priority lien
in the office of the recorder of deeds in the county in which the real estate
is located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one year after the cost
and expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the village engaged in any
nuisance abatement activity described in division (C) of this section on more
than one occasion during the course of one year, then the village may combine
any or all of the costs of those activities into a single notice of lien.
         (b)   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
forth:
            1.   A description of the abandoned residential property that
sufficiently describes the parcel;
            2.   The amount of the cost incurred or payable for the activities;
            3.   The date or dates when such cost was incurred by the village
or someone working on behalf of the village; and
            4.   A statement that the lien has been filed pursuant to one or
more of the property maintenance activities described in division (C) of this
section and authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8(d), 65 ILCS
5/11-20-12(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13(e), 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01, as applicable.
         (c)   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified
mail to the property owner, his agent or legal representative or occupant in
legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to the person
who received the tax bill for the preceding year.
         (d)   The village may not file a lien if the lender has provided
notice to the village that the lender has performed, or will perform, remedial
actions; provided, however, that the remedial actions must be performed or
initiated in good faith within 30 days of the lender's notice to the village.
      (2)   Recordkeeping. To enforce a lien pursuant to this division (F), the
village must maintain contemporaneous records that include, at a minimum:
         (a)   A dated statement of a finding by the village that the property
has become abandoned residential property;
         (b)   The date when the property was first observed to be unoccupied
by any lawful occupant;
         (c)   A description of the actions taken by the village to contact the
legal owner of the property, or if known, any agent of the owner;
         (d)   A statement that no contacts were made with the legal owner or,
if known, any agent of the owner;
         (e)   A dated certification by a village official of the necessity and
specific nature of the work performed;
         (f)   A copy of the agreement with the person or company performing
the work and the rates and estimated cost of the work, if applicable;
         (g)   Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the work; and
         (h)   A statement whether the work was competitively bid, and if so, a
copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders.
      (3)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
      (4)   Enforcement of lien. A lien under this division (F) is enforceable
by the village, or entity or person who performs work on behalf of the village,
at the hearing for confirmation of the foreclosure sale of the abandoned
residential property and is limited to a claim of interest in the proceeds of
the sale. The priority lien is superior to all other liens and encumbrances,
except tax liens.
(Ord. 11-01, passed 4-4-2011)
ABATEMENT
§ 91.15 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   Whenever any nuisances whatever shall be found upon any premises or
elsewhere in the village, the Chief of Police, Village President or any Health
Officer of the village is hereby authorized to cause the same to be summarily
abated in such manner as he or she may direct, and for the purpose of abating
any such nuisance, the officer is hereby to enter any store, stable, house or
building and to enter upon any lot or premises, and to cause all stagnant
waters thereon to be drained off, and pools, sinks or low places or ground to
be cleaned, filled up or otherwise improved; to cause all dead animals or other
noxious or offensive substances to be buried or removed beyond the village
limits. Upon the nuisances being abated by the officer, a suit may be
instituted in any court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the village
against the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the nuisance may have
been found, or the author of the nuisance, for the recovery of expenses
together with the costs of suit, which may be recovered in such actions.
(1983 Code, § 4-1-3)
§ 91.16 FAILURE TO ABATE NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, maintain or suffer or
permit any nuisance to be caused, created or maintained, any nuisances to exist
or to refuse to abate same.
(1983 Code, § 4-1-4) Penalty, see §
91.99 
MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 91.30 LOUDSPEAKERS OR SOUND TRUCKS.
   It shall be unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound
truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph, with loudspeaker or
sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and
raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle, unless the person in
charge of the vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from
the Chief of Police to operate any such vehicle so equipped.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-15) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.31 MUFFLERS, UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which shall
not at all times be equipped with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise;
and it shall be unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle to use a
cutout, bypass or similar muffler elimination appliance.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
LAWN CONDITIONS AND DISEASED TREES
§ 91.45 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may hereafter be referred to as the lawn
maintenance ordinance.
(Ord. 08-17, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 91.46 ENACTMENT.
   This subchapter shall be and hereby is enacted to implement a comprehensive
program of nuisance abatement with respect to certain property conditions in
order to protect the public health and welfare, property values, and quality of
life in the village. Therefore, this subchapter shall be and is hereby enacted
to read as follows.
(Ord. 08-17, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 91.47 WEEDS, BUSHES, GRASSES.
   (A)   Nuisance declared. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for
any person, firm, corporation or any owner, agent, occupant or person in
possession, charge or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, building or
other premises within the village or within its territorial jurisdiction to
permit the growth upon any premises within the village of any noxious weeds,
such as blue vervain, buckthorn, burdock, bull nettle, burdock, cockleburr,
common milk weed, curled dock, dodders, field bindweed, giant foxtail, hoary
cress, jimson weed, Johnson grass, lambsquarter, leafy spurge, marijuana or
wild hemp, multiflora rose, purple loosestrife, ragweed, ox-eye daisy, poison
ivy, thistle (bull, Canada, sowthistle or musk), quack grass, ragweed (giant or
common), Russian knapweed, rough pigweed, sweet clover, teasel, wild carrot,
wild lettuce, wild garlic, wild mustard or like weeds having similar
undesirable characteristics as determined by the Director of Public Works or
the Dean of the College of Agriculture of the University of Illinois at
Champaign-Urbana. It shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or
remain on property within the village.
   (B)   Height limitations. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for
any person, firm, corporation or any owner, agent, occupant or person in
possession, charge or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, building or
other premises within the village or within its territorial jurisdiction to
permit the growth upon any premises within the village of any weeds or grass or
plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, garden crops or other ornamental
plants, to grow to a height exceeding ten inches, or to permit any premises to
become overgrown with weeds and brush in such a manner as to become injurious
to the health of the community.
   (C)   Trimming bushes and shrubs. It is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance for any person, firm, corporation or any owner, agent, occupant or
person in possession, charge or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land,
building or other premises within the village or within its territorial
jurisdiction to permit the unchecked growth upon any premises within the
village of any bushes or shrubs without trimming the same in such a manner as
to prevent such bushes or shrubs from crossing property lines or obstructing
the sidewalk, parkway, street or highway. Moreover, it is hereby declared a
public nuisance to permit bushes and shrubs to become unsightly and unruly, as
the same shall be determined by the Village Director of Public Works or other
designated official.
   (D)   Owner/occupant responsibilities. Every owner or occupant of real
estate within the village shall cut the weeds and grass on his or her property
and on the abutting parkway at all such times as may be necessary so that such
weeds and grass shall not exceed a height of ten inches. Every owner or
occupant of real estate within the village shall trim the bushes and shrubs on
his or her property and on the abutting parkway at all such times as may be
necessary to prevent them from crossing property lines or obstructing the
sidewalk, parkway, street or highway or otherwise become unsightly and unruly,
as the same shall be determined by the Village Director of Public Works or
other designated official. If the owner neglects or refuses to cut such weeds
or grass so that the weeds or grass exceed the height requirements described in
this section, or fails to trim bushes and shrubs in accordance with the
provisions of this section, the village may cut the weeds or grass or trim the
bushes and shrubs or authorize some person to do the same on behalf of the
village.
   (E)   Notice to remediate and abate nuisance. It shall be the duty of the
Village Clerk or other designated official to cause notice to be served upon
the owner or occupant of any premises on which landscaping conditions are in
violation of the provisions of this section, and to demand the abatement of the
nuisance within ten days. The notice to remediate and abate nuisance may be
served either in person or by first class mail. It shall not be necessary in
any case to specify in what manner the nuisance shall be abated, though the
notice shall provide sufficient information for the recipient thereof to
understand the nature of the nuisance(s). The notice shall notify the owner
that he or she must abate the nuisance(s) within ten days and shall also
contain a copy of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7 and this section of the village code and
notify the owner that the village may correct the violation and place a lien on
the property for the cost thereof if the nuisance is not abated within ten
days.
   (F)   Abatement by village. If the person served with a notice to remediate
and abate nuisance under this section shall fail, refuse or neglect to abate
the nuisance within ten days, the Village Director of Public Works or other
designated official may proceed to abate the nuisance, keeping an account of
all related expenses. The expense shall be charged to and paid by the owner or
occupant.
   (G)   Charges for nuisance abatement a lien against property.
      (1)   If weeds, grass, bushes or shrubs are cut or trimmed by the village
or by someone directed to perform the same on behalf of the village, the
Village Clerk or other designated official or his or her designee shall send a
bill for the cost and expense thereof to the property owner, his or her agent
or legal representative or occupant in legal possession or control of the
premises. The bill shall include an administrative charge as determined by the
village. If the bill is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of the
bill, the Village Clerk or other designated official or his or her designee
shall cause a notice of lien of the cost and expense thereof incurred by the
village to be recorded in the following manner: the village or the person
performing the service by authority of the village, in its, his or her own
name, may file a notice of lien in the office of the DeKalb County Recorder of
Deeds. Notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth:
         (a)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
         (b)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the service; and
         (c)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
municipality or someone working on behalf of the municipality.
      (2)   The notice of lien shall be filed within 60 days after the cost and
expense is incurred. After recording, the notice of lien, together with copies
of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7 and this section of the village code shall be sent by
certified mail or hand delivered to the property owner, his or her agent or
legal representative or occupant in legal possession or control of the premises
and, if different, to the person who received the tax bill for the preceding
year.
      (3)   Upon payment of the cost and expense after the notice of lien has
been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
   (H)   Foreclosure of lien. Subsequent to the filing of the above-described
lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure of such
lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the premises
or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the nature of an intervening
petition or cross-complaint the village may proceed in its corporate name to
foreclose such lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this section
may be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be
applied to pay the monies owing the village.
   (I)   Penalty. In addition to a lien which may be filed by the village for
abating the nuisance described in this section, any person, firm, corporation,
business entity or the like which is found guilty of a violation of this
section shall be assessed a fine of not less than $150 or more than $750. Each
day a violation of this section continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 08-17, passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 12-07, passed 7-2-2012) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.48 TREES.
   (A)   Nuisance declared. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for
any person, firm, corporation or any owner, agent, occupant or person in
possession, charge or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, building or
other premises within the village or within its territorial jurisdiction to
permit the growth upon any premises within the village of any elm tree infected
with a fungus disease of elms caused by Ophiostorna ulmi, commonly known as
dutch elm disease, or any ash tree infected with Agrilus Planipennis Fairmaire,
commonly known as the emerald ash borer. It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any property in the village to keep or maintain any such infected tree or
deadwood on his or her property.
   (B)   Trimming or removal of trees. It is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance for any person, firm, corporation or any owner, agent, occupant or
person in possession, charge or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land,
building or other premises within the village or within its territorial
jurisdiction to permit the unchecked growth upon any premises within the
village of any trees without trimming the same in such a manner as to prevent
any part of such trees from crossing property lines or overhanging or
obstructing views along the sidewalk, parkway, street or highway, as the same
shall be determined by the Village Director of Public Works or other designated
official.
   (C)   Owner/occupant responsibilities. Every owner or occupant of real
estate within the village upon whose property there is located an elm tree
infected with dutch elm disease or an ash tree infected with the emerald ash
borer, shall remove the tree immediately upon discovering it or be notified of
it, by cutting the tree down. The tree so cut down, together with all of its
limbs, shall be cut into lengths not to exceed five feet and placed upon the
parkway to be removed by the village. Upon cutting the trees and placing them
upon the parkway, the owner of the property shall notify the Village Director
of Public Works or other designated official, in order that the same may be
removed by the village or its designee. Every owner or occupant of real estate
within the village shall trim or remove any and all trees and the limbs thereof
on his or her property and on the abutting parkway at all such times as may be
necessary to prevent the same from crossing property lines or overhanging or
obstructing views along the sidewalk, parkway, street or highway, as the same
shall be determined by the Village Director of Public Works or other designated
official.
   (D)   Notice to remediate and abate nuisance. It shall be the duty of the
Village Clerk, Director of Public Works or other designated official to cause
notice to be served upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which
landscaping conditions are in violation of the provisions of this section, and
to demand the abatement of the nuisance within 30 days. The notice to remediate
and abate nuisance may be served either in person or by registered mail. The
notice shall provide information regarding the existence of infected or
overgrown trees on the owner's property, and shall notify the owner that he or
she must abate the nuisance(s) within 30 days. The notice shall also contain a
copy of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12 and this section of the village code and notify the
owner that the village may remove or trim the tree(s) and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the removal if the nuisance is not abated within 30
days.
   (E)   Abatement by village. If the person served with a notice to remediate
and abate nuisance under this section shall fail, refuse or neglect to abate
the nuisance within 30 days, the Village Director of Public Works or other
designated official may proceed to abate the nuisance, keeping an account of
all related expenses. The expense shall be charged to and paid by the owner or
occupant.
   (F)   Charges for nuisance abatement a lien against property.
      (1)   If trees are cut, trimmed or removed by the village or by someone
directed to perform the same on behalf of the village, the Village Clerk or
other designated official or his or her designee shall send a bill for the cost
and expense thereof to the property owner, his or her agent or legal
representative or occupant in legal possession or control of the premises. The
bill shall include an administrative charge as determined by the village. If
said bill is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of said bill, the
Village Clerk or other designated official or his or her designee shall cause a
notice of lien of the cost and expense thereof incurred by the village to be
recorded in the following manner: the village or the person performing the
service by authority of the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a
notice of lien in the office of the DeKalb County Recorder of Deeds. The notice
of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth:
         (a)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
         (b)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the service; and
         (c)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
municipality or someone working on behalf of the municipality.
      (2)   The notice of lien shall be filed within 60 days after the cost and
expense is incurred. After recording, the notice of lien, together with copies
of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12 and this section of the village code shall be sent by
registered mail or hand delivered to the property owner, his or her agent or
legal representative or occupant in legal possession or control of the premises
and, if different, to the person who received the tax bill for the preceding
year.
      (3)   Upon payment of the cost and expense after the notice of lien has
been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
   (G)   Foreclosure of lien. Subsequent to the filing of the above-described
lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure of the
lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the premises
or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the nature of an intervening
petition or cross-complaint the village may proceed in its corporate name to
foreclose the lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this section
may be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be
applied to pay the monies owing the village.
(Ord. 08-17, passed 11-3-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.49 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval.
(Ord. 08-17, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   Unless otherwise indicated, any person violating any section or any
provision of §§
91.01,
91.02,
91.15 or
91.16 shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than 50 nor more than $750 for
each offense.
(1983 Code, § 4-1-7)
   (C)   (1)   Any person who shall fail to comply with the provisions of §
91.02(F) within five days after being notified to do so by the Superintendent
of Public Works of the village, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of §
91.02(F) and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50
nor exceeding $750 for each offense, and such person shall be deemed guilty of
a separate and distinct offense for each day during which the person violates,
refuses, fails or neglects to comply with the requirements of this section. Any
such fine not paid within the time permitted by law shall, upon proper
recording thereof, become a lien upon the premises.
      (2)   The person so failing to discontinue the nuisance set forth in §
91.02(G), shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750,
and each and every day the failure shall continue shall be considered and held
a separate offense.
(1983 Code, § 4-1-2)
   (D)   Any person found to have violated §
91.04 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this section.
   (E)   Any person convicted of a violation of §§
91.30 or
91.31 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-27)
(Ord. 88-2, passed - -; Ord. 04-21, passed 12-6-2004; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-
2012)
CHAPTER 92: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
Tree Planting and Maintenance
   
92.01   Purpose
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Permit required to plant or remove trees or other shrubs on public
property
   
92.04   Attaching notices to trees
   
92.05   Street tree species to be planted
   
92.06   Spacing
   
92.07   Distance from curb and sidewalk
   
92.08   Distance from street corners and fireplugs
   
92.09   Distance from other utilities
   
92.10   Public tree care
   
92.11   Planting trees or other shrubs on the public right-of-way
Cross-reference:
   Diseased trees, see §
91.48
TREE PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE
§ 92.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the village:
      (1)   To regulate and control the planting of trees in the village in
order to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions that may result in
injury to persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or property of the
village; and
      (2)   To promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the
village and to prevent damage to street, curb and sidewalk or other public
property.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Village Board that the provisions of these
sections shall apply to any public right-of-way or other premises owned or
controlled by the village.
(1983 Code, § 7-4-1) (Ord. 00-02, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 2017-12, passed 12-4-
2017)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the section, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, alleys or
ways within the village.
(1983 Code, § 7-4-2) (Ord. 00-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 92.03 PERMIT REQUIRED TO PLANT OR REMOVE TREES OR OTHER SHRUBS ON PUBLIC
PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in any public street
or parkway or other public place without first having secured a permit
therefor. All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the
direction and approval of the Superintendent of Public Works or his or her
representative, and such person shall take into consideration, where
practicable, the recommendations of the Kirkland Tree Commission.
   (B)   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Superintendent of
Public Works and shall be approved before issuance.
(1983 Code, § 7-4-3) (Ord. 00-02, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 2023-02, passed 4-24-
2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 ATTACHING NOTICES TO TREES.
   It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree
or shrub in any public place.
(1983 Code, § 7-4-4) (Ord. 00-02, passed 3-6-2000) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   (A)   No species other than those included in the Village of Kirkland
Recommended Tree List, attached as Appendix A, may be planted as street trees
or on any public property. Approval of planting of approved trees must be
provided in writing by the Superintendent of Public Works or his or her
representative, who shall take into consideration, where practicable, the
recommendations of the Kirkland Tree Commission.
   (B)   Exceptions to or changes to the Village of Kirkland Recommended Tree
List must be approved by the Village Board of Trustees, which may do so by
motion.
(1983 Code, § 7-4-5) (Ord. 00-02, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 2023-02, passed 4-24-
2023)
§ 92.06 SPACING.
   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
size classes listed in §
92.05. Except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape
architect, no trees may be planted closer together than the following:
   (A)   Small trees: 30 feet;
   (B)   Medium trees: 40 feet; and
   (C)   Large trees: 50 feet.
(1983 Code, § 7-4-6) (Ord. 00-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 92.07 DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.
   The distance trees may be planted from other curbs or curb lines and
sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in §
92.05. No trees may be planted closer to the curb than the following:
   (A)   Small trees: two feet.
   (B)   Medium trees: three feet.
   (C)   Large trees: four feet.
(1983 Code, § 7-4-7) (Ord. 00-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 92.08 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS.
   No trees shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured
from the point of the nearest intersection curbs or curb lines. No tree shall
be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug.
(1983 Code, § 7-4-8) (Ord. 00-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 92.09 DISTANCE FROM OTHER UTILITIES.
   No street trees other than those listed as small trees in §
92.05 may be planted under or within five lateral feet of any underground water
line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
(1983 Code, § 7-4-9) (Ord. 00-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 92.10 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   The village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenue lanes,
squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of public grounds. Where
practicable, the village will attempt to provide advanced notice to contiguous
property owners when tree care will be performed.
(1983 Code, § 7-4-10) (Ord. 00-02, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 2023-02, passed 4-24-
2023)
§ 92.11 PLANTING TREES OR OTHER SHRUBS ON THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in the public right-
of-way without a permit, as further described in §
92.03. Any person who plants a tree or shrub without a permit shall be
responsible for the village’s cost of maintenance and/or removal, including
without limitation any necessary or consequential property damage, in addition
to penalties for the violation.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall limit or restrict the village from
planting any tree or shrub on any public property or right-of-way.
(Ord. 2017-12, passed 12-4-2017; Ord. 2023-02, passed 4-24-2023)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Prohibited activities
   
93.02   Speed limits
   
93.03   Hours
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   The following actions or activities shall be prohibited at village parks and
other public property:
   (A)   No swimming;
   (B)   No unauthorized vehicle may park or be operated on the grass;
   (C)   No open fires may be started, except that charcoal grills may be used;
   (D)   No unauthorized all-terrain vehicles may be operated in a park or upon
other public property;
   (E)   No unauthorized snowmobiles may be operated in a park or upon other
public property; and
   (F)   No unauthorized boats or marine craft may be operated in a park or
upon other public property.
(1983 Code, § 7-5-1) (Ord. 00-09, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 08-18, passed 9-15-
2008)
§ 93.02 SPEED LIMITS.
   The speed limit for all vehicles within a park or upon other public property
shall be 15 miles per hour, except North Street.
(1983 Code, § 7-5-2) (Ord. 00-09, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 08-18, passed 9-15-
2008)
§ 93.03 HOURS.
   The hours for use as a park or other public property shall be from 6:00 a.m.
until 12:00 a.m. midnight.
(1983 Code, § 7-5-3) (Ord. 00-09, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 08-18, passed 9-15-
2008)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating §§
93.01 through
93.03 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(1983 Code, § 7-5-4) (Ord. 00-09, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 94: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
94.01   Declaration of policy
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Prohibited acts
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   In furthering the policy of the State of Illinois as expressed in its
Constitution and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare,
peace and health of all the inhabitants of the village may be ensured, it is
hereby declared the policy of the Village of Kirkland, Illinois, to assure
equal opportunity to all residents, regardless of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, HIV positive status or physical
disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful, standard living quarters.
   (B)   It is the policy of the village that no owner, lessee, sublessee,
assignee, managing agent or other person, firm or corporation having the right
to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation and/or
real property within the village, or any agent of these, shall refuse to sell,
rent, lease or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, HIV positive status
or disability of the person or persons; or discriminate against any person or
persons because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex,
creed, HIV positive status or disability in the conditions, terms, privileges
of the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodation and/or real property
or in the furnishing of facilities and/or services in connection therewith.
   (C)   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice within the community’s total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities.
(1983 Code, § 1-13-1) (Ord. 00-13, passed 9-5-2000)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS. Housing which is in
sound, clean and weather-tight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state and national codes.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, HIV positive status or disability of
the person.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person, institution or business entity of any
kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for the loans a
secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Includes any building, structure or portion thereof
which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or
any real estate so used, designed or intended for such use.
   OWNER. Any person or persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own
any beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable
title to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate
cooperative which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER.  Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/
or agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the Village of Kirkland,
Illinois.
(1983 Code, § 1-13-2) (Ord. 00-13, passed 9-5-2000)
§ 94.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sublessee,
real estate broker or salesperson, financial institution or employee of the
financial institution, advertiser or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to
discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, HIV positive status or
disability with regard to the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing
concerning any housing accommodation and/or real property.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial
institution dealing with housing or real property in the village:
      (1)   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the
price, terms, conditions or privileges of any kind relating to the sale,
rental, lease or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in the
village or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith;
      (2)   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated,
any notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any
form of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real
property, or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective
purchase, rental or lease of the real estate, which expresses directly or
indirectly any discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, HIV positive status or disability of any person;
      (3)   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing
loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for
the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance
of any housing accommodation and/or real property;
      (4)   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease of any
housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, HIV positive status or disability;
      (5)   To distribute or cause to be distributed written material or
statements designed to induce any owner or any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, HIV positive status or disability of persons in the neighborhood;
      (6)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or
the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/
or real property, for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale
or listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, HIV
positive status or disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of
property values in the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is
located;
      (7)   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or
otherwise deal with the owner’s housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed, HIV positive status or disability; or
      (8)   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability of the proposed buyer or
tenant.
(1983 Code, § 1-13-3) (Ord. 00-13, passed 9-5-2000) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,500. Each
day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. This section
shall in no way abrogate or impair the right of the Village of Kirkland,
Illinois, to specifically enforce, by any legal means, any of the provisions of
this chapter.
(1983 Code, § 1-13-4) (Ord. 00-13, passed 9-5-2000)
CHAPTER 95: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
False Alarms
   
95.01   False alarm calls; status
   
95.02   Charges for false alarms
FALSE ALARMS
§ 95.01 FALSE ALARM CALLS; STATUS.
   (A)   The Village of Kirkland is a non-home rule municipality organized and
operating under the authority of the Illinois Constitution and laws of the
State of Illinois.
   (B)   The village is granted the police power to regulate in favor of the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village.
   (C)   There are certain properties in the village, both residential and
commercial, which have installed alarm systems pursuant to all village
requirements.
   (D)   The village is required to dispatch its personnel to respond to calls
when one of these alarm systems is activated, and as a result the village
incurs certain costs in responding to the scene of the alarm.
   (E)   The Village Board has determined that when alarms are falsely
activated on numerous occasions, the owner or tenant of the property in
question should be charged or fined, which in part will pay the village’s
personnel costs.
(Ord. 04-14, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 95.02 CHARGES FOR FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   The owner or tenant of any property where village personnel are
dispatched to three or more false alarms within a calendar year shall be
charged or fined as follows:
      (1)   Third through sixth false alarm: as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code per false alarm; and
      (2)   Seven or more false alarms: as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code per false alarm.
   (B)   The above charges/penalties shall be paid to the village within 30
days from the date of invoice from the village.
   (C)   After the second false alarm, the Chief of Police, or his or her
designated agent, shall notify the alarm user in writing of each instance
wherein the village has recorded a chargeable false alarm which occurs within
the calendar year.
   (D)   Whenever a new alarm system is installed or a new resident or business
takes control of an existing alarm system the new resident or business shall be
given 45 days from the date of the installation or occupancy within which no
alarm from the premises shall be deemed to be a false alarm.
(Ord. 04-14, passed 7-6-2004)
CHAPTER 96: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
Section
   
96.01   Purpose
   
96.02   Creation
   
96.03   Administrative composition
   
96.04   Notice of violation
   
96.05   Service and notice of hearing
   
96.06   Administrative hearings
   
96.07   Final determination of liability
   
96.08   Judicial review
   
96.09   Enforcement of judgment
   
96.10   Schedule of fines/penalties
   
96.11   Failure to appear; notice
   
96.12   Impending suspension of driver’s license; notice
   
96.13   Immobilization/towing and impoundment of motor vehicles
   
96.14   Request for hearing in the case of towing and impoundment of motor
vehicles
   
96.15   Notice affixed to vehicle in cases of immobilization
   
96.16   Towing of immobilized vehicle
   
96.17   Postimpoundment notice
   
96.18   Hearing in case of vehicle immobilization
   
96.19   Fines and fees for immobilization
   
96.20   Towing services
   
96.21   Eviction, rights of occupants
   
96.22   Defenses to building code violations
   
96.23   Sanctions applicable to the building owner
   
96.24   Federal government contracts under the building code
§ 96.01 PURPOSE.
   The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide for fair and efficient
enforcement of village ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by
ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of such village
ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority
and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.02 CREATION.
   There is hereby established an administrative department of the municipal
government to be known as the Village of Kirkland Ordinance Enforcement
Department and to have the power to enforce compliance with all municipal
ordinances as from time to time authorized by the Village Council and any
offense under the Illinois Building Code, but not any offense under the
Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation
governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under
Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The establishment of the Village
Ordinance Enforcement Department does not preclude the Mayor and Village
Council from using any other method to enforce ordinances of the village.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.03 ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.
   The Village Ordinance Enforcement Department shall be composed of a hearing
officer, an ordinance enforcement administrator, system coordinator/computer
operator and such other personnel hereinafter appointed, with the power and
authority as hereinafter set forth. The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint
all hearing officers of this village with the advice and consent of the Village
Council. The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint all other persons to hold
the positions hereinafter set forth below, and such other personnel as needed.
Other than the hearing officer, one person may hold and fulfill the
requirements of one or more of the above stated positions, and compensation for
each of the hereinafter stated positions shall be as approved by the Mayor and
Village Council.
   (A)   Hearing officer.
      (1)   The hearing officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings
and shall have the following powers and duties:
         (a)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether
or not a code violation exists;
         (b)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the village code violation;
         (c)   Administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers;
         (d)   Preserve by tape recording the hearing and authenticate the
record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
         (e)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating
whether a village code violation exists; and
         (f)   Impose penalties, sanctions or such other relief consistent with
applicable village code provisions and assess costs upon finding a party liable
for the charged violation, except however, that in no event shall the hearing
officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration.
      (2)   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under
this chapter, the hearing officer shall have successfully completed a formal
training program which includes the following:
         (a)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
hearings over which the hearing officer shall preside;
         (b)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that he
or she will adjudicate;
         (c)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
         (d)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on
evidence and issuing final orders.
      (3)   A hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the State of Illinois for at least three years.
   (B)   Ordinance enforcement administrator. The ordinance enforcement
administrator is authorized and directed to:
      (1)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by
ordinance.
      (2)   Adopt, distribute, and process all notices as may be required under
this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this
chapter.
      (3)   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
final determination of liability.
      (4)   Certify copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation
adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the
final determination of any violation liability which was issued in accordance
with this chapter, the laws of the State of Illinois, including 625 ILCS 5/11-
208.3, as from time to time amended.
      (5)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter as hereinafter set forth, and those of state law.
      (6)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
      (7)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection
agencies and pursuit of all post judgment remedies available by current law.
   (C)   System coordinator/computer operator. The system coordinator/computer
operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer
programs for the administrative adjudication system of the Village Ordinance
Enforcement Department hereby created, on a day to day basis, including, but
not limited to:
      (1)   Input of violation notice information.
      (2)   Establishing court dates and notice dates.
      (3)   Record fine and penalty assessment and payments.
      (4)   Issue payment receipts.
      (5)   Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination
of liability; issue notice of immobilization; issue notice of impending
impoundment; issue notice of impending driver’s license suspension, as directed
by the ordinance enforcement administrator in accordance with the provisions
hereinafter set forth.
      (6)   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed,
if any, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.04 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   The system of administrative adjudication of any village ordinance violation
authorized to be adjudicated hereunder, shall be in accordance with the
following procedures:
   (A)   Violation notice of any ordinance violation including violations of
the village motor vehicles and traffic code other than any offense under the
Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation
governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under
Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (hereinafter the “village motor
vehicle code”), shall be issued by the persons authorized under this code and
shall contain information and shall be certified and constitute prima facie
evidence of the violation cited as hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   All full time, and part time officers, as well as other specifically
authorized individuals of any village department shall have the authority to
issue violation notices.
   (C)   Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who
detects an ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated under this chapter
or a violation of any section of any village ordinance, is authorized to issue
a notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter
set forth.
   (D)   The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the
following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the party violating the ordinance, if
known.
      (2)   The date, time, and place of the violation (date of issuance).
      (3)   The type and nature of the ordinance violated.
      (4)   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable).
      (5)   The penalty which may be assessed for failure to appear.
      (6)   The names and witnesses of the violation.
      (7)   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
      (8)   The docket number, date, and location of the adjudicating hearing
of ordinance violations, if applicable, other than violations of the village
motor vehicle code, the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held, and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
   (E)   The date of the hearing shall not be less than 30 nor more than 60
days after the violation is reported.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.05 SERVICE AND NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing
such notice.
      (1)   In the case of violation of the village motor vehicle code, service
shall be made by:
         (a)   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an
unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, un-stickered vehicle, or vehicle
violating any compliance regulation;
         (b)   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator, or lessee
of the vehicle, if present; or mailing the notice by first class mail to the
person responsible for the ordinance violation, along with a summons commanding
the individual to appear at the hearing.
      (2)   In the case of violation of the building code, service shall be
made by:
         (a)   First class mail on the owner of the structure, along with a
summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing;
         (b)   If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained
or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the
owner by posting or nailing a copy of the notice on the front door of the
structure where the violation is found, not less than 20 days before the
hearing is scheduled.
      (3)   In the case of any ordinance violation other than a violation of
the village motor vehicle code or building code, service shall be made by
mailing the notice by first class mail to the person responsible for the
ordinance violation, along with a summons commanding the individual to appear
at the hearing.
   (B)   The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be
verified by the person issuing said notice by:
      (1)   Signing his or her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
      (2)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the ordinance enforcement administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his or her control.
   (C)   The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained
by the ordinance enforcement administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary
course of business.
   (D)   Any violation notice issued, signed, and served in accordance
herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be
prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.06 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.
   (A)   An administrative hearing shall be granted for the following:
      (1)   To adjudicate any alleged ordinance violation on its merits.
      (2)   To contest the validity of a notice of impending immobilization or
impending impoundment, or the validity of a notice of impending driver’s
license suspension. The hearing shall be granted to the registered owner or
operator of the “cited vehicle”, pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 or the lessee
of the “cited vehicle”, 625 ILCS 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference,
and at the date, time and place as is set forth by the ordinance enforcement
administrator and served upon the registered owner, operator, or lessee for
hearings contesting the validity of notices of impending immobilization or
impending impoundment or driver’s license suspension.
   (B)   No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer at the
hearing except where absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the
individual. Lack of preparation does not constitute cause for a continuance. No
continuance may be granted for more than 25 days.
   (C)   All administrative hearings shall be recorded and shall culminate in a
determination of liability or non-liability, made by the hearing officer, who
shall consider facts and/or testimony without the application of the formal or
technical rules of evidence. Evidence including hearsay, may be admitted only
if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the
conduct of their affairs.
   (D)   The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess
fines and penalties in accordance with §§
10.99,
32.48,
32.49,
Chapter 74 Schedules I,
II,
III and
IV,
75.05,
95.02,
150.06 and
Chapter 10, Appendix A of the village’s code. Persons appearing to contest the
alleged violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at their own
expense. The burden of proof shall be on the alleged offender to refute the
prima facie case set forth in the verified notice of violation.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.07 FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   A final determination of liability shall occur following the failure
to pay the fine or penalty after the hearing officer’s determination of
liability and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any administrative
review procedures hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   Where a person fails to appear at the administrative hearing to
contest the alleged violation on the date and at the time and place specified
in a prior served or mailed notice pursuant to §
96.11 of this chapter, the hearing officer’s determination of liability shall
become final either upon a denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination or upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition
without a filing having been made.
   (C)   A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent following
the conclusion of an administrative hearing within five days after the final
determination of liability is made, as is hereinafter set forth, and shall
contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings:
      (1)   The hearing officer’s findings of fact.
      (2)   A decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the
findings of fact.
      (3)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt
due and owing the village.
      (4)   A statement of any sanction ordered or costs imposed which costs
are debts due and owing the village.
      (5)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and
owing the village within the time specified may result in proceeding with
collection procedures.
      (6)   A warning that the person’s driver’s license may be suspended for
failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more vehicular standing or parking
violations under state law, incorporated herein by reference.
      (7)   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within
the village may be immobilized and impounded for failure to pay fines or
penalties for ten or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations.
      (8)   Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or
ordinance.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.08 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any final decision by a hearing officer that a code violation does or does
not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.09 ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the village and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a
code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of
the county for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision,
and order.
   (C)   In any case in which a hearing officer finds that an individual has
failed to comply with a judgment ordering an individual to correct a code
violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a code
violation, any expenses incurred by a municipality to enforce the judgment
including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to
property demolition or foreclosure after they are fixed by the hearing officer,
shall be a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in accordance
with applicable law.
   (D)   A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or
both, of the individual in the amount of any debt due and owing the
municipality under this chapter. The lien may be recorded and enforced in the
same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction. No lien may be enforced under this chapter until it has been
recorded in the manner provided by Article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure
or by the Uniform Commercial Code.
   (E)   A hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and
set a new hearing date upon a petition filed within 21 days after the issuance
of the order of default if the hearing officer determines that the petitioner’s
failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time if the
petitioner establishes that the village did not provide proper service of
process.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.10 SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES.
   (A)   Fines and penalties shall be imposed in accordance with this code, or
where no fine or penalty is expressed in this code, the hearing officer may
impose a fine or penalty according to his or her judgment. However, in no case
may the fines imposed by the hearing officer exceed $750 per violation per day,
or a maximum of $2,500 for all building code violations.
   (B)   Any person who pleads guilty or liable or is found guilty or liable,
in addition to a fine shall be responsible to pay the costs of adjudication of
$50. If a fine is imposed for a continuing violation for each day constitutes a
separate offense, the costs of adjudication shall also be assessed for each day
of the continuing offense.
   (C)   In addition to or in lieu of a fine and costs, the hearing officer may
also require a person who pleads guilty or is found guilty or liable for an
offense to perform community service of not more than 250 hours per offense.
   (D)   In addition to or in lieu of a fine or costs, the hearing officer may
also require a person who pleads guilty or who is found guilty or liable to
attend and successfully complete a drug and/or alcohol related education
program. Such drug and/or alcohol education program may be administered through
the Department of Alcohol and Substance Abuse, DeKalb County, a social services
provider or any other program which is approved by the hearing officer in
advance of an offender attending such alcohol and/or drug education sessions.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 12-13, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 96.11 FAILURE TO APPEAR; NOTICE.
   (A)   Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation of a
village ordinance, other than a village motor vehicle code violation, to appear
at the time and date designated for a hearing, or, in the case of a violation
of the village motor vehicle code, the registered owner, operator, or lessee of
the cited vehicle to pay the fine in full as stated on said notice, the
ordinance enforcement administrator shall send or cause to be sent notices by
first class mail, postage prepaid to the person who received the notice of an
ordinance violation; or, in the case of the violation of the village motor
vehicle code, the registered owner or operator of the cited vehicle at the
address as is recorded with the Secretary of State, and shall be sent to the
lessee of the cited vehicle at the address last known to the lessor of the
cited vehicle at the time of the lease. Service of notices sent in accordance
herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   (B)   The notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the following
sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
      (1)   Upon the failure of the person receiving notice of an ordinance
violation or, in the case of a notice of a violation of the village motor
vehicle code, the registered owner, operator, or lessee of the cited vehicle to
pay the fine in full as stated on said notice, a notice shall be sent, as above
set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
         (a)   Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice.
         (b)   Particular ordinance violated.
         (c)   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable).
         (d)   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
         (e)   A section entitled “notice of hearing” which shall clearly set
forth that the person receiving a notice of ordinance violation, in the case of
a violation of the village motor vehicles and traffic code, title 6 of this
code, or the registered owner, operator, or lessee may appear at an
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the
date and at the time and place as specified in the notice of hearing.
         (f)   1.   Date, time, and place of the administrative hearing at
which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
            2.   Statement that failure to either pay the fine and any
applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the
date and at the time and place specified will result in a final determination
of liability for the “cited” violation in the amount of the fine and penalty
indicated.
         (g)   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or
penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the village.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.12 IMPENDING SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE; NOTICE.
   A notice of impending suspension of a person’s driver’s license shall be
sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine or
penalty that remains due and owing on ten or more vehicular standing or parking
regulation violations:
   (A)   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty
owing within 45 days of the date of the notice will result in the village
notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of
suspension proceedings under state law, incorporated herein by reference.
   (B)   The notice of impending driver’s license suspension shall be sent by
first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary
of State.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.13 IMMOBILIZATION/TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be
liable for ten or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s),
for which the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized,
booted, or towed and impounded if:
      (1)   The ordinance enforcement administrator has determined that a
person has been determined to be liable for ten or more ordinance violations,
for which the fines or penalties remain unpaid.
      (2)   The person determined to be liable for ten or more violations is
the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the village’s
geographical boundaries.
      (3)   A seizure notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor
vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the village which
contains, but shall not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   That a final determination has been made on ten or more
ordinance violations, for which the fines and penalties remain unpaid.
         (b)   A listing of the violations for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
            1.   The ordinance violation notice number;
            2.   Date of issuance; and
            3.   Total amount of fines and penalties assessed.
         (c)   That the motor vehicle owned by the person and located within
the village is subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the
fines and penalties are not paid within 15 days of the date of the notice.
         (d)   Date of immobilization.
         (e)   Date of impending towing and impoundment.
         (f)   That the registered owner may contest the validity of the notice
by appearing in person before the ordinance administrator within fifteen (30)
days of the date of the notice and submitting evidence which would conclusively
disprove liability, such as the following:
            1.   That the registered owner was not the owner or lessee of the
vehicle on the date or dates the notices of violation were issued; or
            2.   That the fines or penalties for the violations cited in the
notice were paid in full; or
            3.   That the registered owner has not accumulated ten or more
ordinance violation notices which are unpaid, not adjudicated or for which no
appearance was made.
      (4)   The motor vehicle of the registered owner to whom notice is sent
has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice
and has failed to appear with evidence to conclusively disprove liability
before the ordinance enforcement administrator to contest the validity of the
notice.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.14 REQUEST FOR HEARING IN THE CASE OF TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR
VEHICLES.
   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment, the ordinance enforcement
administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next scheduled hearing
date or if sooner scheduled by the ordinance enforcement administrator for good
cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than 45 days
after the request for hearing is filed and shall serve notice of the hearing
date upon the registered owner by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address as is set forth on the request for hearing. Service of the notice shall
be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.15 NOTICE AFFIXED TO VEHICLE IN CASES OF IMMOBILIZATION.
   Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the
vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle is
immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage.
The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the
immobilizing restraint is a violation of Sections 16-1 (the Theft statute) and
21-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code (the Criminal Damage to Property statute),
720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. The notice also shall provide the following information
specifying that a release of the immobilizing restraint may be had by:
   (A)   Paying all the fines and penalties, if any, on the outstanding
complaints for which notice has been sent prior to the date of the
immobilization; or
   (B)   Completing appearance forms on all outstanding parking violation
complaints for which notice had been sent prior to the date of the
immobilization and depositing collateral in the amount of 50% of the total
fines for these outstanding parking violation complaints, or $500, whichever is
less.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.16 TOWING OF IMMOBILIZED VEHICLE.
   Except where the vehicle is otherwise subject to towing, if the immobilizing
restraint has not been released as hereinabove provided, within 72 hours of its
placement, the vehicle shall be towed and impounded.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.17 POSTIMPOUNDMENT NOTICE.
   Within ten days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered
owner of the vehicle. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to a
post immobilization and post towing hearing as provided in §
96.18 of this chapter and that if the vehicle is not claimed within 30 days
from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of
in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.18 HEARING IN CASE OF VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION.
   (A)   The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other interested person shall
have the right to a hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any
subsequent towing was erroneous or whether the vehicle was properly included on
an immobilization list, if the owner files a written demand for a hearing
before the ordinance enforcement administrator within 30 days after issuance of
the notice specified in §
96.17 of this chapter or within 30 days of immobilization, whichever is later.
   (B)   A hearing shall be conducted on any business day within 30 days of
receipt of a written demand for hearing, unless otherwise mutually agreed by
the parties. Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a
waiver of the right to a hearing. In the event of such failure, any amount
deposited pursuant to §
96.15 of this chapter shall be forfeited. A hearing provided by this section
shall not determine the validity of or otherwise adjudicate any citation or
notice of ordinance violation issued relative to the immobilized vehicle, but
shall only relate to whether the vehicle was properly immobilized or towed by
determining whether the owner previously submitted evidence required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.19 FINES AND FEES FOR IMMOBILIZATION.
   The fine for immobilization shall be $60 and the fine for impoundment and
towing shall be an amount not to exceed $500. The owner of the vehicle shall
also be charged reasonable storage and towing fees should the vehicle be
removed to a private storage facility, provided that no fees shall be assessed
for any immobilization or tow which has been determined to be erroneous.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.20 TOWING SERVICES.
   The ordinance enforcement administrator shall appoint or retain the services
of an individual, agency, or company to tow and impound vehicles in accordance
herewith, provided that that individual, agency, or company is fully insured
and licensed according to local or state law and has available a secured
impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the
purpose of this section a “secured area” shall mean an area bounded by a fence,
chain link or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to
minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.21 EVICTION, RIGHTS OF OCCUPANTS.
   In the case of a building code violation, no action for eviction, abatement
of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding shall be
threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such
occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation hearing.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.22 DEFENSES TO BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a defense to a building code violation if the owner, his or her
attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the hearing officer’s
satisfaction that:
   (A)   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at
the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed;
   (B)   The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants
and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling
free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations;
   (C)   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or his or her agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of
correcting the code violation.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.23 SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO THE BUILDING OWNER.
   The order to correct a building code violation and the sanctions imposed by
a municipality as the result of a finding of a code violation shall attach to
the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a
code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring
the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property
takes subject to the findings, decision, and order of a hearing officer.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 96.24 FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS UNDER THE BUILDING CODE.
   A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its agencies,
including, without limitation, the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible for maintaining
the property to prevent and correct municipal health and safety code
violations. A person who intentionally violates this section is guilty of a
business offense and shall be fined not less than $501 and not more than
$1,000.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 11-21-2011)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES
         
111.   AMUSEMENTS
         
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
         
113.   MOBILE HOME PARKS; LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
         
114.   VIDEO GAMING
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
Solicitors and Peddlers
   
110.01   Policy
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Permit requirement
   
110.04   Permit application
   
110.05   Standards for permit issuance
   
110.06   Denial of permit
   
110.07   Revocation of permit
   
110.08   Appeal of permit denial or revocation
   
110.09   Exemptions
   
110.10   Individual privacy
   
110.11   Other regulations and standards of conduct
   
110.12   Solicitation restrictions on highways
   
110.13   Effective date
Junk Yards and Dealers
   
110.25   Definitions
   
110.26   License requirements
   
110.27   License fees; term
   
110.28   Inspection of premises
   
110.29   Junk yard requirements
   
110.30   Disqualification for license
   
110.31   Purchase from minors restricted
   
110.32   Revocation of license
Soft Drink Dealers
   
110.45   Definition
   
110.46   License required; fees
   
110.47   Qualification of licensee
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Municipal occupation taxes, see
Chapter 33 of this code of ordinances
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
§ 110.01 POLICY.
   It shall be the policy of the village that no person shall be entitled to
solicit within the village for any reason except in compliance with this
subchapter.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR. Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of
registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is in the
possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
   RESIDENCE. Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by
one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
   SOLICITING. The word SOLICITING shall mean and include any one or more of
the following activities:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders, including distribution of commercial
pamphlets, for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services,
of any kind, character or description whatsoever, for any kind of consideration
whatsoever;
      (2)   Seeking to sell goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of
any kind, character or description whatsoever, for any kind of consideration
whatsoever, that the seller carries with him as he or she goes from house to
house or place to place or along or on the streets of the village;
      (3)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind or character;
      (4)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publications; or
      (5)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization or corporation.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.03 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except those expressly exempted
in this subchapter, to engage in the business or activity of solicitation in
the village without having first applied for, obtained, and maintained a valid
solicitor's permit as hereinafter provided. A permit shall not be issued to any
person under 16 years of age.
   (B)   Each person issued a permit shall prominently display the solicitation
permit issued hereunder on his or her person while so soliciting within the
village.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.04 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have general authority to establish
procedures, forms, and reasonable requirements for solicitor permit
applications and shall be authorized to adapt the application forms and
requirements, as may be required from time to time, due to changes in law and/
or background screening capabilities, so long as the permit requirements remain
objective and uniformly applied to applicants.
   (B)   Application for a solicitor's permit shall be made in writing,
notarized, on a form provided by and filed with the village police department,
to include the following information:
      (1)   An attached printout indicating satisfactory completion of the
Illinois State Police fingerprint background check process;
      (2)   The applicant's full name, all addresses of applicant's residence
during the past two years, the length of time of the applicant's residence at
each address, and the applicant's business address if other than their current
residence address;
      (3)   The applicant's place and date of birth, social security number,
driver's license number and state of issuance or current state or federal
identification card and physical description;
      (4)   The name and address of the business or other person or entity by
whom the applicant is employed or whom the applicant represents, and the
initial date of such employment or representation;
      (5)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting which the applicant will engage in;
      (6)   The dates for which the applicant seeks a solicitor's permit;
      (7)   Information, including the date(s), regarding any prior application
or use of a solicitor's permit by the applicant in the village, and any
revocation of a previously issued solicitor's permit by the village;
      (8)   Information regarding any conviction of any felony or misdemeanor
involving dishonesty, theft, fraud, false statements, a threat to public
safety, or a crime involving sex offenses or offenses involving bodily harm
against persons under the laws of this state or any other state or federal law
of the United States within five years of the date of the permit application;
and
      (9)   Information as to whether a solicitation permit has been previously
issued to the applicant by any other jurisdiction, and if so, whether the
permit was ever revoked.
   (C)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $50
for the investigation and administration of the provisions of this subchapter
and the payment of the amount required to complete fingerprinting through the
state police or other entity. If the applicant has previously been cited for
soliciting without a permit in the village, this non-refundable application fee
is $100.
   (D)   The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in his or her offices an
accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all
other information and data pertaining thereto, and copies of all solicitation
permits issued under the provisions of this subchapter. Applications for
permits shall be numbered in consecutive order, as filed, and every permit
issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified with the duplicate number of
the application upon which it was issued.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008; Ord. 2021-10, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 110.05 STANDARDS FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a solicitor's permit, the
Chief of Police, or an authorized agent, shall cause an investigation to be
made as to the applicant's criminal record, if any, and compliance with all
applicable laws and ordinances of the state and the village. Applicants shall
cooperate with such investigation and furnish such additional information as
may be reasonably requested by the Chief of Police or an authorized agent in
furtherance of the investigation.
   (B)   Within five business days of receiving an application, or within the
extended time period as may be necessary to receive the results of a
fingerprint check, the Chief of Police, or an authorized agent, shall issue a
solicitor's permit if a determination is made that:
      (1)   The material statements made in the application are true;
      (2)   The applicant has not been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor
involving dishonesty, theft, fraud, false statements, a threat to public
safety, or a crime involving sex offenses or offenses involving bodily harm
against persons under the laws of this state or any other state or federal law
of the United States, within five years of the date of the permit application;
      (3)   The applicant has not had a previously issued solicitor's permit
revoked by the Village or by any other municipality within five years of the
date of the application; and
      (4)   The applicant has not been convicted of violating any provisions of
this subchapter within five years of the date of application.
   (C)   All permits issued hereunder shall indicate the date or dates on which
such permit shall be valid, and the hours when solicitation within the village
is permitted in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. An expired
permit may be renewed under the same terms and conditions as the original
application and will be subject to the same fees.
   (D)   The cost of the permit shall be $50, or $100 if the recipient has
previously been cited for soliciting without a permit in the village. A permit
shall only be valid for one year from the date of issuance. lf, during the one-
year period that the permit is valid, the permit holder loses, destroys or
otherwise renders the permit holder's identification undeterminable, the permit
must be replaced at a cost of 50% of the cost of the original permit.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.06 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   If the Chief of Police, or an authorized agent, determines and finds that
the applicant has not met one or more of the above conditions, the Chief of
Police, or any authorized agents, shall deny issuance of the solicitor's permit
and shall give written notification of such denial to the applicant. Such
notice shall be delivered in person or by U.S. mail addressed to the residence
address set forth in the permit application, stating the action taken and the
reasons supporting the action.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.07 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Any solicitor's permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the Chief of
Police, or an authorized agent, if the holder of the solicitor's permit:
      (1)   Violates any of the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Has made a false statement or misrepresentation in the permit
application;
      (3)   Perpetrates a fraud or misrepresentation in the course of
conducting solicitation activities;
      (4)   Transfers any solicitor's permit to a person other than the person
for whom the permit was issued;
      (5)   Uses or allows the use of a solicitor's permit by any person other
than the person to whom the permit was issued;
      (6)   Conducts solicitation activities in an unlawful manner or in a
manner as to create a public nuisance or in such a way as to constitute a
danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public; or
      (7)   Is convicted of any felony subsequent to the issuance of a
solicitor's permit.
   (B)   Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be
given by the Chief of Police, or an authorized agent, to the permit holder, in
person or by U.S. mail addressed to the residence address set forth in the
permit application, stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such
action. Immediately upon the delivery or mailing of such notice, the
solicitor's permit shall become null and void.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.08 APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any person denied a solicitor's permit or whose solicitor's permit has
been revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Village
President.
   (B)   Appeals must be taken in writing and must be filed with the Chief of
Police within ten business days after revocation or denial of the permit and
shall contain a statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The
appealing party shall submit whatever documentation they desire to have the
Village President consider with the written appeal.
   (C)   The written decision of the Village President shall be made available
to the appealing party not later than ten business days after the Village
President receives the written appeal.
   (D)   The decision of the Village President is final. No new application for
a permit will be considered for six months after denial or revocation, unless
said denial or revocation is without prejudice or is conditional and the
conditions have been satisfied as determined by the Village President.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the terms and conditions of this subchapter
namely:
   (A)   Persons engaged in the sales or deliveries of goods, wares,
foodstuffs, merchandise or services on regularly established routes or sales or
deliveries by other persons having an established list of customers to whom
they make periodic deliveries;
   (B)   Persons seeking the signature of a village resident for a zoning or
election petition;
   (C)   Persons engaged in solicitation at the invitation or request of the
person contacted;
   (D)   Solicitation related to children's activities, including but not
limited to, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts and Youth Softball/Baseball or other School
activities within the School District;
   (E)   Charitable or nonprofit organizations and their representatives
distributing handbills or pamphlets only for the purpose of communicating
issues of general interest to the public;
   (F)   Religious, political or other nonprofit organizations; and
   (G)   Political candidates.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.10 INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village that the
occupants of any residence located within the village shall make the
determination of whether any solicitor shall be, or shall not be, invited to
their respective residences.
   (B)   Any person conducting solicitations who is not, pursuant to the
provisions contained herein, invited onto the premises of any resident or who
has obtained entrance to such premises and does not immediately and peacefully
leave the same upon being so requested by the occupant of the premises, shall
be deemed a trespasser.
   (C)   No person, whether registered or not under this subchapter, shall
solicit within the village on any premises if the same are posted against
solicitation by means of a notice, prominently displayed, bearing the words “No
Solicitors”, “No Trespassing” or any other similar notice indicating in any
manner that the occupants of such premises desire not to have their right of
privacy disturbed, unless such occupant has specifically requested such
solicitation.
   (D)   Any premises shall be deemed io be posted against solicitation if
there is exhibited on or near the main entrance to the property, or on or near
the main doors, a sign measuring at least three inches by four inches bearing
the applicable words with letters at least one-third inch in height.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of each solicitor upon going onto any premises in
the village upon which a residence is located to first examine the premises for
the notice provided for in this subchapter. If a notice is posted, then the
solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peaceably depart.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.11 OTHER REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   It is hereby declared unlawful and shall constitute an offense for any
solicitor, whether registered under this subchapter or not, to go in or upon
any premises within the village for the purpose of soliciting at any time
before 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. or on any Sunday or state or national
holiday.
   (B)   Each solicitor registered hereunder shall at all times while
soliciting wear the permit on the outer clothing, in such a way that the permit
may be easily seen and read while in the course of solicitation activities.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct solicitation on any
public property, way or place in a manner that completely or substantially
impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in, on or around such
public property, way or place.
   (D)   Solicitors shall conduct themselves at all times in an orderly and
lawful manner and shall not make, or cause to be made, any loud or obnoxious
noise of such volume sufficient to disturb the peace of the residents of the
village.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to cheat, deceive, or
misrepresent any product, service, or organization, whether individually or
through an agent or employee, while acting as a solicitor, or to sell or barter
any goods, merchandise or wares other than those specified in their permit
application.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.12 SOLICITATION RESTRICTIONS ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle, except upon each of the
following conditions:
      (1)   The soliciting agency is registered with the attorney general as a
charitable organization as provided by Illinois law and said soliciting agency
must be engaged in a statewide fundraising activity;
      (2)   The soliciting agency maintains liability for any injuries to any
person or property during the solicitation which is causally related to an act
of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent;
      (3)   Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of
age or more and shall be wearing a high-visibility vest;
      (4)   Prior to the issuance of a permit, the soliciting agency shall
provide the village with a certificate of liability insurance naming the
village as an additional party insured;
      (5)   The solicitation shall be permitted only on a highway at
intersection where all traffic is required to come to a full stop unless
otherwise permitted by approval of the Village Board; and
      (6)   In no instance shall the solicitation interfere with the operation
of official traffic control devices.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 110.13 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective from and after its passage and approval.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008)
JUNK YARDS AND DEALERS
§ 110.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. Scrap and old iron, steel, chain, brass, copper, magnesium, aluminum,
tin, lead or other base metals, scrap lumber, old rope, old bags, rags,
wastepaper, scraps of woolens, clips, bagging, plastic, rubber and glass,
bottles, any wrecked or dilapidated motor vehicle, engine or machinery and all
articles and things discarded or no longer used as a manufactured article
composed of or consisting of any one or more of the materials or articles
herein mentioned.
   JUNK DEALER. Every person, firm, partnership or corporation that shall
engage in the business of buying, selling, bartering, exchanging or collecting,
receiving, storing or holding in possession for sale, barter or exchange, any
of the things in and by this section defined as junk.
(1983 Code, § 3-5-1)
§ 110.26 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any and all licenses issued hereunder shall state that the license is
issued in the name of the junk dealer solely for the purpose of keeping,
maintaining, conducting and operating a junk yard, the expiration date thereof,
the legal description of the premises where the junk yard is to be located,
that the license shall be used and the privilege thereof exercised only at the
described premises, and that the license is nonassignable and nontransferable.
   (B)   The license shall further provide that it is issued subject to all the
provisions of this subchapter; that upon the first conviction of a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter, in addition to the fine, the junk
yard shall remain closed for a period of 30 days; that upon the second
conviction for a violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter, the
license shall become null and void, and the licensee shall forfeit all sums
paid for the license, and that the licensee, by the acceptance of the license,
expressly agrees to all the terms and conditions thereof and to the terms and
provisions of this subchapter, and all amendments thereof.
(1983 Code, § 3-5-2)
§ 110.27 LICENSE FEES; TERM.
   The annual license fee for each junk yard shall be $100 payable in advance
with the filing of the application for license, and shall not be subject to pro
rata reduction for a portion of the year, either because of the application for
or because of revocation of a license; provided, however, that only one annual
license fee shall be payable for licenses which may be issued whenever the
applicant desires to keep, maintain, conduct or operate junk yards on lots,
blocks, tracts or parcels of land which are situated on directly opposite sides
of and abut upon each side of a public street or alley. All licenses shall
expire on April 30 of each year.
(1983 Code, § 3-5-3)
§ 110.28 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   Any licensee hereunder shall at all reasonable times allow any police
officer or patrol officer of the village and the public health authorities free
access to any portions of the junk yard for the purpose of inspection.
(1983 Code, § 3-5-4)
§ 110.29 JUNK YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The minimum physical requirements at all times and location of each junk
yard shall be as follows:
   (A)   The premises where the junk yard is located shall not have more than
two entrances thereto and two exits therefrom, each of which shall not exceed
15 feet in width at the perimeter of the premises.
   (B)   The premises where the junk yard is located shall be enclosed on its
perimeter with a solid, nontransparent, vertical wall or fence of a minimum
height of seven feet, measured from ground level, excepting from the entrances
and exits permitted by division (A) hereof.
   (C)   The aforesaid solid, nontransparent wall or fence, and the gates or
doors, at the aforesaid entrances and exits, shall not contain any sign, poster
or advertising matter of any kind whatsoever, excepting one sign of the
licensee thereon not exceeding 20 square feet in size.
   (D)   The public streets and alleys adjacent to the junk yard shall not have
junk thereon.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, establish, conduct or
maintain any junk yard in any block in which two-thirds of the buildings on
both sides of the street are used exclusively for residential purposes or which
are within 100 feet of any such street or any block without the written consent
of a majority of the property owners according to frontage on both sides of the
street; provided, that in determining which of the buildings are used
exclusively for residential property, any building fronting upon another street
and located upon a corner lot shall not be considered; and provided, further,
that the word “block” as used in this section shall not be held to mean a
square, but shall be held to include any portion of the street in question
which lies between the two nearest intersecting streets, one on either side of
the lot on which the junk yard is located, established, conducted or
maintained.
   (F)   The written consent as required in division (E) hereof needs not be
resubmitted upon renewal of license for junk yard at any one location if there
are no changes in the ownership, location, size, physical requirements or the
method of operation.
(1983 Code, § 3-5-5) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.30 DISQUALIFICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any applicant for a license to keep, maintain, conduct or operate a junk
yard shall be disqualified for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Not a person of good character;
   (B)   Falsification of an application for a license hereunder;
   (C)   License for a junk yard theretofore issued to the applicant has been
revoked during the preceding 24 months; or
   (D)   Failure to meet any one of the minimum physical requirements and
location of a junk yard as specified in §
110.29 hereof.
(1983 Code, § 3-5-6)
§ 110.31 PURCHASE FROM MINORS RESTRICTED.
   No licensee hereunder shall purchase or receive any article whatsoever from
any minors without the written consent of their parents or guardians.
(1983 Code, § 3-5-7)
§ 110.32 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Village President may revoke the license of any licensee hereunder for
violating, failing or refusing to comply with any provisions of this
subchapter.
(1983 Code, § 3-5-8) (Ord. 517, passed 4-5-1971)
SOFT DRINK DEALERS
§ 110.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SOFT DRINKS. Shall include any and all carbonated beverages containing less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume.
(1983 Code, § 3-6-1)
§ 110.46 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.
   No person shall sell or keep for sale or offer to the general public any
soft drinks without first having obtained license therefor as is herein
provided. Every person selling, keeping for sale or offering to the general
public any soft drink shall pay a license fee of $5 per year.
(1983 Code, § 3-6-2)
§ 110.47 QUALIFICATION OF LICENSEE.
   No such license shall be issued to any person who is not a person of good
character nor unless the place of sale is maintained in a good, clean, orderly
condition.
(1983 Code, § 3-6-3)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who is found guilty of violating any provision of §§
110.01 through
110.13, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 and may be ordered
to stop soliciting unless in receipt of a solicitor's permit as required by the
village code.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
110.25 through
110.32 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each and every
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1983 Code, § 3-5-9)
   (D)   Any person violating any provision of §§
110.45 through
110.47 shall be fined not less than $50 and not more than $750 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1983 Code, § 3-6-4)
((Ord. 517, passed 4-5-1971; Ord. 08-20, passed 10-20-2008; Ord. 12-03, passed
3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Generally
   
111.01   License required; prohibitions
   
111.02   Application for license
   
111.03   License fee
   
111.04   Immoral amusements; prohibited acts, conditions
Billiard, Pool Halls and Video Game Rooms
   
111.15   License required; applications
   
111.16   License issuance; conditions
   
111.17   License fee
   
111.18   Operation of billiard or pool halls or video game rooms
   
111.19   Revocation of license
   
111.20   Offenses
   
111.21   Enforcement
Public Dances
   
111.30   Definitions
   
111.31   Licenses required; application
   
111.32   License issuance; conditions
   
111.33   License fee
   
111.34   Revocation of license
   
111.35   Exemptions to provisions
   
111.36   Investigation and enforcement
Raffles
   
111.50   Adoption and separability of provisions
   
111.51   License required
   
111.52   License procedures
   
111.53   Raffle chances
   
111.54   Conduct of raffles
   
111.55   Records
   
111.56   Appeal
   
111.57   Violation
 
   
111.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Video gaming, see
Chapter 114
GENERALLY
§ 111.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to hold, conduct, give, exhibit or perform or to suffer
or permit to be held, conducted, given, exhibited or performed any public
theatrical or other exhibition, show or amusement or to conduct or permit to be
conducted any skating rink in the village, unless a license therefor shall be
first obtained as herein provided and then only upon complying with all the
terms and conditions of this chapter. In all cases, the owner of any premises
within the village who permits or suffers to be held, conducted, given,
exhibited or performed any public theatrical or other exhibition, show, or who
permits any skating rink to be conducted upon his or her property in the
village, unless a license therefor shall first be obtained, shall be guilty as
a principal for the violation of this chapter.
(1983 Code, § 3-3-1) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring any license under the provisions of this chapter shall
make application in writing to the village for the license, which application
shall state the name or names of the party or parties desiring the license, the
period of time and the purpose for which it is desired and the particular place
for which it is desired to produce, conduct or offer the amusement,
entertainment, exhibition or performance. Upon approval of a majority of the
Board of Trustees and upon the payment by the applicant of the license fee
hereinafter specified, the Village Clerk shall issue a license in accordance
with the principle of the application, which license shall state the purpose
for which it is issued, the particular person or persons to whom issued and the
particular place or buildings for which the same is issued and the amount of
the license fee paid thereunder. Every license issued hereunder shall contain a
statement that it is accepted subject to the terms and conditions of the
ordinances of the village in force or which may at any time become in force
during the term of the license relating to the same or the subject matter
thereof, and that it is issued subject to revocation by the Village President.
(1983 Code, § 3-3-2)
§ 111.03 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The license fee for each day that an amusement is open to the public
shall be $25.
   (B)   For all musical parties, concerts or exhibitions given by the citizens
of the village not engaged in or carrying on the giving of such entertainments
as a business, no license shall be required hereunder.
(1983 Code, § 3-3-3)
§ 111.04 IMMORAL AMUSEMENTS; PROHIBITED ACTS, CONDITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to hold, conduct, give, exhibit or perform any
immoral, immodest or indecent theatrical or other exhibition, show or amusement
under any license issued under the terms of this subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the person licensed hereunder to keep and
preserve or cause to be kept and preserved good order and conduct in and about
the place for which the license is granted and shall keep, at his or her own
expense, a sufficient number of special police officers to be selected and
appointed by the Village President to act as such.
(1983 Code, § 3-3-4) Penalty, see §
111.99
BILLIARD, POOL HALLS AND VIDEO GAME ROOMS
§ 111.15 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   No owner or owners shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard or
pool table or video game open to the public unless he or she is licensed as
herein provided.
   (B)   Written application for the license shall be filed with the Village
Clerk who will schedule a hearing on the application for the next meeting of
the Board of Trustees. The written application for a billiard or pool hall or
video game room license shall state, and the applicant shall state, under oath:
      (1)   The names, addresses and ages of all owners, managers and employees
and length of time they have lived at that address;
      (2)   The place and date of birth of all owners and managers;
      (3)   That the owners, managers or employees have never been convicted of
a felony or of a misdemeanor which is punishable by a prison term of six months
or longer, or concerns offenses concerning persons under the age of 21 years;
      (4)   That the owners, managers and applicants agree to keep the regular
billiard or pool hall building or video game room, and those places or
buildings not actually part of the regular billiard or pool hall or video game
room, but frequented by patrons while in attendance at the billiard or pool
hall or video game room, open to inspection by the officials hereinafter
designated to enforce this subchapter; and
      (5)   The location of the billiard or pool hall or video game room.
(1983 Code, § 3-3A-1)
§ 111.16 LICENSE ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Village President and the Board of Trustees shall issue a license
to any person:
      (1)   Who files an application as herein provided;
      (2)   Who establishes that he or she is a person of good moral character;
      (3)   Who confirms that the place or building where the billiard or pool
hall or video game room is to be operated or maintained reasonably conforms to
all laws and health and fire regulations applicable thereto; and
      (4)   Pays the license fee as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The license issued by the Village President and Board of Trustees
shall expire on the next succeeding April 30 following the date of issuance.
   (C)   The form of the license issued herein shall be designated and printed
by the Village Clerk.
   (D)   The license issued shall be prominently displayed near the main
entrance of the billiard or pool hall or video game room.
   (E)   If the situs or management of the billiard or pool hall or video game
room changes, reapplication for a corrected license shall be made as herein
provided, except that no fee need be paid.
(1983 Code, § 3-3A-2)
§ 111.17 LICENSE FEE.
   The yearly fee for a billiard or pool hall or video game room license shall
be $10 per premises.
(1983 Code, § 3-3A-3)
§ 111.18 OPERATION OF BILLIARD OR POOL HALLS OR VIDEO GAME ROOMS.
   (A)   All billiard tables, pool tables and video games regulated by this
subchapter shall remain closed to public use during the hours of 12:00 a.m.
midnight to 7:00 a.m. and shall remain closed on Sunday until 1:00 p.m., except
those located on premises which hold a liquor license, which may be used during
other hours the premises are properly open to the public under the liquor
license.
   (B)   No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, dispensed or allowed on the
premises of the billiard or pool hall or video game room unless the premises
are licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages, and then only in
compliance with that license and the laws of the United States, this state, the
county and the village.
   (C)   The interior of the billiard or pool hall or video game room shall be
continuously lighted in such manner as to allow patrons or occupants a clearly
visible view of all entrances, exits and doorways.
   (D)   No screens, blinds, curtains or partitions shall be permitted on or
near windows or doorways of the billiard or pool hall or video game room so as
to prevent a clear view of the interior from the entrances, exits or doors.
(1983 Code, § 3-3A-4)
§ 111.19 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Village President and Board of Trustees may revoke the license of
any licensee who:
      (1)   Violates the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   When the pool or billiard hall or video game room, as intended,
reasonably and needlessly disturbs the peace of the neighborhood;
      (3)   When the immoral or disorderly practices are permitted on the
premises; and
      (4)   When any owner or manager, while in the course of his or her
employment concerning the billiard or pool hall or video game room, violates
any laws or ordinances of the United States, this state, the county or the
village.
   (B)   When any license is rejected by the President and the Board of
Trustees, it shall not issue a license to operate a billiard or pool hall or
video game room on the premises until after a period of three months has
elapsed and thereafter only when the reason for the revocation has been
corrected or if it is established that the reason will not reoccur.
(1983 Code, § 3-3A-5)
§ 111.20 OFFENSES.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter, or who makes
a false statement concerning a material fact in his or her application for a
license, or renewal or corrected licensing or in any hearing concerning the
revocation thereof, shall be subject to the provisions of §
111.99.
   (B)   All fees, fines and forfeitures collected under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deposited to the General Fund account of the village.
(1983 Code, § 3-3A-6) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.21 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Village President, any members of the Board of Trustees and any village
police officer shall be empowered to investigate and enforce this subchapter.
(1983 Code, § 3-3A-7) (Ord. 509, passed 3-3-1968)
PUBLIC DANCES
§ 111.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANCE HALL. A place, building or site where dancing is performed after
payment of a fee or  any other consideration which is beneficial to the dance
hall owner.
   DANCE HALL EMPLOYEES.  Any person who attends to or services the patrons of
the dance hall.
   DANCE HALL OWNERS. Any person or persons who participate in the management
or shares in the profits or losses of the business.
(1983 Code, § 3-3B-1)
§ 111.31 LICENSES REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No owner of a dance hall shall operate the dance hall unless he or she
is licensed as herein provided.
   (B)   Written application for the license shall be filed with the Village
Clerk who will schedule a hearing on the application for the next meeting of
the Board of Trustees. The written application for a dance hall license shall
state, and the applicant shall state under oath:
      (1)   The names, addresses and ages of all owners, managers and employees
and length of time they have lived at that address;
      (2)   The place and date of birth of all owners and managers;
      (3)   That the owners, managers or employees have never been convicted of
a felony or of a misdemeanor which is punishable by a minimum prison term of
six months or longer or concerns offenses relating to persons under the age of
21 years;
      (4)   That the owners, managers and applicants agree to keep the regular
dance hall building and such places or buildings not actually a part of the
regular dance hall, but frequented by patrons while in attendance at the
regular dance hall, open to inspection by the officials hereinafter designated
to enforce this subchapter;
      (5)   Whether the application is for an occasional dance hall license or
regular dance hall license; and
      (6)   The location of the dance hall.
(1983 Code, § 3-3B-2)
§ 111.32 LICENSE ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Village President and the Board of Trustees shall issue a license
to any person:
      (1)   Who files an application as herein provided;
      (2)   Who establishes that he or she is a person of good moral character;
      (3)   Who confirms that the place or building where the dance hall is to
be operated or maintained reasonably conforms to all laws and health and fire
regulations applicable thereto, and is properly ventilated and supplied with
separate and sufficient toilet facilities for both sexes and is a safe and
proper place of building for a dance hall; and
      (4)   Pays a license fee as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The license issued by the Village President and Board of Trustees
shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
   (C)   The form of the license issued herein shall be designed and printed by
the Village Clerk.
   (D)   The license issued shall be prominently displayed near the main
entrance of the dance hall.
   (E)   If the situs or management of the dance hall changes, reapplication
for a corrected license shall be made as herein provided, except that no fee
need be paid.
(1983 Code, § 3-3B-3)
§ 111.33 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   No person shall be employed in any capacity in a dance hall if he or
she has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor which is punishable by a
minimum prison term of six months or longer or concerns offenses relating to
persons under the age of 21 years.
   (B)   All dance halls shall be closed to the public during the hours of 12:
00 a.m. midnight and 6:00 a.m. and shall remain closed on Sunday after the hour
of 2:00 a.m., except those located on premises which hold a liquor license
which may be open during other hours the premises are properly open to the
public under the liquor license.
   (C)   No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, dispensed or allowed on the
premises of the dance hall unless it is licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic
beverages and then only in compliance with the license and the laws of the
United States, this state, the county and the village.
   (D)   No dance hall shall operate unless the chaperons, both male and female
and 21 years or older, shall be in attendance at all times and the chaperons,
while acting as such, shall not be allowed to do other work on the premises
while the dance hall is open to the public.
   (E)   No dance hall shall be operated in such manner as to disturb the peace
of persons in and around the neighborhood of the dance hall.
   (F)   The interior of the dance hall shall be continuously lighted in such
manner as to allow patrons or occupants of the dance hall a clearly visible
view of entrances, exits and doorways.
   (G)   No screens, blinds, curtains or partitions shall be permitted on or
near windows or doorways of the dance hall so as to prevent a clear view of the
interior from the window or entrance and exit doors.
(1983 Code, § 3-3B-4) (Ord. 504, passed 2-6-1967)
§ 111.34 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The President and the Board of Trustees may revoke the license of any
licensee:
      (1)   Who violates any provision of this subchapter;
      (2)   When the dance hall, as maintained, unreasonably and needlessly,
disturbs the peace of the neighborhood;
      (3)   When disorderly or immoral practices are permitted on the premises;
or
      (4)   When any owner or manager or chaperon, while in the course of his
or her employment concerning the dance hall, violates any law or ordinance of
the United States, this state, the county or the village.
   (B)   When any license is revoked by the President and the Board of
Trustees, it shall not issue a license to operate a dance hall on the premises
until after a period of three months has elapsed and thereafter only when the
reason for the revocation has been corrected or it is established that the
reason will not reoccur.
(1983 Code, § 3-3B-6)
§ 111.35 EXEMPTIONS TO PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to dances held, operated
or sponsored by other municipal corporations within the village.
(1983 Code, § 3-3B-7)
§ 111.36 INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The President, any member of the Board of Trustees and any village
police officer shall be empowered to investigate and enforce this subchapter.
   (B)   No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any person, empowered
to investigate or enforce this subchapter, in the performance of any duty as
such.
(1983 Code, § 3-3B-8) (Ord. 504, passed 2-6-1967)
RAFFLES
§ 111.50 ADOPTION AND SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   230 ILCS 15 is hereby adopted and made a part hereof by this reference. Any
section, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision of this subchapter which is
held to be in conflict with any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or
provision of 230 ILCS 15 shall be considered null and void. Each section,
paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this subchapter is separable, and
if any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the
decision shall not affect the remainder of this subchapter nor any part hereof.
(1983 Code, § 3-3C-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 230 ILCS 15
§ 111.51 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct raffles or chances without having first obtained a
license therefor pursuant to this subchapter.
(1983 Code, § 3-3C-2) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.52 LICENSE PROCEDURES.
   Individual raffles may be licensed upon proper application to the Village
Clerk’s office by the use of application forms available at the office.
   (A)   Application. All applications shall be presented not less than seven
days prior to the issuance or sale of raffle chances and the application shall
be acted upon within 30 days from the date of application.
   (B)   Conditions.  The issuance of a license under this subchapter shall be
conditioned upon the applicant designating a single raffle manager who shall
supervise the conduct of the raffle. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in
an amount not less than a sum equal to the aggregate retail value of all prizes
or merchandise awarded by licensee in a single raffle, and further conditioned
upon his or her honesty in the performance of his or her duties. Terms of the
bond shall provide that notice be given in writing to the licensing authority
not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation. Any waiver of this bond
requirement must be clearly indicated on the face of the license; however, no
such waiver shall be granted unless the issuer of the license is provided with
satisfactory evidence that the waiver is approved by the unanimous vote of the
members of the licensed organization.
   (C)   Fee. A fee of $1 shall be assessed for each application processed
under this subchapter.
(1983 Code, § 3-3C-3)
§ 111.53 RAFFLE CHANCES.
   Raffle chances (tickets) shall bear a number; the name of the organization
sponsoring the raffle; the time and location at which the winning chances
(tickets) will be determined; the price of each chance (ticket), which is not
to exceed $1; whether it is necessary to be present to win; the aggregate
retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by the licensee in a single
raffle, which shall not exceed $15,000; and the maximum retail value of each
prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle, should there be more than one
prize.
(1983 Code, § 3-3C-4)
§ 111.54 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   Raffle chances (tickets) may be issued or sold for a period not to
exceed 180 days.
   (B)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be devoted to the lawful
purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   (C)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   No person may receive any remuneration of profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   (E)   A licensee may rent premises on which to determine the winning chance
or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under
this subchapter.
   (F)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
   (G)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting
of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the
area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by a
parent or guardian.
(1983 Code, § 3-3C-5)
§ 111.55 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deduction
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization pursuant to license
heretofore issued by the Department of Revenue of the State, and placed in a
separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles.
The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the
operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership, and to the licensing local unit of government, its gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net
proceeds itemized as required in this section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three years,
and organizations shall make available their records relating to the operation
of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(1983 Code, § 3-3C-6)
§ 111.56 APPEAL.
   Any organization aggrieved by the denial of a license may appeal to the
Village Board by filing a letter of appeal with the Village Clerk within ten
days of denial by the issuing authority, and the appeal will be heard at the
next regular meeting or special meeting of the Village Board, as the case may
be.
(1983 Code, § 3-3C-7)
§ 111.57 VIOLATION.
   Any violation of the provisions of this subchapter shall result in the
revocation of any license issued pursuant to this subchapter in addition to any
other penalties provided by law.
(1983 Code, § 3-3C-8) (Ord. 570, passed 1-5-1981)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
111.15 through
111.21, as set forth in §
111.20, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be
fined in the amount not less than $50 nor exceeding $750 for each violation.
Each day that the violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1983 Code, § 3-3A-6)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
111.30 through
111.36, or who makes a false statement concerning a material fact in his or her
application for a license, or renewal or corrected license or in any hearing
concerning the revocation thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on
conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not less than $50 nor
exceeding $750 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1983 Code, § 3-3B-9) (Ord. 504, passed 2-6-1967; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Licenses
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License required
   
112.03   Applications required; contents
   
112.04   Persons not to be licensed
   
112.05   License issuance; number, fees, term
   
112.06   Temporary liquor license
   
112.07   Transfer business; license
   
112.08   Hours of sale
   
112.09   Location and premises restrictions
   
112.10   Sanitary requirements
   
112.11   Restrictions as to minors, other persons
   
112.12   Conditions of licenses
   
112.13   Record of licenses kept; notice of new license
   
112.14   Revocation or suspension
   
112.15   Special event beer garden licenses
   
112.16   Termination by dormancy
   
112.17   Reduction in number of licenses
   
112.18   BASSET Training required
Sunday Sales
   
112.30   License
   
112.31   Applications required; contents
   
112.32   Issuance, renewal of license; number of licenses
   
112.33   License fees; disposition on approval or disapproval
   
112.34   Hours sales are permitted
   
112.35   Effect of provisions
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL LICENSES
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
   BARTENDER.  Any person who dispenses, sells or serves alcoholic liquor to
the general public.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
   LIQUOR STORE. A retail establishment which sells alcohol, alcoholic liquor,
spirits, beer or wine as one of its principal purposes of business.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 21 years.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place, kept, used, maintained, advertised and where
meals are actually and regularly served in accordance with a general menu,
without sleeping accommodations, the space being provided with an adequate and
sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and having employed therein a
sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable
food for its patrons.
   SELL or SALE AT RETAIL.  Sales for use or consumption and not for resale in
any form.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors, and those liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as herein defined.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-1) (Ord. 99-8, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 99-17, passed 10-4-
1999; Ord. 05-04, passed 4-4-2005)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation
of the retail sale of alcoholic liquor without first having obtained a license
therefor, in accordance with the terms and provisions of this subchapter. No
person shall be deemed fully licensed until a license has been actually issued
and delivered to the applicant therefor and no person or association conducting
business in the village to whom or to which a license provided for herein has
not been issued shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be consumed, any
alcoholic liquor on the premises where the business is conducted. A separate
license shall be required for each location, place or premises where the
business or occupation is proposed to be carried on, whether or not under the
same roof or at the same street address.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-2) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATIONS REQUIRED; CONTENTS.
   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Village President in
writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized
agent thereof if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and
shall further contain the following information and statements:
   (A)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit, or a club,
the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the name and
addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority in interest of the
stock of the corporation is owned by one person or his or her nominees, the
name and address of the person;
   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth and, if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization;
   (C)   The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed;
   (D)   The length of time that the applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued;
   (E)   The location and description of the premises or place of business,
together with all entrances thereto, which is to be operated under the license;
   (F)   A statement whether the applicant has made similar application for a
similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and
the disposition of the application;
   (G)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this subchapter, laws of this state or the ordinances of this
village;
   (H)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by
the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor; and
   (I)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Illinois or of the United States, or any ordinance of the village in
the conduct of his or her place of business.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-3)
   (J)   A non-refundable application fee of $150 shall be tendered to the
village upon a submission of a liquor license application. In addition, the
applicant shall pay all other fees for background checks and the like at the
time of application. The application fee shall be in the form of a certified
check or money order only.
(Ord. 08-04, passed 4-7-2008)
§ 112.04 PERSONS NOT TO BE LICENSED.
   No such license shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (B)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
state, or of any other state or of the United States;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (F)   A person whose license issued under this subchapter has been revoked
for cause;
   (G)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for the license upon first application;
   (H)   A copartnership, unless all of the members of the copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license;
   (I)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of the corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the village;
   (J)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee;
   (K)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this subchapter, or shall have forfeited his or
her bond to appear in court to answer the charges for any such violation;
   (L)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued;
   (M)   Any law enforcing public official, any president or trustee; and no
such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in
the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor; or
   (N)   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer’s license.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-4)
§ 112.05 LICENSE ISSUANCE; NUMBER, FEES, TERM.
   (A)   Issuance. Licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor hereunder
shall be issued by the Village President, and he or she may renew the license
of all present licensees at the expiration of their license period; provided
the license has not lapsed, been revoked or canceled; and provided, further,
that each applicant for a license or for the renewal thereof and the premises
where the business is to be carried on comply fully with all the conditions and
provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Limit. The Village President shall not issue more than three bar
licenses hereunder. The Village President is authorized to issue no more than
three licenses for the retail package sale of beer and wine only for off-
premises consumption. Effective April 5, 2016, the Village President is
authorized to issue not more than two licenses authorizing the sale of beer and
wine only at restaurants for on-premises consumption; provided that for each
license that is not issued on April 30, 2016, the maximum number of licenses in
this classification shall be automatically and immediately reduced by one. The
Village President is authorized to issue not more than one license authorizing
the sale of alcoholic liquor for retail sale but only for consumption off the
premises where sold. The Village President is authorized to issue not more than
one license permitting the sale of alcoholic liquor at restaurants for on-
premises consumption.
   (C)   Fees. 
      (1)   Applicants for a bar, liquor store, package liquor or restaurant
license hereunder shall, at the time application for the license is made, pay
to the Village Clerk the annual fee as follows:
         (a)   For a bar license or for a restaurant which sells alcoholic
liquor, the total sum of $900 or the sum of $450 with a written promise to pay
the additional sum of $450 six months thereafter;
         (b)   For a package liquor and restaurant license, the total sum of
$500; and
         (c)   For a liquor store license, the total sum of $700.
      (2)   The application fee shall be turned over to the Village Treasurer
and shall be deposited by him or her in the General Corporate Fund or in any
other fund as the Board of Trustees may designate. In the event the applicant
for a bar license elects to pay the annual fee by means of the $450 with a
written promise to pay the additional sum of $450 six months thereafter, and
the applicant for a bar license is granted a license, the additional sum shall
become immediately due and payable if the license holder sells, transfers or
assigns the business or any interest therein or ceases to do business for a
period of six months.
   (D)   Term of license. All licenses provided for by this subchapter shall
terminate and expire on April 30 next after the issuance thereof.
   (E)   Prorate fees.  In the event that any person shall make application for
a license after the first day of any month, the applicant is entitled to
receive a license for the number of months intervening between the date of his
or her application and April 30, providing the applicant shall pay the prorated
fee covering the intervening period, but fractions of a month shall be counted
as a whole month, all licenses to be dated and payable from the first of the
month.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-5) (Ord. 05-04, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 09-12, passed 10-5-
2009; Ord. 16-05, passed 4-4-2016; Ord. 16-08, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 112.06 TEMPORARY LIQUOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Temporary liquor license authorized. The Local Liquor Commissioner is
authorized to issue a temporary liquor license to any nonprofit religious,
charitable, fraternal, educational or veterans’ organization operating within
the village, hereinafter termed for purposes of this subchapter, “nonprofit
organization.”
   (B)   Application. Any nonprofit organization desiring a temporary license
shall make application therefor in writing to the Liquor Commissioner through
the Village Clerk and accompany their application with the required license
fee. The application shall be verified and be upon a form prepared by the
Village Clerk and shall contain that information as far as is applicable as is
required by ordinance for liquor licenses. All applications for temporary
liquor licenses shall be made ten days prior to the date of the event. The
application, in addition to the above required information, shall indicate the
nonprofit organization which is applying for the license.
   (C)   Conditions and terms.
      (1)   All such temporary licenses shall be valid for a period of up to a
maximum of 38 hours per year for a single event as specified in the license and
at the place specified in the application. Temporary licenses authorizing a
second event shall be valid for a period of up to a maximum of 11 hours per
year for the additional event. It shall be unlawful for any nonprofit
organization to sell the liquor beverages at any time other than up to the
maximum hour period authorized or at a place other than as specified in the
license application approved by the Liquor Commissioner.
      (2)   Applicants shall provide evidence of proper dramshop insurance
issued by a company with a B+ rating or better, in a class of seven or better.
The insurance policy shall be nonassessable and include the following minimum
limits of coverage: bodily injury per person, $100,000; bodily injury per
occurrence, $300,000; injury to means of support, $100,000; and property
damage, $100,000.
      (3)   The fee for each temporary liquor license shall be $200; it may be
waived by the Board.
      (4)   No more than two temporary liquor licenses shall be issued to any
nonprofit organization during any calendar year.
      (5)   All provisions of the ordinances relating to dealers in alcoholic
liquor not inconsistent with the stated terms of this section shall apply to
temporary liquor licenses. No license shall be issued unless all of the
criteria for a license established by this section have been met. In addition
thereto, no temporary license shall be issued unless adequate trash receptacles
are provided and sanitation provisions are made. The applicant is responsible
for control of litter and other material during and after the event and in
addition, the applicant is responsible for demonstrating that adequate parking
is available.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-5.5) (Ord. 88-6, passed - -; Ord. 06-05, passed 5-15-2005)
Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.07 TRANSFER BUSINESS; LICENSE.
   (A)   Forfeit of license fee. In the event that any person to whom a license
has been issued by the village authorizing the retail sale of alcoholic liquor,
sells the retail liquor establishment prior to the termination and expiration
date of the license, the license fee shall be forfeited to the village. In the
event that 51% or more of the capital stock of any corporation to which a
license has been issued by the village authorizing the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor, is sold or transferred prior to the termination and expiration date of
the liquor license, the fee paid in advance for the license by the corporation
shall be forfeited to the village. The president of the corporation to which a
license has been issued by the village authorizing the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor shall notify the President of the village of the sale or transfer of 51%
or more of the capital stock of the corporate licensee, the notification to be
given to the President within three days of the sale or transfer of the capital
stock.
   (B)   Transferability; renewal.
      (1)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege good for a period
not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this
subchapter provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject
to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. The license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution, but shall cease upon the death of the licensee; provided, that
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, which estate consists in part of
the alcoholic liquor, under order of the appropriate court, may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of
the decedent or the insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of the
license, but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of the licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the
license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from
operating under the license in accordance with the provisions of this division.
Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof, provided
he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which the
renewal is sought is suitable for the purpose; and provided, further, that the
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right,
which shall in any case prevent the President from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within his or her jurisdiction.
      (2)   On the sale of any business licensed under this subchapter, the
President may, upon surrender of the original license, issue a new license to
the vendee thereof for the unexpired period of the original license; provided,
however, that the vendee shall first comply with all the laws of this state and
the ordinances of the village relating to the retail sale of alcoholic liquor.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-6)
§ 112.08 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold or offered for sale on or in any
premises licensed under this subchapter between the hours as designated below:
 
Sunday                   See §
                         112.34
11:00 p.m. Monday and    6:00 a.m. Tuesday.
11:00 p.m. Tuesday and   6:00 a.m. Wednesday.
11:00 p.m. Wednesday and 6:00 a.m. Thursday.
11:00 p.m. Thursday and  6:00 a.m. Friday.
1:00 a.m. Saturday and   6:00 a.m. Saturday.
 
   (B)   No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed and no individuals, other than
the licensee and the licensee’s employees working their assigned shift, shall
be present on the licensee’s premises during the following hours:
 
Sunday                   See §
                         112.34
11:30 p.m. Monday and    6:00 a.m. Tuesday.
11:30 p.m. Tuesday and   6:00 a.m. Wednesday.
11:30 p.m. Wednesday and 6:00 a.m. Thursday.
11:30 p.m. Thursday and  6:00 a.m. Friday.
1:30 a.m. Saturday and   6:00 a.m. Saturday.
 
   (C)   It shall be lawful for alcoholic liquor to be sold or offered for sale
on or in premises licensed under this subchapter on the day of any national,
state, county or municipal election, including primary elections during the
hours the polls are open within the political area in which the election is
being held.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-7) (Ord. 86-6, passed - -; Ord. 99-3, passed 3-1-1999)
Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.09 LOCATION AND PREMISES RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Proximity of churches, schools, hospitals.  No license shall be issued
for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church or
church properties, school or school properties. In computing the distance set
out in this section, measurements shall be from the respective nearest property
lines.
   (B)   Floor where liquor is dispensed. No license for the sale of
intoxicating liquor where the intoxicating liquor is to be consumed upon the
premises shall be granted, unless the place of sale be upon the ground floor of
the building.
   (C)   Visibility of interior of premises. In premises upon which the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises is licensed, no screen,
blind, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon
the doors of the licensed premises nor inside the premises, which shall prevent
a clear view into the interior of the licensed premises from the street, road
or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction
nor an arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the
interior of the premises which shall prevent a full view of the entire interior
of the premises from the street, road or sidewalk, and the premises must be so
located that there shall be a full view of the entire interior of the premises
from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold for
consumption on the premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours
by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of
the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into the licensed
premises by the foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee
or by him or her wilfully suffered to be obscured or in any way or manner
obstructed, then the license shall be subject to revocation in the manner
herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this division, the
President shall have the right to require the filing with him or her of plans,
drawings and photographs showing the clearance of the view as herein required.
   (D)   Change of location. A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the
sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and
license. The location may be changed only upon the written permit to make the
change issued by the President. No change of location shall be permitted unless
the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor under the laws of this state and the ordinances of the village.
   (E)   Entrance changes require approval.  No change shall be made of any
premises licensed hereunder with reference to entrances after a license has
been granted without the written approval and consent of the President.
   (F)   Restaurant restrictions. Restaurants that are licensed to only serve
beer and wine in their premises shall only do so to customers who are seated
and who have purchased a meal. Restaurants that are licensed to serve beer and
wine may only have a service bar in their premises and no patrons may be seated
at the bar. Restaurants with a license to sell alcoholic liquor may have a bar
on the premises but the service at the bar shall be secondary to the service of
meals at tables.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-8) (Ord. 99-18, passed 10-4-1999; Ord. 03-06, passed 4-21-
2003; Ord. 16-08, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 112.10 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of every licensee hereunder to keep the premises where
the business is carried on clean and in proper sanitary condition. All persons
employed or working in the premises shall be clean and cleanly clothed. All
utensils, appliances, vessels, receptacles, refrigerators and any other places
or things whatsoever which are used for the purpose of storing must be at all
times kept in a clean, wholesome and sanitary condition.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-9)
§ 112.11 RESTRICTIONS AS TO MINORS, OTHER PERSONS.
   (A)   Sales to minors, habitual drunkards and mentally deficient.
      (1)   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of the license shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor,
beer or wine to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated
person or to any person known by him or her to be an habitual drunkard,
spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental
treatment. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor,
shall sell, give or deliver the alcoholic liquor, beer or wine to another
person under the age of 21 years except in the performance of a religious
ceremony or service.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section shall, in addition to other penalties
provided for in this subchapter, be subject to the provisions of §
112.99.
   (B)   Purchase by minors.
      (1)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of the
alcoholic liquor or have the alcoholic liquor in his or her possession.
      (2)   If a licensee or his or her agents or employees believes or has
reason to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of nonage of the prospective recipient, he or she shall, before making
the sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive
identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the
performance of his or her official duties.
      (3)   No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification
card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. No person shall purchase, accept, deliver or have possession of
alcoholic liquor, beer or wine in violation of this section. The consumption of
alcoholic liquor, beer or wine by any person under 21 years of age is
forbidden. Whoever violates any provisions of this division (B)(3) shall be
subject to the provisions of §
112.99.
      (4)   Any person under the age of 21 years who, for the purpose of
buying, accepting or receiving alcoholic liquor, beer or wine from a licensee,
represents that he or she is 21 years of age or over shall be subject to the
provisions of §
112.99.
      (5)   The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a minor of
alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the
consumption by a minor under the direct supervision and approval of the parents
or parent of the minor in the privacy of a home is not prohibited by this
subchapter.
   (C)   Certain persons forbidden from employment. It shall be unlawful
knowingly to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor, any person in any capacity whatsoever, who has been convicted of a
felony or any of the following misdemeanors or offenses:
      (1)   Carrying or possession of a pistol or other dangerous weapon;
      (2)   Making or possessing burglar instruments;
      (3)   Buying or receiving stolen property;
      (4)   Unlawful entry of a building;
      (5)   Aiding escape from prison; or
      (6)   Unlawfully possessing or distributing habit-forming narcotic drugs.
   (D)   Employing minors. Persons employed by an establishment who are at
least 18 but less than 21 years of age or older shall be permitted to sell,
serve, and dispense alcoholic liquors as long as a person employed by the
establishment who is 21 years of age or older is on premises to supervise the
person, in any establishment licensed hereunder for the sale of alcoholic
liquors.
   (E)   Minors prohibited on premises. It shall be unlawful for any minor
unaccompanied by his or her parent or guardian to enter upon or to attempt to
enter upon any premises licensed hereunder, except restaurants and beer and
wine package liquor only establishments licensed hereunder and further, except
in the exercise of the legitimate business or trade of the minor. If any minor
shall enter upon any premises in violation of this division, and there remain
for 30 minutes or longer, the person licensed shall be subject to a penalty as
provided herein.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-10) (Ord. 99-9, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 99-21, passed 11-1-
1999; Ord. 2022-04, passed 5-2-2022) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.12 CONDITIONS OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Outdoor sales and curb services sales.  
      (1)   No outdoor sale of alcoholic liquor shall be carried on in
connection with premises for which a license has been granted for the sale of
alcoholic liquor.
      (2)   No curb service sale of alcoholic liquor may be carried on in
connection with premises on which a license has been granted for the sale of
alcoholic liquor unless:
         (a)   The premises has a window or other opening out of which or
through which the sales of alcoholic liquor may be made;
         (b)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption on the premises
for which a license has been granted for the sale of alcoholic liquor, for
consumption on adjacent premises, or for consumption on any public areas,
including but not limited to the street;
         (c)   Curb service sales shall cease at least one hour prior to the
normal closing time of the premises for which a license has been granted for
the sale of alcoholic liquor; and
         (d)   A sign of sufficient size to be easily readable shall be posted
at the window or other opening which shall notify the public of the early
cessation of curb service sales.
   (B)   Orderliness required. Every licensee hereunder shall at all times keep
a good and orderly house and it shall be unlawful for any such licensee to keep
a noisy, disorderly and ill-governed house in any place where the licensee is
doing business under the license.
   (C)   Peddling prohibited. It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor
in the village.
   (D)   Permitting gambling on premises where sold; license subject to
revocation.
      (1)   Whoever being licensed hereunder shall, in or upon any premises
described in the license, suffer or permit any person to play for money or
other valuable thing at any cards, dice, checks or with any other article or
instrument or thing whatsoever which may be used for the purpose of playing or
betting upon or winning or losing money or other thing or article of value, or
shall suffer or permit any person to bet on any game others may be playing, or
shall keep or suffer to be kept in or upon the premises any implements such as
are used in gambling in order that the same may for hire, gain or reward be
used for the purpose of gaming for money or other property, or who suffers any
person to play at any unlawful game or sport therein, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. However, video gaming and video gaming terminals may be allowed on
the premises pursuant to 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., the regulations of the Illinois
Gaming Board and the provisions of this municipal code.
      (2)   Whoever, being licensed hereunder, shall be convicted of a
violation of this section shall have his or her license revoked.
   (E)   Soliciting drinks.  It shall be unlawful for any person of either sex
to solicit, appeal to, ask or invite another person of the opposite sex,
theretofore to him or her unacquainted, to purchase for, procure for or give to
that person, a drink of intoxicating liquor, as herein defined, in any premises
licensed hereunder. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed hereunder to
sell intoxicating liquor or any employee thereof who shall suffer or permit any
person to solicit, appeal to, ask or invite another person of the opposite sex,
theretofore to the person unacquainted, to purchase for, procure for or give to
any such person any intoxicating liquor as herein defined.
   (F)   Dram shop insurance. Every licensee shall at all times maintain a
valid dram shop insurance policy within maximum insurance coverage limits. Each
licensee shall provide the Village President with a valid certificate of
insurance at the time of license application or for renewal thereof. The
licensee shall cause a provision added to the policy requiring the insurance
carrier to give the village 30 days prior notice of the cancellation or
nonrenewal of the policy.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-11)
   (G)   Sexual conduct and nudity/semi-nudity prohibited.
      (1)   No licensee or his or her agent or employee shall allow or permit
any person to perform, or simulate the performance of, acts of:
         (a)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
         (b)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;
         (c)   The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus,
vulva or genitals;
         (d)   The actual or simulated displaying of the breast so as to expose
the nipple, or any part of the areola of the female breast; and/or
         (e)   The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live
performance of which is prohibited by (a), (b), (c) or (d) above.
      (2)   No licensee or his or her agent or employee shall allow or permit
any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public
view any portion of his or her genitals or anus.
      (3)   Nudity and semi-nudity are prohibited.
         (a)   No person or entity licensed under the provisions of this
chapter, or any agent, officer or employee of any such person or entity, shall
knowingly allow or otherwise participate in any kind of agreement or
arrangement which allows or requires any person to appear before or amidst the
public in attendance at any establishment to which the license has been issued,
in the nude or in any kind of apparel which as worn or by virtue of its design,
fit or material, makes visible or tends to make visible all or any portion of
the person’s:
            1.   Genitalia;
            2.   Pubic hair or pubic hair region;
            3.   Anus and/or anal crevice; and
            4.   If such person is a female, her breasts at, below and
including the areola.
         (b)   No person shall appear or enter into any kind of agreement or
arrangement which allows or requires the person to appear before or amidst the
public in attendance at an establishment licensed under the provisions of this
chapter, in the nude or in apparel such as that described in division (A)
hereof.
      (4)   Any person or entity licensed under the provisions of this chapter,
or any agent, officer or employee of any such person or entity, who violates
any provision of this section shall have his or her license revoked or
suspended.
(Ord. 86-1, passed - -; Ord. 94-3, passed - -; Ord. 04-3, passed 1-5-2004; Ord.
12-17, passed 11-5-2012) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.13 RECORD OF LICENSES KEPT; NOTICE OF NEW LICENSE.
   The President shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all the
licenses issued by him or her, and shall furnish the Clerk and Chief of Police
each with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any new license, or the
revocation of any old license, the President shall give written notice of the
action to each of those officers within 48 hours of the action.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-12)
§ 112.14 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   The Local Liquor Commissioner (Village President) may revoke or suspend any
license issued by him or her if he or she determines that the licensee has
violated any of the provisions of this subchapter or of any valid ordinance or
resolution enacted by the Board of Trustees or any applicable rule or
regulation established by the Local Liquor Commission or the State Commission
which is not consistent with law. However, no such license shall be so revoked
or suspended except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor Commission after
a three-day written notice to the licensee, affording the licensee an
opportunity to appear and defend.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-13) (Ord. 568, passed 1-5-1981)
§ 112.15 SPECIAL EVENT BEER GARDEN LICENSES.
   (A)   The Local Liquor Commissioner may grant a special event beer garden
liquor license to persons who are currently licensed to sell alcoholic liquor
at retail within the village, pursuant to the provisions contained in this
section.
   (B)   No person shall hereafter, keep, maintain, conduct or operate any
special event beer garden without first obtaining a license therefor.
   (C)   As used in this section, the following term shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
      BEER GARDEN.  An open, unroofed area where beer and other alcoholic
beverages are served or consumed.
   (D)   No more than three special event beer garden licenses may be issued to
a licensee in any calendar year. The fee for each license shall be $75, which
shall be submitted with the application. The special event beer garden license
shall only be valid from 2:00 p.m. until 10:00 p.m. on the date for which the
license is issued.
   (E)   Application for a special event beer garden license shall be made to
the Village Clerk no less than 30 days prior to the requested date for the
license. The license application may be granted approval by the Local Liquor
Commissioner, but only if the applicant meets all of the conditions contained
in this subchapter. No special event beer garden may be located in any area
zoned for residential purposes within the village. The license shall be posted
conspicuously in the beer garden at all times.
   (F)   No special event beer garden shall be permitted, maintained or
operated except in conformity with the following regulations:
      (1)   The beer garden area shall be particularly described and adjacent
to, and operated as part of, premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises.
      (2)   Beer gardens shall be no greater in area than one and one-half of
the floor space of the licensed premises.
      (3)   Access to the beer garden shall only be through the adjacent
principal structure for which a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail has
been issued; provided however, that any part of the beer garden not blocked by
a building shall be surrounded by a fence or hedge not less than three feet
high with a fire exit or exits as required. Each gate or exit shall be not less
than three feet high, shall swing to egress, shall be equipped with proper
hardware, and shall swing free and clear of public sidewalks. The beer garden
fence shall comply with all village ordinances regarding vision clearance and
required distance from corners.
      (4)   Adequate noncombustible rubbish containers shall be provided by the
applicant.
      (5)   Applicant must submit written proof that the beer garden area is
covered by the applicant’s preexisting dram shop insurance for the principal
structure, or that they have obtained a dram shop policy specifically for the
beer garden area.
      (6)   The applicant shall submit a $50 cash deposit for litter control.
If village employees pick up trash or rubbish in the public way that they
reasonably believe is attributable to the beer garden, the cost of the employee
picking up the trash shall be deducted from the litter deposit. Any remaining
funds shall be returned to the applicant.
      (7)   All provisions of village ordinances relating to dealers in
alcoholic liquor not inconsistent with the stated terms of this section shall
apply to the special event beer garden license.
      (8)   The Local Liquor Commissioner may revoke any special event beer
garden license issued by him or her if he or she determines that the licensee
has violated any of the provisions of this subchapter, any other ordinance of
the village, or any applicable rule or regulation established by the Local
Liquor Commissioner or the State Commission which is not inconsistent with law.
   (G)   The Local Liquor Commissioner may waive the 30-day application period
in his or her discretion upon good cause.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-14) (Ord. 91-4, passed - -)
§ 112.16 TERMINATION BY DORMANCY.
   A license shall be rendered dormant and shall abate when the licensed
premises has been closed or when no alcoholic liquor has been sold or served on
the premises for 30 days, and no request for transfer to a new location or to a
new licensee at the same location, or request for an extension of time, has
been received by the Village President. Upon a determination of abatement by
the Village President, and his written notice of such determination to the
licensee, the number of licenses in the class of the license that has been
rendered dormant shall be reduced by one, in accordance with §
112.17.
(Ord. 09-12, passed 10-5-2009)
§ 112.17 REDUCTION IN NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   Whenever a license previously issued under this chapter is revoked,
surrendered, or terminated by dormancy as provided in this chapter, the maximum
number of licenses, as set forth in §
112.05, in the class of the license that is revoked, surrendered, or terminated
by dormancy shall be automatically and immediately reduced by one.
(Ord. 09-12, passed 10-5-2009)
§ 112.18 BASSET TRAINING REQUIRED.
   (A)   In order to provide information to sellers and servers of alcoholic
liquor about the effects of alcohol and drug use and abuse and to provide the
necessary skill development techniques to identify and/or intervene with patron
use problems thereby reducing the incidence of patron misuse, all employees or
agents who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, all management personnel working
on premises and anyone whose job description entails the checking of
identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages for holders of liquor
licenses for bars, restaurants and for beer and wine for consumption at
restaurants issued by the village shall complete Beverage Alcohol Sellers and
Servers Education and Training (BASSET) pursuant to a program licensed by the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission pursuant to 235 ILCS 5/3-12, 235 ILCS 5/6-27
and 77 Illinois Administrative Code, Ch. XVI, Part 3500, Sec. 3500.101, et
seq., as may be amended.
   (B)   The holders of liquor licenses as of the date of approval of this
section shall provide proof of compliance with this requirement by March 1,
2017. All new applicants for a liquor license for bars, restaurants and for
beer and wine consumption at restaurants shall provide proof of compliance with
this section prior to being issued a license by the village.
   (C)   When a license holder adds a new employee who is required by this
section to complete BASSET Training, the new employee shall comply with this
section and proof shall be provided to the village within 30 days of
commencement of employment.
   (D)   A photocopy of Certificates of Completion for all employees or agents
who are required by the section to complete BASSET Training shall be maintained
by the license holder and shall be readily available and posted in a manner
which will allow inspection by the local Liquor Commissioner, the Police Chief
or any designee of either of them or the State Liquor Control Commission.
(Ord. 16-09, passed 10-17-2016)
SUNDAY SALES
§ 112.30 LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation
of the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under this subchapter without first
having obtained a license therefor, in accordance with the terms and provisions
of this chapter. No person shall be deemed fully licensed until a license has
been actually issued and delivered to the applicant therefor, and no person or
association conducting a business in the village to whom or to which a license
provided for in §§
112.01 through
112.15 has not been issued shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be consumed
any alcoholic liquor on the premises as provided in this subchapter where the
business is conducted. A separate license shall be required for each location,
place or premises where the business or occupation is proposed to be carried
on, whether or not under the same roof or at the same street address.
(1983 Code, § 3-2B-1) Penalty, see §
112.99 
§ 112.31 APPLICATIONS REQUIRED; CONTENTS.
   Applications for these licenses shall be made to the President in writing,
signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent
thereof if a club or corporation, and verified by oath or affidavit. The
application may be made with and as part of application made under §§
112.01 through
112.15. If made separately, it shall contain information as provided in §
112.03.
(1983 Code, § 3-2B-2)
§ 112.32 ISSUANCE, RENEWAL OF LICENSE; NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor hereunder shall be
issued by the President, and he or she may renew the license of all licensees
at the expiration of their license period; provided the license has not lapsed,
been revoked or canceled; and provided, further, that each applicant for a
license, or for the renewal thereof, and the premises where the business is to
be carried on shall comply fully with all the conditions and provisions of this
subchapter and §§
112.01 through
112.15; but the President shall not issue more than four licenses hereunder,
and upon each revocation, the authorized total of licenses the President is
permitted to issue is to be reduced by one.
   (B)   No license shall be issued hereunder to any person other than a
licensee under §§
112.01 through
112.15 of this chapter.
(1983 Code, § 3-2B-3) (Ord. 16-08, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 112.33 LICENSE FEES; DISPOSITION ON APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL.
   Applicants for a bar, restaurant serving alcoholic liquor, liquor store,
package liquor or restaurant Sunday sales license hereunder shall, at the time
application for the license is made, pay to the Village Clerk the annual fee as
follows: the total sum of $500, or the sum of $250 with a written promise to
pay the additional sum of $250 six months thereafter. The license fee shall be
turned over to the Village Treasurer and shall be deposited by him or her in
the General Corporate Fund or in such other fund as the Board of Trustees may
designate. In the event the applicant for a Sunday sales license elects to pay
the annual fee by means of the $250 with a written promise to pay the
additional sum of $250 six months thereafter, and the applicant for a bar
license is granted a license, the additional sum shall become immediately due
and payable if the license holder sells, transfers or assigns the business or
any interest therein or ceases to do business for a period of six months.
(1983 Code, § 3-2B-4) (Ord. 05-04, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 16-08, passed 6-20-
2016)
§ 112.34 HOURS SALES ARE PERMITTED.
   It shall be lawful for alcoholic liquor to be sold on or in premises
licensed under this subchapter on Sundays between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
10:30 p.m.; further, it shall be lawful for alcoholic liquor to be consumed on
or in premises licensed under this subchapter on Sundays between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m.
(1983 Code, § 3-2B-5) (Ord. 86-6, passed - - ; Ord. 2022-05, passed 8-1-2022)
Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.35 EFFECT OF PROVISIONS.
   Each of the sections of §§
112.01 through
112.15 which are not in express conflict herewith are incorporated herein as
part of this subchapter. Sections
112.01 through
112.15 are not repealed or amended except to provide for additional hours of
business operation and additional fees as provided herein.
(1983 Code, § 3-2B-6) (Ord. 569, passed 1-5-1981)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §
112.06 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-5.5)
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates §
112.11(A) shall, in addition to other penalties provided for in that
subchapter, be fined not more than $200 for the first offense, and for the
second and subsequent offenses shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than
$750.
      (2)   Whoever violates any provisions of §
112.11(B)(3) or (B)(4) shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50, nor
more than $750.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-10)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §
112.15 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(1983 Code, § 3-2A-14)
(Ord. 88-6, passed - -; Ord. 91-4, passed - -; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 113: MOBILE HOME PARKS; LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License required; term
   
113.03   Applications for licenses
   
113.04   License issuance; conditions
   
113.05   License fees
   
113.06   Park requirements
   
113.07   Conduct of trailer coach parks
   
113.08   Registration and records kept
   
113.09   Revocation of license
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Board of Trustees ex officio as the Village Department of
Public Health.
   DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH or DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A trailer coach which does
not have toilet and bath or shower facilities.
   INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH or INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME.  A trailer coach with
self-contained toilet and bath or shower facilities.
   SCHOOL DISTRICT. Any district created or operated under the provisions of
the School Code, being 105 ILCS 15, of the state, approved May 1, 1945, as
amended.
   TRAILER COACH or MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle or similar portable structure used
or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public
streets or highways and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling
place for one or more persons; provided, that any such structure resting in
whole on a permanent foundation, with wheels, tongue and hitch permanently
removed, shall not be construed as a TRAILER COACH or MOBILE HOME.
   TRAILER COACH PARK or PARK.  An area of land within the village upon which
two or more occupied trailer coaches are harbored either free of charge or for
revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of the trailer
coach park.
(1983 Code, § 3-7-1)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM.
   No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate a trailer coach park
within the village, without first obtaining a license therefor from the
Department. The license shall be issued for one year and shall expire at 12:00
a.m. midnight on April 30 of the year next following the issuance thereof, and
the license shall be renewed from year to year upon payment of the annual
license fee herein provided.
(1983 Code, § 3-7-2) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES.
   (A)   In order to obtain a permit to construct or an original license to
operate a trailer coach park, the applicant shall file with the Department a
written application setting forth:
      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant or applicants or names
and addresses of the partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the names
and addresses of the officers, if the applicant is a corporation, and the
present and last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the
application;
      (2)   The location and legal description of the tract of land upon which
it is proposed to operate and maintain a trailer coach park;
      (3)   The proposed and existing facilities in the trailer coach park for
water supply; sewage, garbage and waste disposal; fire protection and for a
sanitary community building, which will include a description of toilets,
urinals, sinks, wash basins, slop sinks, showers, drains and laundry
facilities, the proposed alterations therein and the maintenance thereof;
      (4)   The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which
the trailer coach park is to be located;
      (5)   The calendar months of the year which applicant will operate the
trailer coach park;
      (6)   The plot plans of the trailer coach park, building plans and
specifications for existing buildings and facilities, and the plans and
specifications for new buildings and facilities or the proposed alterations in
existing facilities, all as may be required by the rules and regulations of the
Department under the provisions of this chapter; and
      (7)   A statement of the firefighting facilities, public or private,
which are available to the trailer coach park.
   (B)   An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters contained
in the application shall be attached thereto. Where a permit to construct as
well as an original license to operate is sought by the applicant, request
therefor shall be made in the same application. Each application shall be
accompanied by an application fee amounting to $25 for each ten acres of land,
or fraction thereof, proposed to be used as a trailer coach park. Each
application fee shall be paid to the Department by a separate certified check
or United States money order in the amount of the application fee only, and the
application fee, once paid to the Department, shall not be refunded.
(1983 Code, § 3-7-3)
§ 113.04 LICENSE ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application permit to construct a trailer coach
park or any application for a license to operate and maintain the same, the
Department shall, if the park is, or the proposed park will be, in conformity
with this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted by the Department
pursuant thereto, issue a permit to construct or an original license, as the
case may be. If the application for a permit to construct or a license is
declined, the Department shall give the reasons therefor in writing to the
applicant; and, if the objections can be corrected, the applicant may amend his
or her application and resubmit it for approval.
   (B)   If a permit to construct a trailer coach park has been issued, the
applicant upon completion thereof shall notify the Department. The Department
shall then inspect the trailer coach park and if completed in accordance with
the accepted application, the Department shall issue a license.
   (C)   No change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water supply, sewer,
drainage, garbage or waste disposal, and no change in the plot plan shall be
made without first making a written application to the Department and receiving
a written permit therefrom. The application shall be made in the way and manner
hereinbefore set forth; except that a fee amounting to $10 shall accompany each
application for a permit to alter the trailer coach park for each ten acres or
fraction thereof used to harbor trailer coaches thereon. No application fee
shall be required to accompany an application for a permit to alter a trailer
coach park where the alteration involves only a reduction in the number of
trailer spaces to a number less than the trailer coach park is currently
licensed for, the change or changes shall comply with the safety and sanitary
rules and regulations as are applicable thereto.
   (D)   The permit does not relieve the applicant from securing building
permits as such may be required under other ordinances of the village.
(1983 Code, § 3-7-4)
§ 113.05 LICENSE FEES.
   In addition to the application fee provided for in §
113.03 herein, the licensee shall pay to the Department on or before April 30
of each year, an annual license fee which shall be $50, plus $3 for each
trailer coach space in the trailer coach park.
(1983 Code, § 3-7-5)
§ 113.06 PARK REQUIREMENTS.
   Each trailer coach park licensed or to be constructed under the provisions
of this chapter shall provide for the following in the manner hereinafter
specified.
   (A)   Supervision. Every trailer coach park shall be in charge of a
responsible attendant or caretaker at all times, whose duty it shall be to
maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and
sanitary condition, and be answerable, with the licensee, for any violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Location and space.
      (1)   No trailer coach park shall be so located that the drainage of the
park area will endanger any water supply. All the parks shall be well drained
and shall be located in areas free from ponds, swamps and similar places in
which mosquitoes may breed. No wastewater from trailer coaches shall be
deposited on the surface of the ground.
      (2)   Each trailer coach shall be allotted a site of not less than 1,000
square feet. No trailer coach shall be parked closer than five feet to the side
lot lines of a trailer coach park, if the abutting property is improved
property, or closer than ten feet to a public street, alley or building. Each
individual trailer site shall abut or face on a driveway or clear, unoccupied
space of not less than 20 feet in width, which space shall have unobstructed
access to a public highway or alley. There shall be an open space of at least
ten feet between the sides of every trailer coach and at least five feet
between the ends of every trailer coach; except that the Department may, upon
application of a trailer coach park operator, waive such requirements if the
waiver does not affect the sanitation requirements herein mentioned or create
or permit to continue any hazard to the health and welfare of the community and
the occupants of the park.
   (C)   Water supply. An adequate supply of water of safe, sanitary quality,
approved by the Department, shall be furnished to each trailer park. Where
water from other sources than that supplied by the village is proposed to be
used, the source of the supply shall first be approved by the Department. At
least one cold water supply outlet shall be provided within 300 feet of every
dependent trailer site. Each independent trailer site shall be provided with a
cold water tap at least four inches above the ground.
   (D)   Disposal of sewage and other water-carried wastes.
      (1)   All sewage and other water-carried wastes shall be disposed of into
a municipal sewerage system whenever available. In trailer coach parks in which
such connections are not available, disposal shall be into a private system
which includes a sanitary means of disposal, the operation of which creates
neither a nuisance nor a menace to health.
      (2)   When a water carriage system of sewage is used, each trailer coach
site shall be provided with a sewer connection for the combined liquid waste
outlet or outlets of each trailer coach, and trapped below the frost line. It
shall be the duty of the owner or operator of the trailer coach park to provide
an approved type of water- and odor-tight connection from the trailer water
drainage to the sewer connection, and it shall be the duty of the owner or
operator to make the connection and keep all occupied trailer coaches connected
to the sewer while located in a trailer coach park. Sewer connections in
unoccupied trailer coach sites shall be so closed that they will emit no odors
or cause a breeding place for flies. No water or wastes shall be allowed to
fall on the ground from a trailer coach.
   (E)   Garbage and rubbish storage and disposal.
      (1)   A sufficient number of adequate flyproof and watertight containers
shall be supplied for the storage of garbage except where an adequate
incinerator is provided.
      (2)   Garbage containers shall be emptied at least weekly and shall not
be filled to overflowing or allowed to become foul smelling, or a breeding
place for flies.
      (3)   Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner which creates
neither a nuisance nor a menace to health and which is approved by the
Department.
      (4)   Adequate insect and rodent control measures shall be employed. All
buildings shall be fly- and rodent-proof, and rodent harborages shall not be
permitted to exist in the park.
   (F)   Central cooking and eating facilities. When community kitchens and
dining rooms are provided, the facilities and equipment as are supplied must be
maintained in a sanitary condition and kept in good repair.
   (G)   Electrical outlets. Electrical outlets for each individual trailer
site shall be provided, and the installation shall be in compliance with all
state and local electrical codes and ordinances. No connected electrical
extension cord shall lie on the ground or be suspended less than seven feet
from the ground above sidewalks or pathways.
   (H)   Fire protection. Fire extinguishers of a type approved by the State
Fire Marshal for use at trailer coach parks shall be placed at locations within
200 feet of each individual trailer site. Each fire extinguisher shall be
periodically examined and kept at all times in a condition for use.
   (I)   Temporary structures. Temporary porches, canvas-roofed canopies and
skirts shall be permitted for trailer coaches, and auxiliary rooms may also be
authorized by regulation of the Department if constructed of fire-resistant
materials of such specifications as shall be required by the regulations.
   (J)   Compliance. All buildings constructed or altered, all plumbing and all
electrical and heating installations shall be in accordance with existing
municipal and county building ordinances and rules of the Department.
(1983 Code, § 3-7-6)
§ 113.07 CONDUCT OF TRAILER COACH PARKS.
   The following provisions shall be applicable to all trailer coach parks
licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each licensee, on the first days of February
and September of each year, to file with the Village Clerk a report giving the
names and ages of all children of school age living in the trailer coach park.
The Village Clerk shall then file with the Hiawatha School Board a copy
thereof.
   (B)   All streets and driveways in every trailer coach park must be
maintained in a passable and reasonably dustproof condition at all times, and
all streets and driveways in every coach park shall have a minimum width of 20
feet.
   (C)   The management of every trailer coach park shall assume full
responsibility for maintaining in good repair and condition all sanitary and
safety appliances on the park, and shall promptly bring such action as is
necessary to prosecute or eject from the park any person or persons who
willfully or maliciously damage the appliances, or any person or persons who
fail to comply with regulations of this chapter.
   (D)   All facilities and requirements for local trailer park control shall
meet at least the minimum requirements of the state Trailer Coach Park Control
Law and the rules and regulations adopted by the Illinois Department of Public
Health pursuant to authority contained in the state law.
(1983 Code, § 3-7-7) (Ord. passed 7-1-1957; Ord. passed 3-23-1958)
Statutory reference:
   Powers over certain businesses, see 65 ILCS 5/11-42-9
   Public order regulations, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-8
§ 113.08 REGISTRATION AND RECORDS KEPT.
   (A)   Each trailer coach park shall be provided with a custodian’s office
where each trailer coach entering the trailer coach park shall be assigned to a
lot location, given a copy of the trailer coach park rules and registered
according to prescribed form. This registration shall include the name and
address of every occupant of the trailer coach; the license number of all
units; the state issuing the licenses; and a statement indicating the exact
location at which the trailer coach was last parked, include the state, city,
town or village where the parking occurred. The licensee shall keep a register
of all children of school age occupying trailer coaches in the trailer coach
park.
   (B)   The abovementioned register shall be signed by the occupant of the
trailer coach. Any person furnishing misinformation for purposes of
registration shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable under the laws of the
state and under the penalty provisions of this chapter. The registration
records shall be neatly and securely maintained, and no registration records
shall be destroyed until ten years have elapsed following the date of
registration. The register shall be available at all times for inspection by
law enforcement officers and the Village Clerk.
(1983 Code, § 3-7-8)
§ 113.09 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension
by the Department; however, the Department shall first serve or cause to be
served upon the licensee a written notice in which shall be specified the way
or way in which the licensee has failed to comply with the ordinances or any
rules or regulations promulgated by the Department pertaining thereto. The
notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate the nuisance, unsanitary
condition or objectionable condition, specified in the notice within five days
or within a longer period of time as may be allowed by the Department. If the
licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the notice, within
the time specified or the extended period of time, the Department may revoke or
suspend the license.
(1983 Code, § 3-7-9)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $750 for each offense, and each day’s violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1983 Code, § 3-7-10) (Ord. passed 7-1-1957; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 114: VIDEO GAMING
Section
   
114.01   Video gaming in licensed establishments
 
   
114.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Chapter 112
   Billiard, pool halls and video game rooms, see §§
111.15 et seq.
§ 114.01 VIDEO GAMING IN LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in §
112.12(D)(1) of this title, not more than five video gaming terminals may be
located in a licensed retail establishment where alcoholic liquor is drawn,
poured, mixed or otherwise served for consumption on the premises. Video gaming
terminals may also be located at licensed fraternal establishments, licensed
veterans establishments and licensed truck stop establishments as defined by
the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
   (B)   In addition to submitting an annual registration on the form required
by the village, each licensed establishment shall concurrently supply to the
village its application to the Illinois Gaming Board and a copy of the license
issued by the Illinois Gaming Board. The licensed establishment shall annually
pay a fee of $100 per video gaming terminal at the same time it renews or pays
for its annual liquor license, to be paid equally between the video gaming
terminal operator and the licensed establishment. If a licensed establishment
does not have a liquor license then it shall pay the annual fee before May 1 of
each year.
   (C)   All licensed establishments shall be located at least 100 feet from a
school or a place of worship as defined under the Religious Corporation Act.
   (D)   At all times a licensed establishment shall comply in all respects
with the Video Gaming Act and the regulations of the Illinois Gaming Board, as
they each may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to
persons over 21 years of age, the entrance to which is within the view of at
least one employee of the establishment who is over 21 years of age. Any
licensed establishment that allows persons under 21 years of age to enter must
segregate video gaming terminals in a separate area inaccessible to minors.
   (F)   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area of the licensed
establishment with restricted visibility from areas outside the business.
   (G)   An owner, manager or employee over the age of 21 shall be present
during all hours of operation when video gaming terminals are available for use
by the public.
   (H)   The licensed establishment shall prevent access to video gaming
terminals by persons who are visibly intoxicated.
   (I)   The village and its agents shall have unrestricted access to enter the
licensed establishment to determine compliance with this section, the Illinois
Video Gaming Act and the regulations of the Illinois Gaming Board.
(Ord. 12-17, passed 11-5-2012; Ord. 2021-11, passed 12-6-2021) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability company or
other entity which violates §
114.01 shall be fined not less than $500 for each offense. Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, any licensed
retail establishment which violates §
114.01 is subject to a fine or suspension or revocation of its liquor license
following a hearing before the village’s local liquor commissioner.
(Ord. 12-17, passed 11-5-2012)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
         
131.   DRUGS
         
132.   CURFEW FOR MINORS
         
133.   ILLINOIS CRIMINAL CODE OF 1961
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Offenses Pertaining to Property
   
130.01   Advertising
   
130.02   Petty theft
   
130.03   Posting bills
   
130.04   Property, malicious injury to
   
130.05   Trespass on a veteran’s memorial
Offenses Against Public Order
   
130.15   Barbed wire, picket and electric fences
   
130.16   Loitering
   
130.17   Riot
   
130.18   Fighting prohibited
   
130.19   Prostitution
   
130.20   Prostitution, house of
   
130.21   Public urination and defecation prohibited
   
130.22   Disorderly conduct
   
130.23   Truancy
Offenses Against Public Justice
   
130.35   Escape, aid in
   
130.36   Escapes
   
130.37   Offender registration
Offenses Against Persons or Animals
   
130.45   Assault
   
130.46   Battery
   
130.47   Hunting or trapping animals
Restricted Substances
   
130.60   Drunkenness, drinking on public street
   
130.61   Unlawful sale to and possession of tobacco and alternative nicotine
products by a minor
Weapons
   
130.70   Missiles
 
   
130.99   Penalty
OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
§ 130.01 ADVERTISING.
   It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or articles in the
village and it shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement
or notice.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 PETTY THEFT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit “petty theft,” which is hereby
defined as a theft when the property taken is of a value less than $150.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-18) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 POSTING BILLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, hitchpost, telegraph pole, hydrant or upon any private wall, door or
gate; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent posting by proper
village and county officials of election signs, polling place signs and other
signs or placards necessary under the law to the conduct of elections.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-19) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 PROPERTY, MALICIOUS INJURY TO.
   It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to injure,
deface, mutilate, remove, pull down, break or in any manner interfere with or
molest or secrete or destroy any real or personal property belonging to or
under the control of any person.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-20) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 TRESPASS ON A VETERAN’S MEMORIAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sit, stand or lie upon a
memorial established for the purpose of honoring the veterans of any war or
conflict.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to rollerskate, skateboard, or
ride a bicycle or scooter, either motorized or not, upon, in or through a
memorial established for the purpose of honoring the veterans of any war or
conflict.
(Ord. 01-03, passed 11-5-2001) Penalty, see §
130.99
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
§ 130.15 BARBED WIRE, PICKET AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence
or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to use barbed
wire as a guard to any parking lot, stairway, or entrance to a building or
parcel of land. The construction of picket fences with pointed ends and/or
barbed wire fences is hereby prohibited in residential districts in the
village.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-3) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 LOITERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or
remain idle either along and/or in consort with others in a public place in
such manner as to:
      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians;
and/or
      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting
on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress,
egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
   (B)   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in
division (A) of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer
shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to
move on or disperse. Any person failing or refusing to obey such orders shall
be guilty of a violation of this section.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-14) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.17 RIOT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to
disperse upon an order to do so by a police officer, when two or more persons
are assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of
committing an unlawful act.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-24) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.18 FIGHTING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to physically fight with another person.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-28) (Ord. 00-10, passed 8-7-2000) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.19 PROSTITUTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or advertise in any manner his
or her vocation as a prostitute or for any person to advertise the profession
of prostitute or solicit for a prostitute.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-21) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.20 PROSTITUTION, HOUSE OF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or assist in the keeping of a
house of ill fame or prostitution or knowingly reside therein or knowingly to
rent, lease or permit any person to occupy any house or room owned, leased or
controlled by him or her for this purpose.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-22) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.21 PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      APPROPRIATE SANITARY FACILITY. A urinal, toilet, commode or other
facility that accommodates or is designed for the sanitary disposal of human
bodily fluids or waste and that is enclosed from public view.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any walkway, street, highway, sidewalk, building facade,
bridge, overpass, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, transportation
facility, park, recreational area, parking lot, vacant or undeveloped lot or
the stairwells, alcoves, doorways and entrance ways to such places.
   (B)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall urinate or defecate in, on, or about any public
place, outside upon any private property in view of others, or upon private
property without the consent of the owner, other than in an appropriate
sanitary facility.
      (2)   It is a separate violation for any person who has urinated or
defecated in, on, or about any public place, other than in an appropriate
sanitary facility, to fail to clean or remove the material deposited
immediately, or to fail to dispose immediately of the material used in the
cleaning or removal process in a container designed for such disposal.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 6-4-2012) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.22 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits disorderly conduct when he
or she knowingly:
      (1)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
      (2)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the fire
department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a false alarm
of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that such fire exists; or
      (3)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a
false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a
container holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or
radioactive substance is concealed in such place that its explosion or release
would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there
is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb, explosive or a container
holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive
substance is concealed in such place; or
      (4)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to any peace
officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing
at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such an offense will be committed, is being committed, or has
been committed; or
      (5)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it; or
      (6)   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the Collection
Agency Act or as an employee of such collection agency, and while attempting to
collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is
designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
      (7)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the
Department of Children and Family Services under Section 4 of the Abused and
Neglected Child Reporting Act; or
      (8)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the
Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act or the ID/DD
Community Care Act; or
      (9)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the police
department or fire department of any municipality or fire protection district,
or any privately owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an
ambulance, emergency medical technician-ambulance or emergency medical
technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such assistance is required; or
      (10)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report under Article
II of “An Act in relation to victims of violence and abuse”, approved September
16, 1984, as amended; or
      (11)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to any public
safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe that
transmitting such a report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public; or
      (12)   Calls the number “911” for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency; or
      (13)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a threat of destruction of a
school building or school property, or a threat of violence, death, or bodily
harm directed against persons at a school, school function, or school event,
whether or not school is in session.
      (14)   (a)   Commits an act of bullying by any severe or pervasive
physical or verbal act or conduct, including communications made in writing or
electronically, directed toward another person that has or can be reasonably
predicted to have the effect of one or more of the following:
            1.   Placing the other person in reasonable fear of bodily harm or
harm to that person's mental health;
            2.   Causing a substantially detrimental effect on the other
person's physical or mental health; or
            3.   Degrading, humiliating, debasing, or coercing another person.
         (b)   Bullying, as defined in this section, may take various forms,
including without limitation one or more of the following; harassment, threats,
intimidation, stalking, physical violence, sexual harassment, sexual violence,
theft, public humiliation, destruction of property, or retaliation for
asserting or alleging an act of bullying. This list is meant to be illustrative
and non-exhaustive. Bullying on the basis of actual or perceived race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, physical or
mental disability, military status, sexual orientation, gender-related identity
or expression, unfavorable discharge from military service, association with a
person or group with one or more of the aforementioned actual or perceived
characteristics, or any other distinguishing characteristic is prohibited.
   (B)   Sentence.  
      (1)   A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a Class C
misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(5) or (A)(11) of this section is a
Class A misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(8) or (A)(10) of this section
is a Class B misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(2), (A)(4), (A)(7), (A)
(9), (A)(12), or (A)(13) of this section is a Class 4 felony. A violation of
division (A)(3) of this section is a Class 3 felony, for which a fine of not
less than $3,000 and no more than $10,000 shall be assessed in addition to any
other penalty imposed.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a Business
Offense and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $3,000.
      (3)   A second or subsequent violation of division (A)(7) or (A)(11) of
this section is a Class 4 felony. A third or subsequent violation of division
(A)(5) of this section is a Class 4 felony.
      (4)   A violation of subsection (a)(14) of this section is a business
offense for which a fine of not more than $500 shall be assessed in addition to
community service as required by division (C) of this section.
   (C)   (1)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, a court
shall order any person convicted of disorderly conduct to perform community
service for not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours, if community service
is available in the jurisdiction and is funded and approved by the county board
of the county where the offense was committed. In addition, whenever any person
is placed on supervision for an alleged offense under this section, the
supervision shall be conditioned upon the performance of the community service.
      (2)   This division does not apply when the court imposes a sentence of
incarceration.
   (D)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, the court shall
order any person convicted of disorderly conduct under division (A)(3)
involving a false alarm of a threat that a bomb or explosive device has been
placed in a school to reimburse the unit of government that employs the
emergency response officer or officers that were dispatched to the school for
the cost of the search for a bomb or explosive device. For the purposes of this
section, EMERGENCY RESPONSE means any incident requiring a response by a police
officer, a firefighter, a State Fire Marshal employee, or an ambulance.
(Ord. 12-11, passed 7-16-2012; Ord. 14-10, passed 5-5-2014) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.23 TRUANCY.
   (A)   Truancy prohibited.  
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of age or younger who
is required by law to attend school and who is subject to the compulsory
attendance requirements of the Illinois School Code, and/or enrolled in a
public, private (including a home school) or parochial school, to absent
himself or herself from attendance at school during the hours in which he or
she is enrolled, including summer school, without parental permission or the
permission of such student’s school authorities.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, TRUANT and TRUANCY shall be as
defined in Section 26-2a of the Illinois School Code, as may be amended.
   (B)   Minors in public place prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
18 years of age or younger who is required by law to attend school and who is
subject to the compulsory attendance requirements of the Illinois School Code
and/or enrolled in a public, private (including a home school) or parochial
school to absent himself or herself from attendance at school during the hours
in which he or she is enrolled, including summer school, without parental
permission or the permission of such student’s school authorities and found in
a public place, as defined herein. For purposes of this section, a minor is
absent from school and found in a public place if said minor is found
loitering, wandering, idling, strolling, playing or aimlessly driving or riding
about in or upon any public street, avenue, road, highway, curb area, alley,
beach, playground, public place or public building, place of amusement or
eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place or any place open to the public
within the village during the hours of the same day when said minor’s school is
in session.
   (C)   Exemptions. The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section
shall not apply when:
      (1)   The minor has in his or her possession a written excuse from the
minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal
care or custody of said minor, which provides a reasonable explanation under
the circumstances considering the time of the day, the conduct being engaged in
at the time by the minor and other observable factors so as to determine the
validity of the minor’s absence from school;
      (2)   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s)
or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor;
      (3)   The minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent
(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having legal care or custody
of the minor;
      (4)   The minor is going directly to or from a medical appointment;
      (5)   The minor has permission to leave the campus of his or her school
enrollment or the place of his or her home school and has in his or her
possession a valid, school-issued (including home school), off-campus permit;
      (6)   The minor is going directly to, or returning directly from a public
meeting or a place of entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event,
dance or other school activity provided such meeting, event or activity is a
school-approved activity for the minor or is otherwise supervised by school
personnel of the minor’s school; or
      (7)   Those defenses and/or exceptions as set forth in the Illinois
School Code for compulsory attendance or enrollment in school are incorporated
herein by reference and shall be exemptions herein.
   (D)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent(s), legal
guardian(s) or other person to permit a person in his or her custody or control
to violate the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
   (E)   Contributing to truancy. It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years
of age or older to perform any act of commission, or omission which act
encourages, contributes or facilitates the truancy of any person as prohibited
in divisions (A) and/or (B) of this section.
(Ord. 12-12, passed 7-16-2012) Penalty, see §
130.99
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE
§ 130.35 ESCAPE, AID IN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to aid in or assist any person to escape
from lawful confinement or to assist any person to escape from the custody of
any peace officer.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-7) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.36 ESCAPES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful
custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-8) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.37 OFFENDER REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Registration required. It shall be unlawful for any person required to
register with the Chief of Police as the law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction as a sex offender or a sexual predator under the Illinois Sex
Offender Registration Act, 730 ILCS 150/1, et seq., or as a violent offender
against youth under the Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth
Registration Act, 730 ILCS 154/1 et seq., or under any similar statute to fail
to register with the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Fees.
      (1)   The person shall pay a $100 initial registration fee and a $100
annual renewal fee to the Chief of Police under the Illinois Sex Offender
Registration Act, 730 ILCS 150/1 et seq., and a $20 initial registration fee
and a $10 annual renewal fee to the Chief of Police under the Murderer and
Violent Offender Against Youth Registration Act, 730 ILCS 154/1 et seq. The
Chief of Police may waive the registration fee if the Chief determines that the
person is indigent and unable to pay the registration fee.
      (2)   Should the person's annual duty to report under the Murderer and
Violent Offender Against Youth Registration Act, 730 ILCS 154/1 et seq., be
increased at the request of the Chief of Police, no additional fee shall be
required.
      (3)   The person shall pay a $50 change fee to the Chief of Police for
any change in information causing the person to update the registration
pursuant to state statute.
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 10-5-2020)
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS OR ANIMALS
§ 130.45 ASSAULT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit ASSAULT, which is hereby
defined as any conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.46 BATTERY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery.
   (B)   A person commits battery if he or she intentionally or knowingly
without legal justification and by any means causes bodily harm to an
individual or makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with
an individual.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-4) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.47 HUNTING OR TRAPPING ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing any animal
other than as prescribed by law in the village.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to use any type of device within the corporate
limits of the village for the purpose of trapping animals. This prohibition
shall not apply to traps used by employees and agents of the DeKalb County
Health Department, DeKalb County Animal Control, or a licensed nuisance
wildlife removal service.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-10; Ord. 14-07, passed 3-19-2014) Penalty, see §
130.99
RESTRICTED SUBSTANCES
§ 130.60 DRUNKENNESS, DRINKING ON PUBLIC STREET.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be found drunk, intoxicated or
under the influence of intoxicating liquor upon any public thoroughfare or
other public place.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink intoxicating liquor while
on any public street, sidewalk or thoroughfare; provided, that liquor may be
sold or dispensed in a public park where approval has been granted by the
Village Board and the Local Liquor Commissioner.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-6) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.61 UNLAWFUL SALE TO AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS BY A MINOR.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS. A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing or by any other means. ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS exclude
cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these terms are
defined in this section or Section 1 of the Prevention of Tobacco Use by
Persons under 21 Years of Age and Sale and Distribution of Tobacco Products Act
(720 ILCS 675/1 et seq.), and any product approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for sale as a tobacco
cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical
purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
      TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but
not limited to, cigarettes, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping
tobacco.
   (B)   Persons under the age of 18.
      (1)   Sale to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products or alternative
nicotine products to any person under the age of 18 years.
      (2)   Purchase and possession by minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase or possess any tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products; provided, that the possession by a
person under the age of 18 years under the direct supervision of the parent or
guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent’s or guardian’s home shall
not be prohibited. Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing any
tobacco product or alternative nicotine product, or any cartridge or component
of an alternative nicotine product, to another person, the person selling,
offering for sale, giving, or furnishing the product or component shall verify
that the person is at least 18 years of age by:
         (a)   Examining from any person that appears to be under 27 years of
age a government- issued photographic identification that establishes the
person is at least 18 years of age; or
         (b)   For sales made through the Internet or other remote sales
methods, performing an age verification through an independent, third-party age
verification service that compares information available from public records to
the personal information entered by the person during the ordering process that
establishes the person is 18 years of age or older.
   (C)   Violations and fines. Violations with respect to sale of tobacco and
alternative nicotine products to a person under 18 years of age and with
respect to possession of tobacco and alternative nicotine products by a person
under 18 years of age shall be as provided in §
130.99.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-26) (Ord. 97-12, passed 9-2-1997; Ord. 15-01, passed 1-12-
2015) Penalty, see §
130.99  
WEAPONS
§ 130.70 MISSILES.
   It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street,
alley or other public place; and it shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any
glass, nails, tacks or other similar articles on any street, sidewalk, alley or
other public place in the village.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-16) Penalty, see §
130.99  
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person convicted of a violation of the foregoing offenses, where
no other penalty is provided, shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than
$750 for any single offense.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-27)
   (B)   Any person violating §
130.05 shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $750 for each offense.
   (C)   Any person violating §
130.18 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-28)
   (D)   Any person violating §
130.61 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(1983 Code, § 5-3-26)
   (E)   Any person who violates §
130.21 shall be fined not less than $150 nor more than $750 for each violation.
   (F)   Penalties relating to truancy.
      (1)   Any person found to be in violation of §
130.23(A) or (B) shall be sentenced to do not less than ten community service
hours for a first offense, not less than 25 community service hours for a
second offense nor more than 50 community service hours for each offense
thereafter and may be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 for each
offense plus costs. No minor under the age of 13 shall be fined or required to
perform community service for a violation of this section but the minor’s
parent or custodian shall be responsible for the payment of a fine or
performance of community service.
      (2)   Any person found to be in violation of §
130.23(D) or (E) may be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each
offense plus costs.
      (3)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalties as provided, any person
found to be in violation of §
130.23 may be required to attend and participate in counseling and or other
such remedial measures designed to or intended to restore the minor to
compliance with the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 97-12, passed 9-2-1997; Ord. 00-10, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 01-03, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012; Ord. 12-06, passed 6-4-2012; Ord. 12-
12, passed 7-16-2012)
CHAPTER 131: DRUGS
Section
Drug Paraphernalia Control
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Possession of drug paraphernalia
   
131.03   Exemptions
Cannabis
   
131.10   Cannabis control
   
131.11   Possession of cannabis
   
131.12   Cultivation of cannabis
   
131.13   Medical use of cannabis
   
131.14   Public use of cannabis
   
131.15   Public display of cannabis
 
   
131.99   Penalty
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA CONTROL
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Cannabis Control Act,
720 ILCS 550/3 as if that definition were incorporated herein.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/102 as if that definition were
incorporated herein.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the
Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act. It includes but
is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      (2)   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      (3)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home
for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
cannabis or controlled substances;
      (4)   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by a private person; and
      (5)   (a)   Objects.  Objects intended to be used unlawfully in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, including but not limiting where applicable,
the following items:
            1.   Water pipes;
            2.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            3.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            4.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            5.   Carburetor pipes;
            6.   Electric pipes;
            7.   Air-driven pipes;
            8.   Chillums;
            9.   Bongs; and
            10.   Ice pipes or chillers.
         (b)   Determination of status; factors to be considered. In
determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority
should consider in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the
following:
            1.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
            2.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control
of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
            3.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act;
            4.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
            5.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
            6.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or
of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he or she
knows or should reasonably know intends to use the object to facilitate a
violation of the statutes referred to in this section; the innocence of an
owner or of anyone in control of the object as to a direct violation of the
statute shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
            7.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;
            8.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
            9.   National and local advertising concerning its use;
            10.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
            11.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
            12.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of
the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise; and/or
            13.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in
the community.
         (c)   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller,
is for use in violation of these Acts.
(Ord. 04-13, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 131.02 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with
the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis
or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a
controlled substance for that use, is guilty of a violation of this subchapter
and subject to the provisions of §
131.99(B). This division (A) does not apply to a person who is legally
authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the Hypodermic
Syringes and Needles Act, 720 ILCS 635.
   (B)   In determining intent under division (A) of this section, the trier of
fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or controlled
substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a controlled
substance on the drug paraphernalia.
(Ord. 04-13, passed 7-6-2004; Ord. 16-03, passed 2-22-2016) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging,
labeling or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to
lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale;
      (2)   (a)   Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in
connection with the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
         (b)   Items exempt under this division include but are not limited to
garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes and cigarette-rolling
papers.
      (3)   Items listed in this subchapter which are marketed for decorative
purposes, when the items have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable
of being used for an illicit purpose prohibited by this subchapter; or
      (4)   A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes
or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act, 720 ILCS 635.
   (B)   In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this
section, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   The general, usual, customary and historical use to which the item
involved has been put;
      (2)   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the
item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the
device upon its functioning;
      (3)   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item
concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
      (4)   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the
time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
      (5)   Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose or
use of the item involved, and the entire context in which the advertising
occurs;
      (6)   The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed
for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise
exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
      (7)   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; and
      (8)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
(Ord. 04-13, passed 7-6-2004)
CANNABIS
§ 131.10 CANNABIS CONTROL.
   The village hereby adopts the state Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et
seq., as may be amended from time to time, by this reference.
(Ord. 13-06, passed 10-7-2013) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.11 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the age of 21 to
possess any substance containing cannabis within the corporate limits of the
village. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess any substance
containing cannabis within the corporate limits of the village:
      (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act,
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.;
      (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.;
      (3)   In any correctional facility;
      (4)   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving;
      (5)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
      (6)   In any part of a building owned in whole or in part, or leased, by
the village; or
      (7)   In any other manner prohibited by state statutes, as they may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   Other than as set forth in §
131.11(A), it shall be unlawful for any person who is 21 years of age or older
and a resident of the State of Illinois to cumulatively possess within the
corporate limits of the village:
      (1)   More than 30 grams of cannabis flower;
      (2)   More than 500 milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-infused
product; or
      (3)   More than five grams of cannabis concentrate.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be unlawful for registered
qualifying patients under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq., to possess more than 30 grams of any cannabis
produced by cannabis plants grown under 10-5(b) of the Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act, provided any amount of cannabis produced in excess of 30 grams of raw
cannabis or its equivalent must remain secured within the residence or
residential property in which it was grown.
   (C)   Other than as set forth in §
131.11(A), it shall be unlawful for any person who is 21 years of age or older
and not a resident of the State of Illinois to cumulatively possess within the
corporate limits of the village:
      (1)   More than 15 grams of cannabis flower;
      (2)   More than 250 milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-infused
product; or
      (3)   More than 2.5 grams of cannabis concentrate.
(Ord. 2019-14, passed 12-2-2019)
§ 131.12 CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for: i) Any person who is under the age of 21; or
ii) Any person who is 21 years of age or older and not a registered qualifying
patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS
130/1 et seq., to cultivate cannabis plants within the corporate limits of the
village. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to cultivate cannabis
plants within the corporate limits of the village in any other manner
prohibited by state statutes, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is 21 years of age or older
and a registered qualifying patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq., to cultivate cannabis plants
within the corporate limits of the village:
      (1)   Unless the person has been a resident of the State of Illinois for
more than 30 days before cultivation;
      (2)   In excess of five plants that are more than five inches tall per
household without a cultivation center or craft grower license;
      (3)   Outside of an enclosed, locked space;
      (4)   Using cannabis seeds purchased from somewhere other than a
dispensary for the purpose of home cultivation and seeds may not be given or
sold to any other person;
      (5)   In a location where they are subject to ordinary public view
(within the sight line with normal visual range of a person, unassisted by
visual aids, from a public street or sidewalk adjacent to real property, or
from within an adjacent property);
      (6)   Without reasonable precautions to ensure the cannabis plants are
secure from unauthorized access, including unauthorized access by a person
under 21 years of age;
      (7)   On non-residential property and property that is not lawfully in
possession of the cultivator or without the consent of the person in lawful
possession of the property;
      (8)   In a dwelling, residence, apartment, condominium unit, enclosed,
locked space, or piece of property which has not been divided into multiple
dwelling units and contains in excess of five plants at any one time; or
      (9)   Unless residing at the residence where the cannabis plants are
located, except that a registered qualifying patient's authorized agent may
tend to the cannabis plants if attending to the residence for brief periods,
such as when the qualifying patient is temporarily away from the residence.
   (C)   A registered qualifying patient who cultivates more than the allowable
number of cannabis plants, or who sells or gives away cannabis plants,
cannabis, or cannabis-infused products produced under this section, is liable
for penalties as provided by law, including the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS
550/1 et seq., in addition to loss of home cultivation privileges as
established by rule.
(Ord. 2019-14, passed 12-2-2019)
§ 131.13 MEDICAL USE OF CANNABIS.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be unlawful for any registered
qualifying patients to possess cannabis consistent with the Compassionate Use
of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq., as amended, the terms
of which are incorporated herein.
(Ord. 2019-14, passed 12-2-2019)
§ 131.14 PUBLIC USE OF CANNABIS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use cannabis:
   (A)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act,
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.;
   (B)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school, unless
permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.;
   (C)   In any correctional facility;
   (D)   In any motor vehicle;
   (E)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
   (F)   In any public place or privately owned parking lot or walkway where
retail business is conducted (as used in this section, “public place" means any
part of a building or property owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the
village, parks, and sidewalks);
   (G)   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under 21 years of age
who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.; or
   (H)   In any other manner prohibited by state statutes, as they may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2019-14, passed 12-2-2019)
§ 131.15 PUBLIC DISPLAY OF CANNABIS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to display cannabis in any public place
(as used in this section, "public place" means any part of a building or
property owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the village, parks, and
sidewalks).
(Ord. 2019-14, passed 12-2-2019)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who violates the provisions of §
131.02 is punishable by a minimum fine of $750.
(Ord. 04-13, passed 7-6-2004; Ord. 16-03, passed 2-22-2016)
CHAPTER 132: CURFEW FOR MINORS
Section
   
132.01   Restrictions
   
132.02   Exceptions
   
132.03   Determination prior to citation
   
132.04   Responsibility of parent, legal guardian
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at or
upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway within the Village
of Kirkland at the following times unless one of those exceptions listed in §
132.02 applies:
   (A)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
   (B)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
   (C)   Between 11:01 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on
the following day.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 7-2-2007) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to any person less than 17 years of age who
is involved in the following activities:
   (A)   Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible companion of at least 17 years of age who is approved by the parent
or legal guardian;
   (B)   Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state
authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform;
   (C)   Attending or traveling to or from an official school, religious or
civic activity;
   (D)   Attending or traveling to or from any assembly activity for which a
permit has been lawfully issued;
   (E)   Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or
property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage; or
   (F)   Any activity which involves the exercise of the minor’s First
Amendment rights.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 7-2-2007)
§ 132.03 DETERMINATION PRIOR TO CITATION.
   Before issuing any citation pursuant to this subchapter, the citing officer
shall reasonably determine if the person is involved in any activity as
considered under §
132.02. If the officer determines that the person is involved in such an
activity, then no citation shall be issued. If the officer, however, has
reasonable belief that the person is not involved in such activity as
considered under §
132.02, then the officer shall issue a citation pursuant to §
132.04.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 7-2-2007)
§ 132.04 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT, LEGAL GUARDIAN.
   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly
permit a minor in his or her custody or control to violate §
132.01.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 7-2-2007) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   A person violating this chapter shall be issued a citation and fined no more
than $750.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012)
CHAPTER 133: ILLINOIS CRIMINAL CODE OF 1961
Section
   
133.01   Adoption
§ 133.01 ADOPTION.
   The village hereby adopts the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/1-
1 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 12-14, passed 7-16-2012)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   BUILDING CODES
         
151.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
         
152.   FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
         
153.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
154.   ZONING
         
155.   DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITE OR CASH IN LIEU OF LAND
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODES
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Short title
   
150.02   Permits and scope of regulations
   
150.03   Building Officer
   
150.04   Liability of Building Officer
   
150.05   Regulations for administration of building regulations
   
150.06   Compliance with fee schedule; distribution of fees
   
150.07   Duty to notify Village Clerk of property for sale or rent
   
150.08   Certificate of Compliance required
   
150.09   Making false statement to notice of intent unlawful
Codes Adopted
   
150.15   Generally
   
150.16   Building Code; amendments
   
150.17   Electrical Codes; amendments
   
150.18   Mechanical Code; amendments
   
150.19   Plumbing Codes; amendments
   
150.20   Fuel Gas Code; amendments
   
150.21   Energy Conservation Code
   
150.22   Fire Code; amendments
   
150.23   Residential Code; amendments
   
150.24   Property Maintenance Code; amendments
   
150.25   Illinois Accessibility Code
   
150.26   International Existing Building Code
Fire Prevention Regulations
   
150.35   Fire limits established
   
150.36   Smoke detectors
   
150.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Building Permit and Plan Review Fees
   
Appendix B:   Developmental Impact Fees
   
Appendix C: Notice of Intent to Sell Application for Village Inspection
   
Appendix D: Agreement to Correct Building Code Violations Form
   
Appendix E: Property Transfer Compliance Form
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter, including the rules and regulations it adopts by reference, is
entitled and may be cited as the “Building Ordinance of Kirkland, Illinois.”
The “letters” and “numbers” designations used to set off or identify its
various parts refer to articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs, rules,
regulations or other division as the text or arrangement may indicate.
Reference to any one of these parts may be such a designation alone.
(1983 Code, § 8-1-1) (Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.02 PERMITS AND SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is hereby required that a permit be obtained in advance, and all
other requirements of this chapter be complied with, whenever a building or
structure, or parts or appurtenances thereof, is erected, installed, altered,
converted, remodeled, structurally repaired, moved or changed.
   (B)   All building and structures, and parts and appurtenances thereof, both
existing and hereafter erected, or installed, shall be so maintained that the
occupants and users thereof, as well as the public, are reasonably safe from
the hazards of fire, explosion, collapse, contagion and spread of infectious
disease. If found not so maintained, the necessary corrective work, repair,
replacement or removal may be ordered by the Building Officer to cause the
premises to conform with this chapter.
(1983 Code, § 8-1-5) (Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.03 BUILDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Office of Building Officer is hereby created in which is vested
the power and duty to administer and enforce all the provisions of this chapter
and such related regulations as are assigned to that office by the Board of
Trustees who fills this role.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall appoint as Building Officer a person who
is qualified by professional or practical, training and experience to conduct
the affairs and carry out the duties of that office.
   (C)   Duties and authority shall include the following:
      (1)   Issue building permits and administer the building regulations of
the village and other applicable ordinances and state laws;
      (2)   Hire such assistants as authorized by the Board of Trustees;
      (3)   Keep systematic records, including permit applications, survey
plats and building plot plans. Those plans for buildings which may be useful
for future periodic inspections may be kept;
      (4)   Collect all fees;
      (5)   Make inspections, and for that purpose may enter buildings at
reasonable hours, structures and premises; and
      (6)   Issue a written stop work order when he or she finds work being
done contrary to a building permit, contrary to this chapter or that a permit
was issued based upon a false statement or misrepresentation in the
application.
(1983 Code, § 8-1-6) (Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.04 LIABILITY OF BUILDING OFFICER.
   The Building Officer or any employee charged with the enforcement of this
code, acting in good faith and without malice for the municipality in the
discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself
liable personally and he or she is hereby relieved from all personal liability
for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or by reason of any act required or omission in the discharge of his
or her duties. Any suit brought against the Building Officer or employee,
because of such act or omission performed by him or her in the enforcement of
any provision of this code, shall be defended by the municipality.
(1983 Code, § 8-1-7) (Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.05 REGULATIONS FOR ADMINISTRATION OF BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   The administration of this chapter shall be in accordance with the following
regulations:
   (A)   Application for a permit.
      (1)   Building permit application, signed by owner or authorized agent,
shall be on forms provided by Building Officer;
      (2)   Fee payment shall accompany application in accordance with a
separate fee ordinance;
      (3)   Permit may be amended during course of work with written approval
of Building Officer; and
      (4)   Permit shall expire upon the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
   (B)   Information to accompany and be a part of application.
      (1)   Legal description of the property;
      (2)   Three copies of a plot plan, in the manner of a spotted survey,
showing proposed building location, existing buildings, structures and
underground facilities. Survey may be waived by the Building Officer.
      (3)   Three copies of construction plans including wiring and plumbing
systems, specifications and tests to show compliance with regulations. Scale of
plans not less than one-eighth inch to one foot. Plans may be waived for minor
alterations not involving structural changes and for residential accessory
buildings not over 500 square feet in area, if sufficiently described in
application.
   (C)   Action on application and plans.
      (1)   Shall be denied, approved or conditionally approved, within ten
business days by or under direction of the Building Officer. Failure to
approve, or conditionally approve, within ten days, shall be tantamount to
denial;
      (2)   If the application conforms to requirements of the building
regulations and other applicable ordinances and state laws, a permit shall be
issued in writing to proceed with the work, and one set of plans and
specifications, endorsed by Building Officer, returned and kept on the job at
all times;
      (3)   If a permit is denied, reasons shall be given in writing upon
request; and
      (4)   Permit furnished is to remain conspicuously posted on premises near
road entrance during the course of work.
   (D)   Action after permit is issued.
      (1)   Permit expires if project is not commenced within six months of
date of issuance. Project must be completed within two years of date of
issuance unless extended. A new permit will be required if construction is not
completed within 30 months after issuance.
      (2)   A certificate of occupancy must be secured before a building is
permanently occupied. The certificate shall be issued by the Building Officer
when an inspection following completion of work shows that all construction is
in compliance with these regulations and applicable ordinances and state laws.
      (3)   Temporary occupancy permit may be issued for a building, or portion
thereof, if it is found that the condition of the building and the lighting,
heating, water supply, sewage disposal, life safety systems, the means of
egress system and other sanitary facilities available to the occupant provide a
reasonable degree of safety. A new temporary occupancy permit shall be required
if a certificate of occupancy is not issued within 60 days thereafter.
   (E)   Nonconforming building or structures.
      (1)   NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE shall be defined as an existing
building or structure or part or appurtenance thereof, not in conformance with
these building regulations.
      (2)   Work limited to necessary repairs only, unless building, or part,
is made to conform with the requirements of this chapter.
(1983 Code, § 8-1-8) (Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.06 COMPLIANCE WITH FEE SCHEDULE; DISTRIBUTION OF FEES.
   (A)   (1)   In the event that any building is undertaken without compliance
with the above referenced fee schedule, then and in that event, the responsible
owner or contractor, or both, shall be liable for a fee in double of the fees
set forth in
Appendix A to this chapter.
      (2)   In the event that any building is undertaken without compliance
with the above referenced fee schedule after 30 days when notified of
noncompliance, then and in that event, the responsible owner or contractor, or
both, shall be liable for a fine as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code. Each day that a violation occurs shall be
deemed a separate offense. In addition, a permit fee in double of the fees set
forth in
Appendix A shall be paid.
      (3)   In the event that continued noncompliance necessitates litigation,
the responsible owner or contractor, or both, shall be liable as set forth in
Chapter 10, Appendix A of this code.
   (B)   The village shall retain a percentage of the permit fees as stated in
the agreement between the Village of Kirkland and ICCI.
   (C)   As condition of the issuance of a building permit, the owner or
developer shall pay the development impact fee in the amounts set forth in
Appendix B.
(Ord. 07-10, passed 8-6-2007; Ord. 15-07, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. 2019-11,
passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.07 DUTY TO NOTIFY VILLAGE CLERK OF PROPERTY FOR SALE OR RENT.
   (A)   (1)    The term COMMERCIAL PROPERTY, as used in this subchapter, is
defined to mean real property, buildings and any and all rental units situated
therein within the village and used to conduct, transact or carry on commerce,
trade or business with the general public or used in connection with the
conducting, transacting or carrying on of commerce, trade or business with the
general public.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hereafter occupy, by
purchase, rental, lease or otherwise, or for any owner or agent thereof, to
permit the occupation of any commercial property, or addition thereto, or part
thereof, for any purpose until a Certificate of Compliance has been issued by
the Building Officer.
      (3)   Said certificate is required for each and every separate occupancy
and in the case of rental or lease, said certificate is required for each new
tenant.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false
statement in the notice of intent to sell or rent commercial property.
   (B)   (1)   All owners, agents, brokers or any individual or legal entity
having ownership or control of any residential property which is offered for
sale or rental within the village must notify the Village Building Department
within five days after the first real estate listing agreement is executed or
within five days after public notification of an intent to sell or rent is made
or published, whichever shall occur first.
      (2)   The notification shall be in writing on a form made available at
the office of the Building Department.
   (C)   No Certificate of Compliance shall be issued unless each violation of
any building code or regulation of the "Building Ordinance of Kirkland,
Illinois," as set forth in the inspection report of the Building Officer, is
corrected.
   (D)   A Certificate of Compliance is a condition precedent in order to
receive village water or sewer services.
(Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.08 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No residential property shall be sold unless the owner shall furnish
the buyer with a Certificate of Occupancy based on inspection of the property
five days prior to the sale of the property.
   (B)   No residential property shall be rented unless the lessor shall
furnish the tenant with a Certificate of Occupancy based on an inspection of
such property 30 days prior to tenancy.
   (C)   No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless each violation of
any building code or regulation of the "Building Ordinance of Kirkland,
Illinois," as set forth in the inspection report of the Building Officer, is
corrected.
   (D)   A Certificate of Occupancy is a condition precedent to receiving
village water or sewer services.
   (E)   All Certificates of Occupancy issued pursuant to an inspection under
this section shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy.
(Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.09 MAKING FALSE STATEMENT IN NOTICE OF INTENT UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement in
the notice of intent to sell or rent residential property.
(Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.15 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Certain documents, one set of each of the codes adopted of the
International Code Council (ICC) International Codes and the National
Electrical Code (NFPA 70) and three copies of the Illinois Plumbing Code, shall
be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter or in the codes hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or
existing, under any act or ordinance repealed by this subchapter, nor shall any
just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by
this subchapter.
(Ord. 07-13, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.16 BUILDING CODE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   International Building Code. The International Building Code, 2018
edition, including Appendix C, E, G, H, I, J and N, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code
of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, for the control of
building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International
Building Code on file in the office of the Village of Kirkland, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
subchapter, with the specific revisions otherwise noted in division (B) of this
section.
   (B)   Amendments. The following sections of the International Building Code,
2006 edition, are hereby revised and amended in words and figures as follows:
      a.   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Building Code of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”
      b.   Section 101.4.8 Electrical. The provisions of the National
Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems,
including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures,
fittings and appurtenances thereto.
      c.   Section 101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the Illinois State
Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repair and
replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures,
fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and
all aspects of a medical gas system.
      d.   Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit
requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any
work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or
any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be
required for the following:
            Building:
               1.   Oil derricks.
               2.   Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1,219 mm) in
height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.
               3.   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity
does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or
width does not exceed 2:1.
               4.   Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm)
above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part
of an accessible route and not in the parkway area.
               5.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter
tops, and similar finish work.
               6.   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets
and scenery.
               7.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-
3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep or are inflatable of any
depth (with or without electrical filters), do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925
L) and are installed entirely above ground.
               8.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or
agricultural purposes, not including service systems.
               9.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached
one- and two-family dwellings.
               10.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not
project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not
require additional support of Group R-3 and U occupancies.
               11.   Nonfixed and moveable fixtures, cases, racks, counters,
and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1,753 mm) in height.
               Rest of section remains the same.
      e.   Section 109.2 Schedule of Permit Fees.  Insert at the end of the
paragraph: “This schedule of Building Permit Fees is stated in Appendix A of
this chapter, as it may be amended from time to time.”
      f.   Section 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who
commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or
plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to 100
percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee.
         In the event that any building is undertaken without compliance with
the above-referenced fee schedule after 30 days when notified of noncompliance,
then and in that event, the responsible owner, contractor, or both, shall
liable for a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and 100 percent of the usual permit fee
in addition to the required permit fee. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
      g.   Section 109.6 Refunds.  The code official shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
         1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously
paid or collected.
         2.   Not more than 90 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has
been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
         3.   No part of the plan review fee paid shall be refunded when the
plan review has been completed and the application for permit is withdrawn.
         The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 days after the date of fee payment.
      h.   Section 113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to
the application and interpretation of this code, the Village Board of Trustees
shall be the board of appeals. Therefore, for the purposes of this code, the
board of appeals shall be construed to mean the Village Board of Trustees. The
Building Official shall be an ex officio member of the board, but shall have no
vote on any matter before the board. When a quorum is present, the board shall
modify, reverse or uphold the decision of the code official by a concurring
vote of the majority of members present at the meeting.
         The board of appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its
business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the
appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official. The Building Official
shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board.
      i.   Section 113.3 Qualifications.  Deleted in its entirety.
      j.   Section 114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a
provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building
Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code, shall be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
         Section 114.4.1 Court costs and legal fees. In the event noncompliance
with this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a provision of
this code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred by the village.
      k.   Section 115.3 Unlawful continuance.  Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
         Section 115.3.1 Court costs and legal fees. In the event noncompliance
with this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a provision of
this code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred by the village.
      l.   Section 903.4 Sprinkler system monitoring and alarms.  All valves
controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks,
water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures and water-flow switches
on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised.
         Exception: Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family
dwellings. Delete all other exceptions.
      m.   Section 904.3.5 Monitoring. All automatic fire-extinguishing systems
in every use group shall be monitored with an approved fire alarm system with
supervision in accordance with NFPA 72 and Section 907.6.6.
      mm.   Section 1101.1. When there is a conflict between the requirements
of this code and the Illinois Accessibility Code the stricter of the two
requirements shall be applied.
      n.   Section 1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas.  To establish
flood hazard areas, the governing body shall adopt a flood hazard map and
supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of
special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
in an engineering report entitled: “The Flood Insurance Study for Incorporated
and Unincorporated DeKalb County,” published September 1, 2000, as amended or
revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any
revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section.
   It is recommended to follow the year of the editions listed in the code
unless the Fire Department wants most current edition.
(Ord. 07-13, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.17 ELECTRICAL CODES; AMENDMENTS.
   National Electrical Code 2017 (NFPA 70), published by the National Fire
Protection Association, are hereby adopted as the Electrical Codes of the
Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
electrical systems in the village, and providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of such National Electrical Code 2005 (NFPA 70), with the
specific revisions otherwise noted in division (B) of this section, on file in
the office of the village, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this subchapter.
(Ord. 07-13, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.18 MECHANICAL CODE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   International Mechanical Code. The International Mechanical Code, 2018
edition, including Appendix A, published by the International Code Council,
Inc., is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the Village of Kirkland,
DeKalb County, Illinois, for regulating the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the
village, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Mechanical Code on file in the office
of the village, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this subchapter, with the specific revisions otherwise noted
in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Amendments. The following sections of the International Mechanical
Code, 2006 edition, are hereby revised, amended or added in words and figures
as follows:
      a.   Section 101.1 Title.  These regulations shall be known as the
Mechanical Code of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, and shall
be cited as such and will be referred to hereinafter as “this code.”
      b.   Section 106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be
as stated in Appendix A of this chapter, as may be amended from time to time.
      c.   Section 106.5.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
         1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously
paid or collected.
         2.   Not more than 90 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has
been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
         3.   No part of the plan review fee paid shall be refunded when the
plan review has been completed and the application for permit is withdrawn.
         The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 days after the date of fee payment.
      d.   Section 108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code
official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code, shall be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
         Section 108.4.1 Court costs and legal fees. In the event noncompliance
with this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a provision of
this code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred by the village.
      e.   Section 108.5 Stop work orders. Last sentence to read: Any person
who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove
the violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less than
seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day unauthorized work continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
         Section 108.5.1 Court costs and legal fees. In the event noncompliance
with this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a provision of
this code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred by the village.
      f.   Section 109.1 Application for appeal. A person shall have the right
to appeal a decision of the code official to the Village Board of Trustees.
Therefore, for the purposes of this code, the board of appeals shall be
construed to mean the Village Board of Trustees. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code, or the rules
legally adopted thereunder, have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of
construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained
from the code official within 20 days after the notice was served.
      g.   Section 109.2 Membership of board. The board of appeals shall be the
Village Board of Trustees.
      h.   Section 109.2.1 Qualifications. Deleted in its entirety.
      i.   Section 109.2.2 Alternate members. Deleted in its entirety.
      j.   Section 109.2.3 Chairman.  Deleted in its entirety.
      k.   Section 109.2.5 Secretary. Deleted in its entirety.
      l.   Section 109.2.6 Compensation for members. Deleted in its entirety.
      m.   Section 109.5 Postponed hearing. When a quorum is not present to
hear an appeal, the matter shall be continued to another date convenient to all
parties.
      n.   Section 109.6 Board decision. The board shall modify, reverse, or
uphold the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority
of members present at the meeting.
(Ord. 07-13, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.19 PLUMBING CODES; AMENDMENTS.
   The Illinois State Plumbing Code, latest edition, published by the Illinois
Department of Public Health, are hereby adopted as the Plumbing Codes of the
Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing
systems in the village, and providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms of the Illinois State Plumbing Code, latest edition, on file in the
office of the village, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this subchapter with the specific revisions otherwise
noted.
(Ord. 07-13, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.20 FUEL GAS CODE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   International Fuel Gas Code. The International Fuel Gas Code, 2006
edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted
as the Fuel Gas Code of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, for
providing the minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and
public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction,
installation, quality of materials, location, operation, and maintenance or use
of fuel gas systems, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms of the International Fuel Gas Code on file in the office of the
village, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this subchapter, with the specific revisions otherwise noted in division
(B) of this section.
   (B)   Amendments. The following sections of the International Fuel Gas Code,
2006 edition, are hereby revised, amended, or added in words and figures as
follow:
      a.   Section 101.1 Title.  These regulations shall be known as the Fuel
Gas Code of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, and shall be
cited as such and will be referred to hereinafter as “this code.”
      b.   Section 106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for work shall be as stated
in the Kirkland Ordinance No. 07-10, as may be amended from time to time.
      c.   Section 106.5.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
         1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously
paid or collected.
         2.   Not more than 90 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has
been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
         3.   No part of the plan review fee paid shall be refunded when the
plan review has been completed and the application for permit is withdrawn.
         The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 days after the date of fee payment.
      d.   Section 108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   Section 108.4.1 Court costs and legal fees.  In the event noncompliance with
this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a provision of this
code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by
the village.
      e.   Section 108.5 Stop work orders. Change last sentence to read: Any
person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with
a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day work continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
         Section 108.5.1 Court costs and legal fees.  In the event
noncompliance with this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a
provision of this code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable
attorney’s fees incurred by the village.
      f.   Section 109.1 Application for appeal.  A person shall have the right
to appeal a decision of the code official to the Village Board of Trustees.
Therefore, for the purposes of this code, the board of appeals shall be
construed to mean the Village Board of Trustees. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction
is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the code
official within 20 days after the notice was served.
      g.   Section 109.2 Membership of board.  The board of appeals shall be
the Village Board of Trustees.
      h.   Section 109.2.1 Qualifications. Deleted in its entirety.
      i.   Section 109.2.2 Alternate members. Deleted in its entirety.
      j.   Section 109.2.3 Chairman. Deleted in its entirety.
      k.   Section 109.2.5 Secretary. Deleted in its entirety.
      l.   Section 109.2.6 Compensation for members. Deleted in its entirety.
      m.   Section 109.5 Postponed hearing.  When a quorum is not present to
hear an appeal, the matter shall be continued to another date convenient to all
parties.
      n.   Section 109.6 Board decision.  The board shall reverse, modify, or
uphold the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority
of members present at the meeting.
(Ord. 07-13, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.21 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   International Energy Conservation Code. The edition of the
International Energy Conservation Code, referenced in the State of Illinois
Energy Conservation Act, published by the International Code Council, Inc., is
hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the village for regulating
and governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy
efficient mechanical, lighting, and power systems as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of the
International Energy Conservation Code on file in the office of the village are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
subchapter, with the specific revisions otherwise noted in division (B) of this
section.
   (B)   Amendments. The following section of the International Energy
Conservation Code, 2015 edition, is hereby revised and amended in words and
figures as follows:
      a.   Section 101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Energy
Conservation Code of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, and
shall be cited as such and will be referred to hereinafter as “this code.”
(Ord. 07-13, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.22 FIRE CODE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   International Fire Code. The International Fire Code, 2018 edition,
including Appendix B, C, D, E, F, G and H, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the Village of
Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, for regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from
the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings
and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of the International Fire Code on file in the office of
the village, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this subchapter, with the specific revisions otherwise noted
in divisions (B) and (C) of this section.
   (B)   Amendments.  The following sections of the International Fire Code,
2006 edition, are hereby revised, amended, or added in words and figures as
follow:
      a.   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire
Code of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, and shall be cited as
such and shall hereinafter be referred to as “this code.”
      b.   Section 108.1 Board of appeals established. In order to hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the code official
relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the Village Board
of Trustees shall be the board of appeals. Therefore, for the purposes of this
code, the board of appeals shall be construed to mean the Village Board of
Trustees. The code official shall be an ex officio member of the board but
shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall adopt rules
of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and
findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the code
official.
      c.   Section 108.3 Qualifications. Delete in its entirety.
      d.   Section 109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to a
fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
         Section 109.3.1 Court costs and legal fees. In the event noncompliance
with this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a provision of
this code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred by the village.
      e.   Section 111.4. Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day unauthorized work
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
         Section 111.4.1 Court costs and legal fees. In the event noncompliance
with this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a provision of
this code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred by the village.
      f.   Section 903.4 Sprinkler system monitoring and alarms. All valves
controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks,
water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures and water-flow switches
on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised.
         Exception: Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family
dwellings. Delete all other exceptions.
      g.   Section 904.3.5 Monitoring.  All automatic fire-extinguishing
systems in every use groups shall be monitored with an approved fire alarm
system with supervision in accordance with NFPA 72 and Section 907.6.6.
   Note R = The edition of the standard listed in the code should be used
unless the Fire Department wants the most current edition.
   (C)   Limits. The limits referred to in certain sections of the
International Fire Code, 2018 edition, are hereby established as follow:
      a.   Section 5906.2.1 Location. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in
stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited in all zoning
districts except Industrial.
      b.   Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are
prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of
buildings is prohibited in all zoning districts except Industrial.
      c.   Section 6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within
all zoning districts except Industrial the storage of liquified petroleum gas
is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the
aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of
2,000 gallons (7,570 L). Exception remains the same.
(Ord. 07-13, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.23 RESIDENTIAL CODE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)    International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. The
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 edition,
including Appendix A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, K, M, N, and Q as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the
Residential Code of the village for regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal,
demolition, addition to, use or maintenance of detached one- and two-family
dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three
stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
International Residential Code on file in the office of the village are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
subchapter, with the specific revisions otherwise noted in division (B) of this
section.
   (B)   Amendments. The following sections of the International Residential
Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 edition, are hereby revised,
amended, or added in words and figures as follow:
      a.   Section R101.1 Title.  These provisions shall be known as the
Residential Code of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, and shall
be cited as such and will be referred to hereinafter as “this code.”
      b.   Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit.  
         Building: Delete numbers 1 and 2, then renumber to read:
               1.   Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1,219 mm) in
height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge.
               2.   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity
does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or
width does not exceed 2:1.
               3.   Service sidewalks, patio slabs, and that portion of the
driveway on private property.
               4.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter
tops, and similar finish work.
               5.   Prefabricated swimming pools that have a maximum water
depth of 24 inches (610 mm) and/or inflatable, temporary swimming pools of any
water depth.
               6.   Swings and other playground equipment.
               7.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not
project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not
require additional support.
         Rest of section remains the same.
      c.   Section R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures,
electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a
permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with
Appendix A of this chapter, as may be amended from time to time.
      d.   Section R108.2.1 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person
who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject
to 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee.
         In the event that any building is undertaken without compliance with
the above-referenced fee schedule after 30 days when notified of noncompliance,
then and in that event, the responsible owner, contractor, or both, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and 100 percent of the usual permit fee
in addition to the required permit fee. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
      e.   Section 108.5 Refunds. The Building Official shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
         1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously
paid or collected.
         2.   Not more than 90 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has
been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
         3.   No part of the plan review fee paid shall be refunded when the
plan review has been completed and the application for permit is withdrawn.
         The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 days after the date of fee payment.
      f.   Section R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to
the application and interpretation of this code, the Village Board of Trustees
shall be the board of appeals. Therefore, for the purposes of this code, the
board of appeals shall be construed to mean the Village Board of Trustees. The
Building Official shall be an ex officio member of the board, but shall have no
vote on any matter before the Board. The board of appeals shall adopt rules of
procedure for conducting its business. When a quorum is present, the board
shall uphold, modify, or reverse the decision of the code official by a
concurring vote of the majority of members present at the meeting; and, shall
render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate
copy to the Building Official.
      g.   Section R112.3 Qualifications. Deleted in its entirety.
      h.   Section R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a
provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building
Official, or a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code,
shall be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
         Section R113.4.1 Court costs and legal fees. In the event
noncompliance with this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a
provision of this code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable
attorney’s fees incurred by the village.
      i.   Section R114.2 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue
any work in or about the structures after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less than
seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day unauthorized work continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
         Section R114.2.1 Court costs and legal fees. In the event
noncompliance with this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a
provision of this code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable
attorney’s fees incurred by the village.
      j.   Table R301.2(1)  Insert the following data into table:
         For Ground Snow Load:
         For Wind Speed: 115
         Topographical Effects: Yes
         Special Wind Region: No
         For Seismic Design Category: A
         For Weathering: Severe
         For Frost Line Depth: 42
         For Termite: Moderate to Heavy
         For Winter Design Temperature: -4° F
         For Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: Yes
         For Flood Hazards:
         Date of the currently effective FIRM and FBFM: Latest published
edition.
         For Air Freezing Index: 2000
         For Mean Annual Temperature: 47° F
         Manual J Design
         Elevation - 758 Latitude - 42 Winter heating - 1 Summer cooling - 89
Altitude correction - 98
         Indoor design temp - 72 Design temperature cooling - 75 Heating
temperature difference 76
         Cooling temperature difference - 14 Wind velocity heating - 15 Wind
velocity cooling - 7.5
         Coincident wet bulb 74 Daily range - M Winter humidity 40 Summer
humidity
      k.   Section R311.7.8.5 Handrails. Type I handrails shall be provided on
at least one side of each continuous run of treads or flight with three or more
risers.
      l.   Section P2603.6.1. Sewer Depth.  Building sewers that connect to a
private sewage disposal system shall be a minimum of 42 inches below finished
grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a
minimum of 42 inches below grade.
      m.   Section P3103.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend
through a roof shall be terminated above the roof in accordance with the
Illinois State Plumbing Code, latest edition, except where a roof is to be used
for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run
at least 7 feet (2,134 mm) above the roof.
   It is the intent to delete the Chapters on Plumbing and only use the
Illinois Plumbing Code.
      AP101 Fire sprinklers.  An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall
be installed in new multiple single (one-) family dwellings (townhomes) and
two-family (duplex) dwellings in accordance with NFPA 13D. This is now Section
R313.
(Ord. 07-13, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.24 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   International Property Maintenance Code. The International Property
Maintenance Code, 2018 edition, as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Village
of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such
existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Property
Maintenance Code, on file in the office of the village are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subchapter, with
the specific revisions otherwise noted in division (B) of this section, is
hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Amendments. The following sections of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2018 edition, are hereby revised, amended, or added in words
and figures as follow:
      a.   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois,
and shall be cited as such and will be hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
      b.   Section 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed
by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be
in accordance with
Appendix A of this chapter, as may be amended from time to time.
      c.   Section 106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state
and local laws; and, shall be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day
a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
         Section 106.4.1 Court costs and legal fees. In the event noncompliance
with this code necessitates litigation, any person who violates a provision of
this code shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred by the village.
      d.   Section 111.2 Membership of board.  The board of appeals shall be
the Village Board of Trustees. Therefore, for the purposes of this code, the
board of appeals shall be construed to mean the Village Board of Trustees. The
code official shall be an ex-officio member but shall have no vote on any
matter before the Board.
      e.   Section 111.2.1 Alternate members. Deleted in its entirety.
      f.   Section 111.2.2 Chairman. Deleted in its entirety.
      g.   Section 111.2.4 Secretary. Deleted in its entirety.
      h.   Section 111.2.5 Compensation of members. Deleted in its entirety.
      i.   Section 111.5 Postponed hearing. When a quorum is not present to
hear an appeal, the matter shall be continued to another date convenient to all
parties.
      j.   Section 111.6 Board decision.  The board shall modify, reverse, or
uphold the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of the
majority of members present at the meeting.
      k.   Section 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches (8").
(Rest of section remains the same.)
      l.   Section 304.14 Insect screens. During the period from March 31 to
October 31, every door, window and other opening required for ventilation of
habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas where products to
be included or utilized for human consumption... (Rest of paragraph remains the
same.)
      m.   Section 602.3 Heat supply.  “...to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to April 30 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms.” (Rest of section remains the same.)
      n.   Section 602.4 Occupiable spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall
be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to April 30 to maintain
a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied. (No changes to Exceptions.)
(Ord. 07-13, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.25 ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE.
   (A)   Illinois Accessibility Code. The Illinois Accessibility Code, 1997,
published by the State of Illinois, be and is hereby adopted as the
Accessibility Code of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, for the
control of the accessibility provisions for building and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations and provisions and terms of the
Illinois Accessibility Code on file in the office of the Village of Kirkland
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this subchapter, with the specific revisions otherwise noted in division (B) of
this section.
   (B)   Amendments. The following sections of the Illinois Accessibility Code,
1997 edition, are hereby revised and amended in words and figures as follows:
      a.   Any conflict between this code and the International Code will
result in the application of the stricter of the requirements.
(Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.26 INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   International Existing Building Code. The International Existing
Building Code, 2018 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
be and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the Village of
Kirkland, DeKalb County, Illinois, for the control of existing buildings and
structures as herein provided: and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the International Existing Building Code on
file in the office of the Village of Kirkland are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this subchapter, with the
specific revisions otherwise noted in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Amendments. The following sections of the International Existing
Building Code, 2018 edition, are hereby revised and amended in words and
figures as follows:
      a.   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
Building Code of the Village of Kirkland, DeKalb County Illinois, hereinafter
referred to as "this code."
      b.   Section 1301.5.4. The requirements for fire sprinkler systems in
Chapter 9 of the Building Code will be enforced regardless of the outcome of
this evaluation process.
(Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
§ 150.35 FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.
   The fire limits of the village are hereby established as follows:
   The fire limits shall include all structures within the General Commercial
District as indicated on the Zoning Map and all structures within 200 feet of
the boundaries of the General Commercial District.
(1983 Code, § 8-1-3) (Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.36 SMOKE DETECTORS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      APARTMENT. A building which is divided into two or more residential
units, each with its own separate living area.
      OWNERS.  As applied to any building, this term includes but shall not be
limited to any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or
lessee of the whole or part of such building.
      ROOMING HOUSE. A building which is divided into two or more residential
units, consisting of a room or rooms, and with additional common areas for
eating and/or bathroom facilities.
(1983 Code, § 8-3-1)
   (B)   Requirements for apartments and rooming houses. The owners of
apartments and rooming houses shall do or cause to be done the following:
      (1)   Apartments.
         (a)   Detector/detectors shall be located according to the
manufacturer’s specifications, and shall also comply with divisions (B)(1)(b),
(c) and (d) as listed below.
         (b)   Detector/detectors shall be located in each living unit.
         (c)   Detector/detectors shall be located between the bedroom areas
and the rest of the living unit.
         (d)   1.   Detector/detectors shall be located in all hallways and
corridors. In the event a hallway or corridor is divided by a fire door or
smoke door, an additional detector shall be located in those confines.
            2.   Spacing of detector/detectors shall be determined by the
manufacturer’s specifications.
         (e)   All detector/detectors shall meet Underwriters Laboratories’
Standard Number 217, effective July 5, 1977, as amended.
         (f)   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to structures
which have a fully automated and sufficient sprinkler or smoke and heat system
that has been annually inspected and approved by the Village Fire Department.
         (g)   The owner/owners or their designated agent/agents shall be
responsible for maintaining all equipment required by this chapter and any
other applicable chapters of the village code.
         (h)   Corridors and hallways not defined as interior in this chapter
shall not require the installation of detector/detectors.
      (2)   Rooming houses.
         (a)   Detector/detectors shall be located according to the
manufacturer’s specifications, and shall also comply with divisions (B)(2)(b),
(c) and (d) as listed below.
         (b)   One smoke detector shall be located in each sleeping room, and
in lounges and study rooms if located on the same floor as the sleeping rooms.
         (c)   A detector shall be located at the top of each stairway.
         (d)   1.   Detector/detectors shall be located in all hallways and
corridors. In the event a hallway or corridor is divided by a fire door or
smoke door, an additional detector shall be located in those confines.
            2.   Spacing of detector/detectors shall be determined by the
manufacturer’s specifications.
         (e)   All detector/detectors shall meet Underwriters Laboratories’
Standard Number 217, effective July 5, 1977, as amended.
         (f)   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to structures
which have a fully automated and sufficient sprinkler or smoke and heat system
that has been annually inspected and approved by the Village Fire Department.
         (g)   The owner/owners or their designated agent/agents shall be
responsible for maintaining all equipment required by this chapter and any
other applicable chapters of the village code.
   (C)   Compliance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/owners to
provide written certification to the Code Enforcement Department that their
structure/structures are in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1983 Code, § 8-3-2) (Ord. 86-3, passed - -; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of these
building regulations, or who refuses to remedy a hazard of fire, explosion,
collapse, contagion or spread of infectious disease found to exist and duly
ordered eliminated, shall be guilty of a petty offense and subject to a fine of
not less than $10 nor more than $750. Each day such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   A person licensed or registered by the state, or a subdivision
thereof, to do work regulated by this chapter or to render professional
architectural or engineering service in connection therewith, who violates the
law or ordinance under which licensed or registered, or who violated this
chapter while carrying out such work or rendering service, in connection
therewith shall be reported by the building officer to the licensing authority.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
150.07 et seq. of this chapter, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued
pursuant to that subchapter, shall be subject to the penalties provided herein,
in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for.
   (D)   (1)   A complaint setting forth more than one violation of the
provisions of §§
150.07 et seq. of this chapter may result in the imposition of separate fines
of not less than $100, and not more than $750, for each separate violation.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of §§
150.07 et seq. of this chapter, or who refuses to remedy a violation found to
exist and reported on the Certificate of Compliance within the time therein
specified, shall be fined not less than $200, nor more than $750, for each
offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation of that subchapter occurs or continues.
      (3)   Each day a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1983 Code, § 8-1-10) (Ord. 534, passed 5-15-1974; Ord. 12-03, passed 3-5-2012;
Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
APPENDIX A: BUILDING PERMIT AND PLAN REVIEW FEES
   (A)   Building permit fees.
      (1)   One-Family, Two-family, and Multiple Single-Family (Townhouses)
Residential use groups:
   New construction (per unit for two-
A. family and multiple single-family      $700.00 plus $0.20 per square foot
   dwellings)
B. Additions (per unit for two-family and $350.00 plus $0.15 per square foot
   multiple single-family dwellings)
C. Remodeling (per unit)                  $100.00 plus $0.10 per square foot
D. Detached garage up to 750 square feet  $150.00
   with electrical
   Detached garages over 750 square feet  $300.00
   with electrical
E. Demolition                             $100.00
F. In-ground swimming pools               $350.00
G. Permanent above-ground swimming pools  $150.00
   with electric
H. Temporary to start construction        10% of full permit fee, not to be
                                          applied to the full permit fee
   Conditional certificate of occupancy
I. when requested by the builder when     $200.00 (non-refundable)
   circumstances do not warrant
J. Moving of existing one- or two-family  $650.00
   structure
 
      (2)   Multiple-Family Residential use groups.
A. New construction                      $400.00 per unit plus $0.20 per square
                                         foot for total structure floor area
B. Additions                             $325.00 per unit plus $0.20 per square
                                         foot for total addition floor area
                                         $200.00 (per unit or area remodeled)
C. Remodeling                            plus $0.10 per square foot for
                                         remodeled floor area
   Demolition (of entire structure roof  25% of new construction fee (above);
D. to foundation; not a routine part of  minimum fee of $100.00
   remodel)
E. Detached garage up to 750 square feet $150.00
   with electrical
   Detached garages over 750 square feet $300.00
   with electrical
F. In-ground swimming pool               $350.00 plus $0.20 per square foot
G. Temporary to start construction       25% of full permit fee, not to be
                                         applied to the full permit fee
   Conditional certificate of occupancy
H. when requested by the builder when    $50 per unit (non-refundable)
   circumstances do not warrant
I. Moving of existing multiple-family    $650.00
   structure
 
      (3)   All other use groups.
A. New construction                       $850.00 plus $0.25 per square foot
B. Additions                              $700.00 plus $0.25 per square foot
C. Remodeling                             $400.00 plus $0.15 per square foot
   Demolition (of entire or part of       25% of new construction fee (above);
D. structure from roof to foundation; not Minimum fee: $100.00
   a routine part of a remodel)
E. In-ground swimming pools               $350.00 plus $0.20 per square foot
F. Temporary to start construction        25% of full permit fee, not to be
                                          applied to full permit fee
   Conditional certificate of occupancy
G. when requested by the builder when     $200.00 (non-refundable)
   circumstances do not warrant
H. Moving of existing primary structure   $650.00
 
      (4)   Miscellaneous permits (includes plan review fee.)
 
Miscellaneous permits* $100.00
*Examples: Decks, fences, gazebos, reroof of primary structure, residing,
sheds, new plumbing, new electrical and/or electrical service upgrades,
electrical service to detached accessory structure, porches, moving accessory
structures, enlargement of an existing exterior staircase, installation of new
powered roof vents/attic fans/whole-house fans, sprinkler system for one- or
two-family dwelling, and the like.
 
   (B)   Voided permits. In the event a permit holder requests to have a permit
voided after payment and issuance of the permit, the permit holder shall pay
25% of the permit fee and the entirety of any plan review fee assessed when the
permit was issued. This amount shall be withheld from the refund. In the event
a request for permit is voided prior to payment for the permit, the permit
applicant shall pay the entirety of any plan review fee assessed and a $100.00
administrative fee. (For plans approved under a master set of plans, the plan
review fee for the original design model for the relinquished permit shall be
paid, regardless of the number of structures built to that design, along with
the $100.00 administrative fee.)
   (C)   Hourly rate.  
      (1)   Hourly rate: $100.00 per hour or any part thereof, per person for
any meeting, reinspection, or property maintenance related item.
      (2)   Minimum charge: $100.00 for meeting; $200.00 for property
maintenance/per day.
   (D)   Plan review fees. Should any permit application be withdrawn after any
of the following plan reviews has/have been completed, the applicant shall be
responsible for payment of all plan review fees.
      (1)   One- and Two-Family Residential.
         (a)   New construction or additions:
            1.   Ten percent of the building permit fee. For developments
utilizing a master set of buildings plans, this fee shall be assessed to the
first structure built using an approved master plan and the first structure
using each variation of the same approved master plan. Any deviation from the
master plan or its approved variation will require a separate plan review.
            2.   Minimum plan review fee: $125.00/dwelling unit.
         (b)   Remodeling:
            1.   Ten percent of the building permit fee.
            2.   Minimum plan review fee: $50.00/dwelling unit.
         (c)   Demolition: $50.00.
         (d)   In the event a permit application is withdrawn after completion
of the plan review, the applicant shall pay the complete plan review fee.
      (2)   Multiple-Family Residential.
         (a)   New construction:
            1.   Ten percent of the building permit fee. For developments
utilizing a master set of buildings plans, this fee shall be assessed to the
first structure built using an approved master plan and the first structure
using each variation of the same approved master plan. Any deviation from the
master plan or its approved variation will require a separate plan review.
            2.   Minimum plan review fee: $375.00.
         (b)   Additions:
            1.   Twenty percent of the building permit fee:
            2.   Minimum plan review fee: $200.00.
         (c)   Remodeling:
            1.   Thirty percent of the building permit fee;
            2.   Minimum plan review fee: $200.00.
         (d)   Electrical, energy, mechanical, and plumbing plan, each:
            1.   Ten percent of the building permit fee.
            2.   Minimum fee $100.00.
         (e)   Demolition (of entire unit/structure):
            1.   Twenty-five percent of new construction fee, above.
            2.   Minimum plan review fee: $75.00.
         (f)   In the event a permit application is withdrawn after completion
of the plan review, the applicant shall pay the complete plan review fee.
      (3)   All other use groups.
         (a)   Building code (with accessibility code) plan review fees for new
construction. Refer to fire systems for additional fees for fire suppression/
alarm systems.
 
Building Size                 Fee
1 to 60,000 cubic feet        $375.00
60,001 to 80,000 cubic feet   $425.00
80,001 to 100,000 cubic feet  $525.00
100,001 to 150,000 cubic feet $575.00
150,001 to 200,000 cubic feet $675.00
Over 200,000 cubic feet       $675.00 + $6.75 per 10,000 cubic feet over
                              200,000
 
         (b)   Electrical, mechanical, and plumbing plan review fees for new
construction.  
            1.   Each of the three plan reviews is 25% of building code plan
review fee for new construction.
            2.   Minimum plan review fee per type: $95.00.
         (c)   Energy conservation plan review fees.  
            1.   Each review is 25% of building code plan review fee for new
construction.
            2.   Minimum plan review fee: $95.00.
         (d)   Building shell. For any speculative structure with unfinished
tenant areas, the plan review fees are calculated as for new construction,
above.
         (e)   Tenant build-out. Fee calculations are the same as for new
construction for a new tenant area designed for placement in a building shell.
Fees for tenant areas fully-designed and shown with the main building are
included in the review fees for the main building. Minimum fees are as stated
above.
         (f)   Tenant remodels. For reviews for tenant areas in existing areas
to be remodeled, the remodeling fee calculations will apply. Minimum fees are
as stated below.
         (g)   Remodeling plan review.  Fifty percent of the new construction
plan review fees listed above.
            1.   Minimum plan review (all codes): $250.00.
            2.   Minimum plan review for single code remodel: $95.00.
         (h)   Demolition plan review fees. Fire detection/alarm systems and
fire suppression systems are extra fees above the new construction, addition,
or remodel plan review fees.
            1.   Each review is 25% of building code plan review fee for new
construction.
            2.   Minimum plan review fee: $95.00.
      (4)   Fire detection/alarm systems.
         (a)   Fee is $125.00 per 10,000 square feet of floor area.
         (b)   Minimum fee: $125.00.
      (5)   Fire sprinkler system plan review fees.
Number of Sprinklers Scheduled or Calculated
Number of Sprinklers               Scheduled or Calculated
1 to 25                            $75.00
26 to 100                          $250.00
101-200                            $500.00
201-300                            $550.00
301-400                            $600.00
401-500                            $650.00
Over 500                           $700.00
PLUS, for each sprinkler over 500: $0.95/each
 
      (6)   Alternate fire suppression systems.
 
      �Standpipe (No charge with sprinkler $175.00 per standpipe riser
             review)
      �Specialized extinguisher agent (dry $125.00 per 50 pounds agent
             or other chemical agent)
      �Hood and duct cooking extinguisher  $150.00 flat rate per system
             agent
 
      (7)   General information.  
         (a)   Turnaround time for all plan reviews is 15 business days;
however, normally they are done in five to ten business days, depending upon
size of the structure. If special handling is required, such as rush reviews or
a preliminary review, they will be charged at the hourly rate plus the
applicable fee.
         (b)   Second reviews are included—no extra charge.
         (c)   Additional third or more reviews, and when hourly rates are
applicable, are charged at the hourly rate of $100.00/hour.
         (d)   If any plan has to be sent to an outside consultant other than
the inspection firm, the outside consultant’s fee(s) will be charged and that
fee paid directly to the outside consultant.
 
Village of Kirkland - Miscellaneous Project Permit Fees
                   B&F       Number of           Village  Village
Type of B&F Plan   Inspectio Inspectio B&F Total fee Plan fee       Total
project Review fee n fee     ns                  review   Inspectio Village fee
                                                          ns
Village of Kirkland - Miscellaneous Project Permit Fees
                      B&F        Number of         Village    Village    Total
Type of    B&F Plan   Inspectio  Inspectio B&F     fee Plan   fee        Village
project    Review fee n fee      ns        Total   review     Inspectio  fee
                                                              ns
Shed no    $25.00     $35.00     One       $60.00  $35.00     $50.00     $85.00
foundation
Shed with  $25.00     $70.00     Two       $95.00  $35.00     $100.00    $135.00
foundation
Deck       $25.00     $105.00    Three     $130.00 $35.00     $147.00    $182.00
Fence      $25.00     $70.00     Two       $95.00  $35.00     $100.00    $135.00
Reroofing  $25.00     $35.00     One       $60.00  $35.00     $50.00     $85.00
Satellite
dishes     $25.00     $35.00     One       $60.00  $35.00     $50.00     $85.00
(large)
New water            $35.00     One       $35.00            $50.00     $50.00
heater
Above
ground     $25.00     $105.00    Three     $130.00 $35.00     $100.00    $135.00
pool no
deck
Above
ground     $50.00     $140.00    Four      $196.00 $70.00     $200.00    $270.00
pool with
deck
In ground  $172.00    $140.00    Four      $312.00 $240.00    $200.00    $440.00
pool
Patio no   $25.00     $35.00     One       $60.00  $35.00     $50.00     $85.00
steps*
Patio with $25.00     $35.00     One       $60.00  $35.00     $50.00     $85.00
steps**
Brick
patio no   $25.00               None      $25.00  $35.00               $35.00
steps*
                      B&F        Number of         Village    Village    Total
Type of    B&F Plan   Inspectio  Inspectio B&F     fee Plan   fee        Village
project    Review fee n fee      ns        Total   review     Inspectio  fee
                                                              ns
Brick
patio with $25.00     $35.00     One       $60.00  $35.00     $50.00     $85.00
steps**
Electric
service    $25.00     $35.00     One       $60.00  $35.00     $50.00     $85.00
upgrade
Minor
electric
plumbing   $25.00     $35.00     One       $60.00  $35.00     $50.00     $85.00
mechanic
al upgrade
or repair
Misc.      $25.00 per $35.00 per Based on  Based   $35.00 per $50.00 per Based
project    discipline discipline project   on      discipline discipline on
not shown                                  project                       project
 
The number of inspection is the basic number if there are other inspection
generated because of the project these are charged at the B&F rate of $35.00
and the village rate of $50.00.
   *   A cement patio, which is less than       square feet (15 x 15), does not
need a permit if it has no steps and is not part of a larger project.
   **   A cement and brick patio larger than        square feet with steps will
require one inspection unless there is a special situation of handrail is
required, then two inspections are required.
Village of Kirkland - Fee Schedule
Village of Kirkland - Fee Schedule
One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses (per unit)
(plan review and inspections) square footage includes all   B & F
stories, habitable attic, basements and attached garages
Up to 3,200 square     $1,778.00                          $1,270.00
feet
Over 3,200 square      0.277 per sq. ft.                  0.198 per sq. ft.
feet
Additions/alterations  0.277 per sq. ft.      Min. $200.00 0.198 per sq. ft.
Zoning                 $105.00                            $75.00 per lot
Demolition             $224.00                            $160.00
Temporary or final CO  $224.00                            $160.00
Specialty construction or sequencing fee based on project
Master plans or        $210.00 per lot                    $150.00 per lot
models
Deviation from master  $210.00 per lot                    $150.00 per lot
plan
Commercial, industrial, multiple family (plan review)
Building includes                                         
accessibility
Up to 60,000 cubic     $486.85                            $347.75
feet
60,001 to 80,000       $599.20                            $428.00
cubic feet
80,000 to 100,000      $766.78                            $547.70
cubic feet
100,000 to 150,000     $876.33                            $625.95
cubic feet
150,001 to 200,000     $996.17                            $711.55
cubic feet
Over 200,000 cubic     1,1732.00 + 11.2 per               $838.00 = $8.00 per
feet                    10,000 cubic feet                   10,000 cubic feet
Mechanical             25% of the building                25% of the building
                        fee                                 fee
Electric               50% of the building                50% of the building
                        fee                                 fee
Plumbing               25% of the building                25% of the building
                        fee                                 fee
Fire code              70% of building fee                50% of building fee
NFPA 101 review        35% of building review             25% of bldg. (min.
                                                            $300)
HPM, high hazard,      2.1 x base fee                     1.5 x base fee
processing piping
Footing and            35% of building fee                25% of bldg. (min.
foundation                                                  $300)
Shell                  Same as above                       
Tenant finish not      Fees above                          
with base building
Priority express                                         2.5 x base fee
review
Elevator               $420.00 per bank                   $300.00 per bank
Specialty projects                                        
Spray booths           $490.00                            $350.00
Hood and duct systems                                     
- Type I
Per hood w/            $770.00                            $50.00
o suppression
Per hood w                                                
suppression
   W < 15 flow poin $910.00                            $650.00
   W 16-29 flow     $945.00                            $675.00
points
   W 30+ flow point $980.00                            $700.00
Hood and duct - Type   $700.00 per hood                   $500.00
II
Other                                                     
Fire alarm             .21 per sq. ft. plus               .15 per sq. ft.
   1 - 20 devices   $280.00                            $200.00
   21 - 49 devices  $595.00                            $425.00
   50 - 99 devices  $875.00                            $625.00
   100 and over     $875.00 + $5.60 per                $625.00 + $4.00 per
                        devices                             device
Sprinkler reviews and inspections based on                  
project
Special extinguishing per project                           
Zoning                 $168.00 per 10,000                 $120.00 per 10,000
                        square feet                         square feet
Commercial, industrial, multiple family                     
(inspections)
Building               .196 per square foot               .14 per square foot
Plumbing               0.056 per square foot              .04 per square foot
Mechanical             0.056 per square foot              .04 per square foot
Electrical             0.056 per square foot              .04 per square foot
Energy                 0.028 per square foot              .02 per square foot
Demolition             $224.00                            $160.00
Temporary or final CO  $490.00                            $350.00
Specialty construction or sequencing fee based              
on project
Shell review same as                                      
above fee
Voided permits. In the event a permit holder requests to
have a permit voided after payment and issuance of the
permit, the permit holder shall pay 25% of the permit fee
and the entirety of any plan review fee assessed when the
permit was issued. This amount shall be withheld from the    
refund. In the event a request for permit is voided prior
to payment for the permit, the permit applicant shall pay
the entirety of any plan review fee assessed and a $100.00
administrative fee.
Plan review fees. Should any permit application be withdrawn after any of the
following plan reviews has/have been completed, the applicant shall be
responsible for payment of all plan review fees.
Project meetings - after first meeting $150.00 per hour per $150.00 per hour
consultant (building, engineering, traffic, specialty)
 
(1983 Code, § 8-1-9) (Ord. 07-10, passed 8-6-2007; Ord. 07-14, passed 12-3-
2007; Ord. 2019-11, passed 10-7-2019)
APPENDIX B: DEVELOPMENTAL IMPACT FEES
Division
   (A)   Municipal Administration Developmental Impact Fee
   (B)   Police Department Developmental Impact Fee
   (C)   Public Library Developmental Impact Fee
   (D)   Parks and Recreation Developmental Impact Fee
   (E)   Public Works-Street and Drain Developmental Impact Fee
   (F)   Public Works-Water Supply and Distribution Developmental Impact Fee
   (G)   Public Works-Wastewater Collection and Treatment Developmental Impact
Fee
   (H)   Fire Protection Developmental Impact Fee
   (I)   Quadrennial Review of Developmental Impact Fees
   (A)   Municipal Administration Developmental Impact Fee.
      (1)   There is established a developmental impact fee to defray the
initial capital costs to the village, for the expansion of village buildings to
provide additional work space to accommodate new employees and the purchase of
new equipment to be used by such employees, the hiring of which employees is
necessitated by the need of the village to provide additional administrative
services for residents of newly platted subdivisions, located on previously
unimproved vacant land.
      (2)   The fee shall be required each time a building permit is issued for
a lot in a platted subdivision which plat was presented to the Village Board
for approval after July 1, 2002.
      (3)   The fee shall be $275 per new residential unit, and shall be
collected by the Village Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (4)   All fees collected herein shall be held in a separate account by
the Village Treasurer. Such funds may be expended as authorized by the annual
appropriation ordinance but only for purposes provided in division (1) of this
division (A). The Treasurer shall invest the funds and the interest credited
and accrued thereon.
   (B)   Police Department Developmental Impact Fee.
      (1)   There is established a developmental impact fee to defray the
initial capital costs to the village, for the Police Department to purchase
additional equipment, including vehicles, for the use of additional police
officers, whose hiring is necessitated by the need to provide law enforcement
for newly platted subdivisions, located on previously unimproved vacant land,
and to defray the cost of expansion of village buildings to provide additional
work space for the police officers.
      (2)   The fee shall be required each time a building permit is issued for
a lot in a platted subdivision, which plat was presented to the Village Board
for approval after July 1, 2002.
      (3)   The fee shall be $315 per new residential unit, and shall be
collected by the Village Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (4)   All fees collected herein shall be held in a separate account by
the Village Treasurer. Such funds may be expended as authorized by the annual
appropriation ordinance but only for purposes provided in division (1) of this
division (B). The Treasurer shall invest the funds and the interest credited
and accrued thereon.
   (C)   Public Library Developmental Impact Fee.
      (1)   There is established a developmental impact fee to defray the
initial capital costs to the village, for the expansion of the public library
to provide additional space for an enlarged collection necessitated by the need
to serve residents of newly platted subdivisions of vacant land, located on
previously unimproved vacant land.
      (2)   The fee shall be required each time a building permit is issued for
a lot in a platted subdivision, which plat was presented to the Village Board
for approval after July 1, 2002.
      (3)   The fee shall be $350 per new residential unit, and shall be
collected by the Village Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (4)   All fees collected herein shall be held in a separate account by
the Village Treasurer. Such funds may be expended as authorized by the annual
appropriation ordinance but only for purposes provided in division (1) of this
division (C). The Treasurer shall invest the funds and the interest credited
and accrued thereon.
   (D)   Parks and Recreation Developmental Impact Fee.
      (1)   There is established a developmental impact fee to defray the
initial capital costs to the village, for the purchase and installation of
additional park and recreation equipment necessitated by the need to serve
residents of newly platted subdivisions, located on previously unimproved
vacant land.
      (2)   The fee shall be required each time a building permit is issued for
a lot in a platted subdivision, which plat was presented to the Village Board
for approval after July 1, 2002.
      (3)   The fee shall be $200 per new residential unit, and shall be
collected by the Village Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (4)   All fees collected herein shall be held in a separate account by
the Village Treasurer. The funds may be expended as authorized by the annual
appropriation ordinance, but only for purposes provided in division (1) of this
division (D). The Treasurer shall invest the funds and the interest credited
and accrued thereon.
   (E)   Public works-Street and Drain Developmental Impact Fee.
      (1)   There is established a developmental impact fee to defray the
initial capital costs to the village, for the Public Works Department to
purchase additional street maintenance equipment, snow removal equipment, and
sewer and drain cleaning equipment to be used for newly platted subdivisions,
located on previously unimproved vacant land, and for the initial capital costs
of the construction of additional storage space for the equipment.
      (2)   The fee shall be required each time a building permit is issued for
a lot in a platted subdivision which plat was presented to the Village Board
for approval after July 1, 2002.
      (3)   The fee shall be $675 per new residential unit, and shall be
collected by the Village Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (4)   All fees collected herein shall be held in a separate account by
the Village Treasurer. The funds may be expended as authorized by the annual
appropriation ordinance, but only for purposes provided in division (1) of this
division (E). The Treasurer shall invest the funds and the interest credited
and accrued thereon.
   (F)   Public Works-Water Supply and Distribution Developmental Impact Fee.
      (1)   There is established a developmental impact fee to defray the
initial capital costs to the village, for the construction of new wells and
well houses to provide water for newly platted subdivisions, located on
previously unimproved vacant land.
      (2)   The fee shall be required each time a building permit is issued for
a lot in a platted subdivision, which plat was presented to the Village Board
for approval after July 1, 2002.
      (3)   The fee shall be $975 per new residential unit, and shall be
collected by the Village Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (4)   All fees collected herein shall be held in a separate account by
the Village Treasurer. The funds may be expended as authorized by the annual
appropriation ordinance, but only for purposes provided in division (1) of this
division (F). The Treasurer shall invest the funds and the interest credited
and accrued thereon.
   (G)   Public Works-Wastewater Collection and Treatment Developmental Impact
Fee.
      (1)   There is established a developmental impact fee to defray the
initial capital costs to the village, for the Public Works Department to
construct new wastewater collection and treatment facilities sufficient to
provide adequate additional capacity for wastewater to be generated by new
residences in newly platted subdivisions, located on previously unimproved
vacant land.
      (2)   The fee shall be required each time a building permit is issued for
a lot in a platted subdivision, which plat was presented to the Village Board
for approval after July 1, 2002.
      (3)   The fee shall be $2,275 per new residential unit, and shall be
collected by the Village Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (4)   All fees collected herein shall be held in a separate account by
the Village Treasurer. The funds may be expended as authorized by the annual
appropriation ordinance but only for purposes provided in division (1) of this
division (G). The Treasurer shall invest the funds and the interest credited
and accrued thereon.
   (H)   Fire Protection Developmental Impact Fee.
      (1)   There is established a developmental impact fee to defray the
initial capital costs to provide and develop additional fire protection
capabilities to be used in providing fire protection services to newly platted
subdivisions, located on previously unimproved vacant land.
      (2)   The fee shall be required each time a platted subdivision of vacant
land is presented to the Village Board for approval of the final plat.
      (3)   The fee shall be $300 per lot, which shall be paid by the developer
to the Trustees of the Kirkland Community Fire Protection District. A signed
receipt for the payment shall be presented to the Village Clerk by the
developer as a condition precedent to the approval of the village being
endorsed upon the original plat of subdivision.
      (4)   Pursuant to intergovernmental agreement, all fees collected herein
shall be held in a separate account by the Fire Protection District. The funds
may be expended as authorized by the annual appropriation ordinance of the Fire
Protection District but only for purposes provided in division (1) of this
division (H). The Fire Protection District shall invest the funds and the
interest credited and accrued thereon.
   (I)   Quadrennial Review of Developmental Impact Fees. The developmental
impact fees established by this
Appendix B shall remain in full force and effect until such time as they may be
amended by the Village Board, but the fees shall be reviewed by the Village
Board at least once every four years for the purpose of determining if the
amounts of the fees should be modified, if some or all fees should be
abolished, or if additional fees should be added to those already in existence.
(Ord. 02-15, passed 8-20-2002)
APPENDIX C: NOTICE OF INTENT TO SELL APPLICATION FOR VILLAGE INSPECTION
[Reserved]
APPENDIX D: AGREEMENT TO CORRECT BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS FORM
[Reserved]
APPENDIX E: PROPERTY TRANSFER COMPLIANCE FORM
[Reserved]
CHAPTER 151: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Authority
   
151.002   Purpose
   
151.003   Applicability
   
151.004   Fee in lieu of detention
   
151.005   Definitions
General Submittal Requirements
   
151.015   Minimization of increase in runoff volumes and rates
Water Quality
   
151.030   Compliance
   
151.031   Construction site stormwater runoff control
   
151.032   Stormwater Management Plan
   
151.033   Multiple uses
   
151.034   Stormwater Management Plan submittal requirements
   
151.035   Maintenance responsibility
Design Standards
   
151.045   Applicability
   
151.046   Release rates
   
151.047   Detention basin outlet/control structure design
   
151.048   Detention storage requirements
   
151.049   Stormwater management system design and evaluation
   
151.050   Methods for generating runoff hydrographs
   
151.051   Dry detention basin design
   
151.052   Wet detention basin design
   
151.053   Detention in floodplains
   
151.054   Drainage into wetlands and depressional storage areas
   
151.055   Street, parking lot and underground storage
   
151.056   Culvert design
   
151.057   Safety considerations
   
151.058   Maintenance considerations
   
151.059   Soil erosion and sediment control
Additional Considerations
   
151.070   Flow from upstream tributary areas
   
151.071   Regional detention evaluation
   
151.072   Early completion of stormwater management facilities
Administration; Enforcement
   
151.085   Inspections
   
151.086   Variances
   
151.087   Appeals
   
151.088   Enforcement
   
151.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the powers granted to the Village of
Kirkland, Illinois (Kirkland), by the Illinois Compiled Statutes and Illinois
Drainage Law, being 70 ILCS 605/1-1 et seq.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.002 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to diminish threats to persons,
property and the environment caused by excess stormwater runoff from new
development and redevelopment; to promote the public health, safety and welfare
by guiding, regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and
maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the
topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in
Kirkland. It is the intention of this chapter that land disturbing activities
not result in an increase in the rate of or the location of stormwater runoff
from properties in order to safeguard adjoining properties from the negative
impacts of such runoff. Further, it is intended to require the temporary
storage and the control of the rate of release of excess stormwater runoff
between dominant and subservient estates.
   (B)   It is DeKalb County’s intention that by encouraging communities
throughout the county to adopt and enforce this chapter within their municipal
jurisdictions, water quality will not be negatively impacted by continued urban
development. In addition, adoption of this chapter by communities within the
county will present development with a consistent set of requirements for
addressing stormwater management.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.003 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   All development in the village meeting the following criteria shall
submit a stormwater management plan including required drawings, calculations
and supporting data as necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. No site development permit, building permit, or final plat shall
be issued or signed until the village has determined that the proposed
development, development application, and stormwater management plan meet all
applicable requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   Development resulting in greater than or equal to one acre of new
impervious area.
      (2)   Development resulting in less than one acre of new impervious area
and is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would result in
a total new impervious area of greater than or equal to one acre.
   (B)   Development disturbing more than 5,000 square feet must comply with
the soil erosion and sediment control provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and
other ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
      (1)   Overlapping or multiple jurisdictions. In all cases where a
development lies within the jurisdictional boundaries of more than one
municipality or regulatory authority, the development shall conform to the
requirements of all applicable jurisdictions. In cases where the requirements
of the municipality or regulatory authority are in conflict, the more
restrictive requirement shall be followed.
      (2)   Adjacent jurisdictions. In all cases where a development lies
within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of an incorporated
municipality, the development shall conform to all applicable ordinances and
plans of the municipality in addition to the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   Additional jurisdictions list.  Municipalities, districts and
regulatory authorities from which fees, approval and/or permits may be required
may include (but are not limited to) the following divisions (a) through (k).
This list is not intended to be comprehensive. Persons conducting activities
regulated by this chapter are responsible for identifying and complying with
the applicable authorities:
         (a)   Drainage Districts;
         (b)   Army Corps of Engineers;
         (c)   U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service;
         (d)   Illinois Historic Preservation Agency;
         (e)   Illinois Department of Natural Resources;
         (f)   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency;
         (g)   Illinois Department of Transportation;
         (h)   Townships;
         (i)   Railroads;
         (j)   Illinois Tollway Authority; and
         (k)   FEMA.
   (D)   Development in special flood hazard areas (SFHA). In addition to the
provisions set forward in this chapter, development in special flood hazard
areas shall comply with the requirements of the zoning and building codes of
the Village of Kirkland, Illinois, as set forth in Chapters
150 and
154 of this code of ordinances. Where these ordinances conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.004 FEE IN LIEU OF DETENTION.
   The village may require, as part of an adopted drainage basin plan or
floodplain study, the payment of a fee in lieu of on-site stormwater storage to
fulfill all or part of the on-site stormwater storage requirement for a
development. Fee in lieu of on-site stormwater storage revenues may be used to
plan, design or construct and upgrade to existing or future stormwater
management system within the effected drainage basin.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.005 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not defined shall be interpreted
in accordance with definitions contained in Merriam-Webster’s New Collegiate
Dictionary, Ninth Edition.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated by the village to administer and
enforce this chapter.
   ADVERSE IMPACTS.  Any deleterious impact on water resources or wetlands
affecting their beneficial uses including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic
habitat, quality and quantity.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the
necessary forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to
carry out construction or a development from the village.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FREQUENCY
FLOOD.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation at all locations delineating the level
of flooding resulting from the base flood event.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP).  A measure used to control the adverse
stormwater-related effects of development. BMPs include structural devices
(e.g., swales, filter strips, infiltration trenches and detention basins)
designed to remove pollutants, reduce runoff rates and volumes, and protect
aquatic habitats. BMPs also include non-structural approaches, such as public
education efforts to prevent the dumping of household chemicals into storm
drains.
   BUFFER AREA. An area of predominantly vegetated land to be left open,
adjacent to wetlands, drainageways, lakes, ponds or other surface waters for
the purpose of eliminating or minimizing adverse impacts on such areas.
   CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a defined bed and
bank or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION.  Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted
vegetation. CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the clearing of debris or
removal of trash.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the floodplain used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain.
   CONDUIT. Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or
movement of water, whether open or closed.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE.  A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   CRITICAL DURATION.  The duration of a storm or flood event that results in
the greatest peak runoff or high water elevation.
   DEED or PLAT RESTRICTION. Easements, covenants, deed restricted open spaces,
outlets dedicated to a public entity, reserved plat areas, conservation
easements, or public road rights-of-way that contain any part of the stormwater
management system of a development.
   DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE. A non-riverine depression where stormwater collects.
The DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE volume is the volume contained in a depression below
the high water level of the critical duration 100-year flood through the site
in the pre-developed condition.
   DETENTION BASIN. A facility constructed or modified to provide for the
temporary storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release by gravity of
this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm.
   DETENTION TIME. The mean residence time of stormwater in a detention basin.
   DEVELOPMENT.  
      (1)   Any manmade change to real estate, including:
         (a)   Preparation of a plat of subdivision;
         (b)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any
addition to a building;
         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days;
         (d)   Drilling, mining, installation of utilities, construction of
roads, bridges or similar projects;
         (e)   Filling, dredging, grading, construction of levees, clearing,
excavating, paving or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface;
         (f)   Storage of materials or deposit of nonagricultural solid or
liquid waste; and
         (g)   Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency,
deviation or velocity of stormwater flows from a property.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as resurfacing of roadways when the road elevation is not
increased, or gardening, plowing and traditional agricultural practices that do
not involve filling, grading or construction of levees. Additionally,
DEVELOPMENT does not include fence installation, pole placement, drilling or
other minor auxiliary construction activity which does not affect stormwater
runoff rates or volumes.
   DRAINAGE DISTRICT. A special district created by petition or referendum and
court approval having the power to construct and maintain drainage improvements
and to pay for improvements with assessments on the land within the district
boundaries.
   DRY DETENTION BASIN. A detention basin designed to drain completely after
temporary storage of stormwater flows and to be normally dry over the majority
of its bottom.
   EMERGENCY OVERFLOW. The structure in a stormwater management system designed
to protect the system in event of a malfunction of the primary flow structure
or a storm event greater than the system design. The EMERGENCY OVERFLOW
capacity initiates at the facility design high water level or base flood
elevation.
   EROSION.  The general process whereby soil is detached by the action of
water or wind.
   EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF.  The volume and rate of flow of stormwater
discharged from an urbanized area which is or will be in excess of that volume
and rate which pertained before urbanization.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations codified as 44
C.F.R. §§ 59-79, effective September 29, 1989, as amended.
   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD RATE INSURANCE MAP (FIRM). A map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency of HUD that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA)
within a community. The map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and
may or may not depict regulatory floodways.
   FLOODPLAIN. That land adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. The FLOODPLAIN is also known as the SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
(SFHA).
   FLOODWAY.  The channel and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a
stream or watercourse which is needed to store and convey the anticipated
existing and future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-
foot increase in stage due to any loss of flood conveyance or storage and no
more than 10% increase in velocities. The village participates in the National
Flood Insurance Program, and the floodplain limits are generally described in
the following Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency:
      (1)   Map Number: 17037C0004D, panel 4 of 190; and
      (2)   Map Number: 17037C0015D, panel 15 of 190.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of height added to the base flood elevation,
groundwater table, or 100-year design water surface elevation to provide a
factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown local conditions,
wave action and unpredictable effects.
   HYDROGRAPH. A graph showing the flow with respect to time for a given
location on a stream or conduit.
   ILLINOIS URBAN MANUAL.  Technical design manual by the Natural Resource
Conservation Service for best management practices (BMPs) for controlling non-
point source pollution.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard-surfaced, manmade area that does not readily
absorb, retain or infiltrate water, including but not limited to building
roofs, parking and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks and paved
recreation areas.
   INFILTRATION. The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The lowest finished grade adjacent to a structure,
not including the bottom of window wells.
   MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  That portion of a stormwater management system
needed to store and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage
system. Where manmade, it is designed to handle stormwater runoff from the 100-
year frequency event.
   MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM. That portion of a stormwater management system
designed for the convenience of the public. It consists of street gutters,
storm sewers, small open channels and swales. Where manmade, the minor
conveyance system is designed to handle stormwater runoff from the ten-year
frequency event. It also consists of cross-road culverts which shall be
designed to handle stormwater runoff from the 50-year frequency event.
   MITIGATION.  Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative
effects which stormwater drainage and development activities might have on the
public health, safety and welfare. Examples of MITIGATION include compensatory
storage, soil erosion and sediment control, and channel restoration.
   NATURAL.  Conditions resulting from physical, chemical and biological
processes without intervention by man.
   NEW IMPERVIOUS AREA. Impervious surface area created after the effective
date of this chapter.
   ONE HUNDRED-YEAR RETURN FREQUENCY EVENT. A rainfall, runoff or flood event
having a 1% chance of occurring or being exceeded in any given year.
   ON-STREAM DETENTION.  Any detention facility to which runoff from upstream
tributary areas flow.
   OVERLAND FLOW ROUTE.  An area of land which conveys stormwater runoff for
all events up to and including the base flood event.
   PEAK FLOW.  The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel
or conduit.
   PERSON. An individual, public or private corporation, government,
partnership or unincorporated association.
   POSITIVE DRAINAGE. Provision for overland paths for all areas of a property
including depressional areas that may also be drained by storm sewers.
   PROPERTY. A parcel of real estate.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Any activity, alteration or change in land use that is
undertaken on previously developed land.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer in the State of Illinois,
under the Professional Engineer Act of 1989, 25 ILCS 325/1-49.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by
the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources (IDNR-
OWR), which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future
100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-foot increase in
stage due to loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than 10% increase
in velocities. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the
regulatory floodway boundary shall be scaled off the regulatory floodway map
and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory
floodway boundary, the IDNR-OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
   RELEASE RATE. The rate at which stormwater runoff leaves the property.
   RETENTION BASIN. A facility designed to completely retain a specified amount
of stormwater runoff without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration, emergency bypass or pumping.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a stream (including creeks
and rivers).
   SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or stormwater drainage
systems.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Any area subject to inundation by the base
flood from a river, creek, stream or any other identified channel or ponding
and shown on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map. The SFHA is also known as the
FLOODPLAIN.
   STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.  A plan, including engineering drawings and
supporting calculations, which describes the existing stormwater drainage
system and environmental features, as well as the stormwater management system
and environmental features which are proposed after development of a property.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. The collection of natural features and manmade
facilities which define the stormwater management for a development. Examples
include major and minor drainage systems, stormwater storage facilities, BMPs,
and the like.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling
within a tributary drainage basin which are in excess of the infiltration
capacity of the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface of the ground
or are collected in channels or conduits.
   STRUCTURE.  The results of manmade change to the land constructed at or
below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a
site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational
vehicle on a site for more than 180 days.
   TIME OF CONCENTRATION.  The elapsed time for stormwater to flow from the
most hydraulically remote point in a drainage basin to a particular point of
interest in that watershed.
   TRADITIONAL AGRICULTURE USES. Uses commonly classified as agricultural or
horticultural including forestry, crop farming, truck gardening, wholesale
nursery operations, animal husbandry, the operation of any machinery or
vehicles incidental to those uses, and the construction of single-family
dwellings and other farm structures incidental to and typically associated with
those uses. Agribusiness uses are not considered to be TRADITIONAL AGRICULTURAL
USES and include but are not limited to commercial grain elevators, commercial
facilities for grain storage, drying or other processing; commercial feed, seed
or fertilizer manufacturing, processing or sales; or any other agricultural-
related use, which substantially increases the size of impervious surface areas
which may cause significant or measurable increases in stormwater runoff.
   TRIBUTARY WATERSHED. All of the land surface area that contributes runoff to
a given point.
   TWO-YEAR RETURN FREQUENCY EVENT. A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a
50% chance of occurring or being exceeded in any given year.
   WET DETENTION BASIN.  A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent
pool of water after the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
   WETLAND.  WETLANDS are land that is inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, under normal
conditions, a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions (known as hydrophytic vegetation). A WETLAND is identified based
upon the three attributes: hydrology, soils and vegetation as mandated by the
current federal wetland determination methodology.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
GENERAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.015 MINIMIZATION OF INCREASE IN RUNOFF VOLUMES AND RATES.
   (A)   In the selection of a stormwater management plan for a particular
development, the applicant shall evaluate and implement, where practicable,
site design features which minimize the increase in runoff volumes and rates
from the site.
   (B)   The applicant’s stormwater management plan submittal shall include
evaluations of site design features which are consistent with the following
hierarchy:
      (1)   Minimize impervious surfaces on the property, consistent with the
needs of the project;
      (2)   Preservation of the existing natural streams, channels and
drainageways;
      (3)   Attenuate flows by use of open vegetated swales and natural
depressions;
      (4)   Preservation of natural infiltration and storage characteristics of
the site;
      (5)   Provide stormwater retention structures;
      (6)   Provide stormwater detention structures; and
      (7)   Construct storm sewers.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
WATER QUALITY
§ 151.030 COMPLIANCE.
   All development disturbing one or more acres must comply with the provision
of the IEPA General NPDES Permit No. ILR10 for Stormwater Discharges from
Construction Site Activities.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.031 CONSTRUCTION SITE STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL.
   The development must have a construction site stormwater pollution
prevention plan that meets the requirements of Part IV of IEPA General Permit
No. ILR10 for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Site Activities,
including BMPs, controls and other provisions at least as protective as the
requirements contained in the Illinois Urban Manual, current edition.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.032 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The development must have a stormwater management plan that meets the
requirements of Part IV (D)(2)(b) of IEPA General Permit No. ILR10 for Storm
Water Discharges from Construction Site Activities, including BMPs, controls
and other provisions at least as protective as the requirements contained in
the Illinois Urban Manual, current edition.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.033 MULTIPLE USES.
   The stormwater management system should incorporate multiple uses where
practicable. Uses considered compatible with stormwater management include open
space, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation (boating, trails, playing
fields) and natural area enhancement. The applicant should avoid using portions
of the property exclusively for stormwater management wherever practicable.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.034 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each applicant shall submit the following information to ensure that
the provisions of this chapter are met. The submittal shall include sufficient
information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the property, the
potential adverse impacts of the development on water resources both on-site
and downstream, and the effectiveness of the proposed stormwater management
plan in managing stormwater runoff. The applicant shall certify on the drawings
that all clearing, grading, drainage and construction shall be accomplished in
strict conformance with this chapter.
   (B)   Applicant shall provide a stormwater management plan, prepared by and
bearing the stamp and seal of a registered professional engineer, which
includes the following information for both existing and proposed property
conditions:
      (1)   Narrative description of proposed development and impact on
surrounding drainage systems;
      (2)   A location map and description providing township, range and
section; showing the properties’ location within the larger watershed; and
showing the jurisdictional boundaries of all municipalities, drainage districts
and townships within two miles of the project;
      (3)   Existing and proposed topography at a minimum of two-foot contour
intervals;
      (4)   Existing and proposed stormwater management features, including
(but not limited to) drain tiles, ditches, culverts, swale, storm sewers and
structures, detention areas, wetlands, lakes, ponds, streams and the like;
      (5)   Plan, profile and cross sections of stormwater storage facilities,
and overland flow routes, including the areas expected to be inundated or
covered with water;
      (6)   Construction cost estimate of the stormwater management facilities
required by this chapter;
      (7)   Proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures;
      (8)   Existing and proposed buildings, structures, roads, impervious
surfaces, ground elevations, and other improvements where site grading is
proposed;
      (9)   Existing and proposed wells, septic fields, water main, sanitary
sewers and other underground utilities;
      (10)   Property area lines and dimensions, including rights-of-way,
easements, buffer areas and setback lines;
      (11)   Sub-watershed boundaries within the property;
      (12)   Delineation of upstream and downstream drainage features that
might be affected by the development;
      (13)   Environmental features of the property and immediate vicinity,
including wetland areas, natural areas, and proposed environmental mitigation
features;
      (14)   Copies of permit applications, permits and signoffs as required by
other jurisdictions;
      (15)   Basis of design for all stormwater management system components;
      (16)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Administrator;
      (17)   Drain tile survey; and
      (18)   Wetland delineation report prepared using the guidelines and
methods as specified by the Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual,
January 1987 (Technical Report Y-87-1).
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.035 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   A plan for long-term maintenance and the responsibility for maintaining the
stormwater management system shall be submitted and approved by the
Administrator prior to final approval.
   (A)   Maintenance of stormwater management facilities located on private
property shall be the responsibility of the property owner or homeowners’
association (if applicable).
   (B)   Prior to issuance of a site development permit or building permit, or
prior to execution of a final plat by the village, the applicant shall execute
a maintenance agreement with the village guaranteeing that the applicant and
all future owners of the property will maintain the property’s stormwater
management system.
   (C)   The maintenance agreement shall specifically authorize representatives
or subcontractors of the village to enter onto the property for the purpose of
inspections and maintenance of the stormwater management system.
   (D)   The maintenance agreement shall stipulate that if the village notifies
the property owner in writing of maintenance deficiencies that require
correction, the property owner shall make the correction within 30 calendar
days of that notification, after which time the village may have the necessary
work completed and assess the cost to the property owner.
   (E)   If a property owners’ association is to be established, the developer
of the project shall be responsible for its establishment and for informing the
individual property owners of their responsibilities.
   (F)   All stormwater management facilities shall be located and described
with a deed or plat restriction. Deed or plat restrictions shall run with the
land and reference the maintenance agreement.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 151.045 APPLICABILITY.
   The following performance standards shall be applicable and shall be
satisfied prior to any development which is subject to the provisions of this
chapter. However, in all cases where a development lies within one and one-half
miles of the corporate limits of an incorporated municipality having more
restrictive requirements, those requirements shall apply.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.046 RELEASE RATES.
   (A)   Stormwater management systems for properties required to provide
stormwater runoff storage facilities shall be designed to control the rate of
discharge from the property for the two-year and 100-year critical duration
events. The maximum controlled release rate of stormwater from all developments
requiring storage shall not exceed the stormwater runoff rate able to be
carried by the downstream stormwater management system and may not exceed the
predetermined safe carrying capacity of any limiting downstream restriction.
The peak rate of discharge shall not cause an increase in flooding or channel
instability downstream when considered in aggregate with other developed
properties and downstream drainage capacities.
   (B)   (1)   The peak discharge from events less than or equal to the two-
year event shall not be greater than the predevelopment discharge rate for the
property.
      (2)   The peak 100-year discharge shall not be greater than 0.15 cfs per
acre of property drained.
      (3)   The village reserves the right to require more restrictive release
rates for any development within a watershed or sub-watershed which has either
limited downstream capacity or observed historical flooding.
      (4)   All concentrated stormwater discharges leaving a site must be
conveyed into an existing channel, storm sewer, drainage tile, or overland flow
path (with appropriate permission from owners of downstream system) with
adequate downstream stormwater capacity and must not result in increased flood
and drainage hazard.
      (5)   The design of stormwater management systems shall not result in the
interbasin transfer of drainage, unless no reasonable alternative exists and
there is no legal restraint preventing the transfer.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.047 DETENTION BASIN OUTLET/CONTROL STRUCTURE DESIGN.
   (A)   Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream stormwater
management system shall be evaluated when designing the outlet.
   (B)   Single pipe outlets shall be a minimum of 12 inches in diameter.
   (C)   Minimum outlet restrictor sizes shall be four inches in diameter,
provided there is adequate downstream capacity. Where release rates dictate an
outlet orifice less than four inches in diameter, alternative outlet designs
which avoid clogging shall be utilized.
   (D)   Outlet pipes and restrictors shall be designed to minimize the
possibility of clogging and ease of maintenance, even during high runoff
events. A trash rack shall be provided.
   (E)   The outlet design shall not require mechanical or manual adjustment to
control flow.
   (F)   The control structure shall be designed to maintain as uniform a flow
as possible, independent of the stormwater storage volume. An energy dissipater
(such as riprap or a plunge pool) shall be provided to reduce erosive
velocities.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.048 DETENTION STORAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The design of stormwater storage facilities shall be based on the peak
runoff from the 100-year storm event determined through a critical duration
analysis. Detention storage shall be computed using hydrograph methods as
described in this chapter.
   (B)   The function of existing on-site depressional storage shall be
preserved or compensated for at a ratio of 1.1:1, cut to fill.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.049 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DESIGN AND EVALUATION.
   The following criteria should be used in evaluating and designing the
stormwater management system. The underlying objective is to provide capacity
to pass the ten-year peak flow in the minor drainage system and to provide an
overland flow path for flows in excess of the design capacity.
   (A)   Design methodologies.
      (1)   Minor drainage systems may be designed using the rational formula.
      (2)   Major drainage system for areas up to ten acres may be designed
using the rational formula.
      (3)   Major drainage systems for areas larger than ten acres and all
detention basins must be designed using an approved hydrograph-producing runoff
calculation method.
   (B)   Positive drainage.
      (1)   All areas of the property must be provided with an overland flow
route that will pass the 100-year flow at a stage at least two feet below the
lowest adjacent grade of structures hydraulically connected to the flow route.
      (2)   Overland flow routes up to the 100-year frequency flow level shall
be placed in drainage easements. Drainage easement language shall strictly
prohibit the placement or construction of fill or other obstructions that would
impede stormwater runoff flow.
      (3)   Wherever possible, storm sewers should be used as minor drainage
systems in lieu of drainage swales for rear and side yard drainage.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.050 METHODS FOR GENERATING RUNOFF HYDROGRAPHS.
   (A)   For the determination of detention and depressional storage
requirements, an approved hydrograph-producing runoff calculation method shall
be used. Approved methods include HEC-1, Soil Conservation Service TR-20, or
Soil Conservation Service TR-55 tabular method. The use of methods other than
those listed above must be approved by the village.
   (B)   Runoff hydrographs shall be developed incorporating the following
assumptions of rainfall amounts and antecedent moisture:
      (1)   Unless a continuous simulation approach to stormwater management
system hydrology is used, all design rainfall events shall be based on the
Illinois State Water Survey Bulletin 70.
      (2)   The first quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for
the design and analysis of conveyance systems with critical durations of less
than or equal to six hours.
      (3)   The second quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for
the design and analysis of conveyance systems with critical durations of
greater than six hours and less than or equal to 12 hours.
      (4)   The third quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for
the design and analysis of conveyance systems with critical durations of
greater than 12 hours and less than or equal to 24 hours.
      (5)   The fourth quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for
the design and analysis of conveyance systems with critical durations of
greater than 24 hours.
      (6)   The first, second, third and fourth quartile distributions
described by Huff are presented in Table 37 of Bulletin 70. The SCS Type II
distribution may be used in lieu of the Huff distributions.
      (7)   Computations of runoff hydrographs which do not rely on a
continuous accounting of antecedent moisture conditions shall assume an
antecedent moisture condition of two as a minimum.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.051 DRY DETENTION BASIN DESIGN.
   (A)   Wherever practicable, dry detention basins shall be designed to serve
a secondary purpose for recreation, open space or similar type of uses which
will not be adversely affected by occasional, intermittent flooding.
   (B)   Dry detention basins shall be designed to completely drain within 48
hours after the end of storm events. Underdrains should be utilized if
necessary to meet this requirement.
   (C)   Dry detention basins shall have a minimum bottom slope of 2%.
Underdrains directed to the outlet control structure shall be installed if the
minimum bottom slope cannot be obtained, provided that there are no inlets or
other direct connections to the underdrain.
   (D)   Velocity dissipation measures shall be incorporated into dry basin
designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets and to minimize the
resuspension of pollutants.
   (E)   To the extent feasible, the distance between detention inlets and
outlets shall be maximized. If possible, inlets and outlets should be located
at opposite ends of the basin.
   (F)   An emergency overflow weir able to pass the 100-year frequency flow
without damage to the basin shall be provided.
   (G)   A minimum of one foot of freeboard shall be provided between the 100-
year frequency high water level and the top of the basin berm.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.052 WET DETENTION BASIN DESIGN.
   Wet detention basins shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutant, to be
safe, to be aesthetically pleasing, and as much as feasible to be available for
recreational use.
   (A)   All wet basins shall be designed to provide fish habitat.
   (B)   “Management of small lakes and ponds in Illinois” (IDNR, revised 1997)
provides guidance for design of fishing ponds in Illinois. The applicant is
encouraged to contact the local IDNR Fisheries Biologist for additional
information.
   (C)   Wet basins shall have a minimum depth of at least five feet with a
minimum depth of ten feet over 25% of the bottom area of the basin to prevent
winter freeze out.
   (D)   The minimum normal water elevation surface for a wet basin shall be
one acre.
   (E)   The side slopes of wet basins at the normal pool elevation shall not
be steeper than 5:1.
   (F)   A ten-foot wide safety ledge shall be provided below the normal water
level with a maximum depth of three feet and a maximum side slope of 10:1.
   (G)   The permanent pool volume in a wet basin at the normal water elevation
shall be equal or greater to the runoff volume from its watershed for the two-
year frequency event.
   (H)   To the extent feasible, the distance between detention inlets and
outlets shall be maximized. If possible, inlets and outlets should be located
at opposite ends of the basin.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.053 DETENTION IN FLOODPLAINS.
   (A)   The placement of detention basins within the floodplain is strongly
discouraged because of questions about their reliable operation during flood
events. The use of fee in lieu of detention shall be investigated where
detention outside of the floodplain is not feasible.
   (B)   However, the stormwater detention requirements of this chapter may be
fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood fringe areas on the
project site, provided the following provisions are met:
      (1)   Detention in flood fringe areas.
         (a)   The placement of a detention basin in a flood fringe area shall
require compensatory storage for 1.5 times the volume below the base flood
elevation occupied by the detention basin, including any berms.
         (b)   The release from the detention basin provided shall still comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   The applicant shall demonstrate its operation for all stream
flow and floodplain backwater conditions up to the ten-year frequency flood
elevation.
         (d)   Excavations for compensatory storage along watercourses shall be
opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention.
         (e)   All floodplain storage filled below the existing ten-year
frequency flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year
frequency flood elevation. All floodplain storage filled above the existing
ten-year frequency flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-
year frequency flood elevation. The additional storage volume (0.5 times the
totals volume filled) may be provided at any elevation between the normal water
elevation and the BFE.
         (f)   All compensatory storage excavations shall be constructed to
drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
      (2)   Detention in floodways. Detention in floodways is prohibited.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.054 DRAINAGE INTO WETLANDS AND DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE AREAS.
   (A)   Wetlands shall be protected from damaging modifications and adverse
changes in runoff quality and quantity associated with land developments.
   (B)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the following
requirements shall be met for all developments whose drainage flows into
wetlands:
      (1)   Existing wetlands shall not be modified for the purposes of
stormwater detention unless it is demonstrated that the existing wetland is low
in quality and the proposed modifications will maintain or improve its habitat
and ability to perform beneficial functions.
      (2)   Existing storage and release rate characteristics of wetlands and
other depressional storage areas shall be maintained, and the volume of
detention storage provided to meet the requirements of this section shall be in
addition to this existing storage.
      (3)   The existing wetlands shall be protected during construction by
appropriate soil erosion and sediment control measures and shall not be filled.
      (4)   Site drainage patterns shall not be altered to substantially
decrease or increase the existing area tributary or flow rates to the wetland.
      (5)   All runoff from the development shall be routed through a
preliminary detention/sedimentation basin designed to provide a minimum 24-hour
hydraulic detention time before being discharged into the wetland. This basin
shall be constructed before property grading begins.
      (6)   A vegetated buffer area of at least 25 feet in width, preferably
vegetated with native plant species, shall be maintained or restored around the
periphery of the wetland.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.055 STREET, PARKING LOT AND UNDERGROUND STORAGE.
   The following design criteria shall be met where streets, parking lots and
culverts are proposed to be used for stormwater detention or conveyance.
   (A)   Streets. If streets are to be used as part of the major drainage
system, ponding depths shall not exceed three inches at the street centerline
and the street shall not remain flooded for more than eight hours for the 100-
year frequency event.
   (B)   Parking lots. The maximum ponding depth in parking facilities designed
to store excess stormwater runoff shall not exceed 12 inches at the deepest
point, and the duration of flooding shall not exceed eight hours for the 100-
year frequency event. Storage in parking facilities shall only be allowed in
the most remote, least-used areas of the parking facilities.
   (C)   Underground. Underground stormwater storage facilities must meet the
following design criteria.
      (1)   Access to all chambers shall be provided in order to remove
accumulated sediment and debris.
      (2)   Underground facilities shall be provided with a positive gravity
outlet.
      (3)   Storage volume shall only be provided in the pipe. Void space
volume of bedding material will not be considered as part of the detention
volume.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.056 CULVERT DESIGN.
   Sizing of culvert and roadway crossings shall consider entrance and exit
losses as well as tailwater conditions on the culvert.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.057 SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS.
   The drainage system components, especially all detention basins, shall be
designed to protect the safety of any children or adults coming in contact with
the system during runoff events.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.058 MAINTENANCE CONSIDERATIONS.
   The stormwater management system shall be designed to minimize and
facilitate maintenance. Turfed side slopes shall be designed to allow lawn
mowing equipment to easily negotiate them. Wet basins shall be provided with
alternate outflows which can be used to completely drain the pool for sediment
removal. Pre-sediment basins shall be included, where feasible, for localizing
sediment deposition and removal. Maintenance easements shall be provided to
allow access for maintenance equipment.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.059 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
   (A)   Soil erosion and sediment control-related measures are required for
any land disturbance activity regulated by this chapter.
   (B)   The following requirements shall be met:
      (1)   Soil disturbances shall be conducted in such a manner as to
minimize erosion. Areas of the development site that are not to be graded shall
be protected from construction traffic or other disturbance until final seeding
is performed. Soil stabilization measures shall consider the time of year, site
conditions and the use of temporary or permanent measures.
      (2)   Properties and channels adjoining development site shall be
protected from erosion and sedimentation. At points where concentrated flow
leaves a development site, energy dissipation devices shall be placed at
discharge locations and along the length of any outfall channel as necessary to
provide a non-erosive velocity of flow from the structure to the watercourse so
that the natural physical and biological characteristics and functions are
maintained and protected.
      (3)   Soil erosion and sediment control features shall be constructed
prior to the commencement of excavating or mass grading.
      (4)   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent
measures within 14 calendar days following the end of active hydrologic
disturbance, or redisturbance, consistent with the following criteria or using
an appropriate measure as approved by the village:
         (a)   Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall
include seeding, mulching, sodding and/or nonvegetative measures.
         (b)   Areas or embankments having slopes greater than or equal to 3H:
1V shall be stabilized with staked-in-place sod, mat or blanket in combination
with seeding.
         (c)   Erosion control blanket shall be required on all interior
detention basin side slopes between normal water level (or basin bottom for dry
basins) and high water level.
         (d)   The 14-day stabilization requirement may be precluded by snow
cover or where construction activity will resume within 21 days from when the
active hydrologic disturbance ceased, in which case stabilization measures do
not have to be initiated on that portion of the site by the fourteenth day
after construction activity temporarily ceased, given that portion of the site
has appropriate soil erosion and sediment controls.
      (5)   Land disturbance activities in streams shall be avoided, where
possible. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the following requirements
shall be met:
         (a)   Where stream construction crossings are necessary, temporary
crossings shall be constructed of non-erosive material.
         (b)   The time and area of disturbance of a stream shall be kept to a
minimum. The stream, including bed and banks, shall be restablized within 48
hours after channel disturbance is completed or interrupted.
      (6)   Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be appropriate
with regard to the amount of tributary drainage area as follows:
         (a)   Disturbed areas draining greater than 5,000 square feet but less
than one acre shall, at a minimum, be protected by a filter barrier (including
filter fences, straw bales or equivalent control measures) to control all off-
site runoff. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of 25 feet, may be
used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is expected.
         (b)   Disturbed areas draining more than one but fewer than five acres
shall, at a minimum, be protected by a sediment trap or equivalent control
measure at a point downslope of the disturbed area.
         (c)   Disturbed areas draining more than five acres, shall, at a
minimum, be protected by a sediment basin with a perforated filter riser pipe
or equivalent control measure at a point downslope of the disturbed area.
         (d)   1.   Sediment basins shall have both a permanent pool (dead
storage) and additional volume (live storage) with each volume equal to the
runoff amount of a two-year, 24-hour event over the on-site hydrologically
disturbed tributary drainage area to the sediment basin.
            2.   If the detention basin for the proposed development condition
of the site is used for sediment basin, the above volume requirements will be
explicitly met. Until the site is finally stabilized, the basin permanent pool
of water shall meet the above volume requirements and have a filtered
perforated riser protecting the outflow pipe.
      (7)   All storm sewers that are or will be functioning during
construction shall be protected by an appropriate sediment control measure.
      (8)   If dewatering services are used, adjoining properties and discharge
locations shall be protected from erosion. Discharges shall be routed through
an effective sediment control measure (e.g., sediment trap, sediment basin or
other appropriate measure).
      (9)   All temporary soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be
removed within 30 days after final site stabilization is achieved or after the
temporary measures are no longer needed. Trapped sediment and other disturbed
soil areas shall be permanently stabilized.
      (10)   A stabilized mat of aggregate underlain with filter cloth (or
other appropriate measure) shall be located at any point where traffic will be
entering or leaving a construction site to or from a public right-of-way,
street, alley or parking area. Any sediment or soil reaching an improved public
right-of-way, street, alley or parking area shall be removed by scraping or
street cleaning as accumulations warrant and transported to a controlled
sediment disposal area.
      (11)   Earthen embankments shall be constructed with side slopes no
steeper than 3H:1V. Steeper slopes may be constructed with appropriate
stabilization as approved by the village.
      (12)   Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales and
diversions, and the outlet of all channels and pipes shall be designed and
constructed to withstand the expected flow velocity from the ten-year frequency
storm without erosion. All constructed or modified channels shall be stabilized
within 48 hours.
      (13)   Temporary diversions shall be constructed as necessary to direct
all runoff from hydrologically disturbed areas to the appropriate sediment trap
or basin.
      (14)   Soil stockpiles having greater than 100 yards of soil and
remaining in place for more than seven days shall not be located in a flood-
prone area or waters of the United States. Soil stockpile locations shall be
shown on the soil erosion and sediment control plan and shall have the
appropriate measures to prevent erosion of the stockpile.
      (15)   Soil erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed and
constructed per the requirements contained in the Illinois Urban Manual, 2002
(or current edition).
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
§ 151.070 FLOW FROM UPSTREAM TRIBUTARY AREAS.
   (A)   Stormwater runoff from areas tributary to the property shall be
considered in the design of the property’s stormwater management system.
Whenever practicable, undetained stormwater runoff from upstream areas that are
not providing detention should be routed around the basin being provided for
the applicant’s property.
   (B)   The following shall apply to upstream tributary areas:
      (1)   If upstream tributary flows are passed through the applicant’s
basin, then a detention volume safety factor of 5% shall be added to storage
volume required for the applicant’s property.
      (2)   If upstream tributary flows are passed through the applicant’s
detention basin, the final design release rates shall be based on the total
tributary area (the applicant’s property and upstream areas tributary to the
applicant’s property).
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.071 REGIONAL DETENTION EVALUATION.
   (A)   When upstream property tributary to the applicant’s property does not
meet the stormwater runoff storage and release requirements of this chapter,
regionalized detention on the applicant’s property shall be explored by the
applicant.
   (B)   The following steps shall be followed:
      (1)   The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for his or
her property alone using the applicable release rates from this chapter, the
applicant’s property area, and the procedures described in this chapter.
      (2)   Upstream areas tributary to the applicant’s property not meeting
the storage and release rate requirements of this chapter shall be identified.
      (3)   The applicant shall compute the combined storage volume needed for
the total area (the applicant’s property and upstream areas tributary to the
applicant’s property) using the applicable release rates from this chapter, the
total area, and the procedures described in this chapter.
      (4)   If upstream tributary areas are not currently developed, a
reasonable fully developed land cover, based on anticipated zoning, shall be
assumed for the purposes of computing storage.
      (5)   Once the necessary combined storage is computed, the village may
choose to pay for increasing the size of the applicant’s detention basin to
accommodate the upstream area flows. The applicant’s responsibility will then
be limited to the required storage for his or her property alone.
      (6)   If regional storage is selected by the village, then the combined-
storage design computed above shall be implemented.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.072 EARLY COMPLETION OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   Stormwater management and drainage facilities shall be constructed and
functional prior to commencing mass grading and as described in the typical
construction sequencing below. The facilities shall be maintained during
construction. All storm sewers that are or will be functioning during
construction shall be protected by appropriate sediment control measures. Any
sediment captured in the stormwater management facilities shall be removed and
disposed of in an appropriate manner by the applicant before project completion
in order to maintain the design volume of the facilities.
   (B)   The following typical construction sequencing shall be followed:
      (1)   Installation of soil erosion and sediment control measures.
      (2)   Remove trees where necessary.
      (3)   Construct sediment trapping devices.
      (4)   Construct detention facilities and outlet control structures with
restrictors and temporary perforated risers.
      (5)   Strip and stockpile topsoil and grade site.
      (6)   Temporarily stabilize topsoil stockpiles.
      (7)   Install storm sewer, sanitary sewer, water and associated inlet and
outlet protection.
      (8)   Permanently stabilize detention basins with seed and erosion
control blanket.
      (9)   Temporarily stabilize all areas including lots that have reached
temporary grade.
      (10)   Install roadways.
      (11)   Permanently stabilize all outlot areas.
      (12)   Construct structures and grade individual lots.
      (13)   Permanently stabilize lots.
      (14)   Remove all temporary soil erosion and sediment control measures
after the site is stabilized with vegetation.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.085 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Designated official.  The Administrator or his or her representatives
shall be the official primarily responsible for administration and enforcement
of this chapter. The Village Engineer shall be the Administrator for the
village.
   (B)   Inspections. The Administrator or his or her representatives are
authorized to enter upon any land or water to inspect development activity and
to verify the existing conditions of a development site that is currently under
review.
      (1)   Inspections during construction.
         (a)   A village representative shall conduct periodic inspections of
the work in progress to be certain that the stormwater management system is
being constructed as designed.
         (b)   If any violations of the provisions or requirements of this
chapter are noted during such inspections, the village shall notify the
property owner and other entities having jurisdiction in writing of the items
needing correction.
         (c)   The property owner shall have ten calendar days to make the
corrections unless given a specific extension of time in writing by the
village.
         (d)   Failure to complete the corrections within the specified time
period shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
         (e)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter may be referred to
or jointly enforced with other entities having jurisdiction.
      (2)   Final inspection.
         (a)   Upon notification by the property owner that the stormwater
management system is completed, the village shall conduct a final inspection.
         (b)   If the stormwater management system is found to contain
deficiencies which require correction, the village shall notify the property
owner and other entities having jurisdiction of the necessary corrections.
         (c)   The property owner shall correct the deficiencies within ten
calendar days unless given a specific extension of time in writing by the
village.
         (d)   Failure to complete the corrections within the specified time
period shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
         (e)   Upon completion of the stormwater management system and all
noted deficiencies, the owner shall perform a site survey and submit as-built
plans and revised stormwater management calculations to the village. A
registered professional engineer shall certify the as-built plans and
calculations.
         (f)   Upon finding that the stormwater management system and as-built
plans meet the provisions and requirements of this chapter, the village shall
issue in writing a notice of stormwater management system completion to the
property owner.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.086 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances to the provisions and/or requirements of this chapter may
only be granted by written approval of the Village Board.
   (B)   Variance shall only be granted upon all of the following:
      (1)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to
afford relief, considering the flood hazard and water quality;
      (3)   A finding that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant;
      (4)   A finding that the granting of a variance would not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the
public, nor conflict with existing local laws or ordinances and that all
buildings will be protected by methods that minimize flooding damage during the
base flood elevation;
      (5)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not represent a
general problem; and
      (6)   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses.
   (C)   The petitioner shall place his or her request for variation in
writing, citing the specific section of the ordinance being sought for variance
to the Administrator.
   (D)   (1)   The Administrator, within 15 calendar days, shall forward the
petitioner’s request, along with his or her recommendation to the Village Board
for its consideration; or
      (2)   The Administrator, within 15 calendar days, shall respond in
writing to the petitioner should he or she determine that the request is
incomplete due to lack of information or specificity.
   (E)   The Village Board’s determination in the variation process shall be
final.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.087 APPEALS.
   (A)   The petitioner shall place his or her request for an appeal of a
decision of the Administrator in writing, to the Enforcement Officer, citing
the specific ordinance interpretation being appealed.
   (B)   (1)   The Administrator, within 15 calendar days, shall forward the
petitioner’s request, along with his or her recommendation to the Village Board
for its consideration; or
      (2)   The Administrator, within 15 calendar days, shall respond in
writing to the petitioner should he or she determine that the request is
incomplete due to lack of information or specificity.
   (C)   The Village Board’s determination in the appeal process shall be
final.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.088 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Administrator shall be the official primarily responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter relative to any development activity conducted in
violation of this chapter as it pertains to the owner or his or her authorized
agent, a tenant, architect, builder, contractor or other person who commits or
participates in any violation. The Administrator may request the DeKalb County
State’s Attorney to institute legal proceedings necessary to enforce this
chapter or prevent or remedy any violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall
constitute a violation, and any person, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 4-16-2007)
CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
Section
Development Regulations
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Base flood elevation
   
152.03   Code official, duties
   
152.04   Development permit
   
152.05   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
152.06   Protecting buildings
   
152.07   Subdivision requirements
   
152.08   Public health and other standards
   
152.09   Carrying capacity and notification
   
152.10   Variances
   
152.11   Liability
   
152.12   Effective date
Administration
   
152.25   Flood insurance assurance
   
152.99   Penalty
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-year flood. The BASE
FLOOD elevation at any location is as defined in §
152.02.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180
days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. 
      (1)   Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster.
Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services,
can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special
populations at risk.
      (2)   Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood protection should be
required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police
stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities,
major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations
or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
         (a)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
         (b)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days per year;
         (d)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
culverts or similar projects;
         (e)   Construction or erection of levees, dams walls or fences;
         (f)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other alterations of the ground surface;
         (g)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filing, grading, or construction of levees.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
      (1)   These two terms are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the Village of Kirkland, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of
Kirkland, or that may be annexed into the Village of Kirkland, that are subject
to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the South Branch Kishwaukee
River and the Bull Run, Kingsbury, and Owens Creeks are generally identified as
such on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of DeKalb County prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated January 2, 2009. FLOODPLAIN
also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
      (2)   The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated DeKalb County that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Kirkland or that
may be annexed into the Village of Kirkland are generally identified as such on
the Flood Insurance Rate map prepared for DeKalb County by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated January 2, 2009.
   FLOODWAY. That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the South Branch Kishwaukee
River and the Bull Run, Kingsbury, and Owens Creeks shall be as delineated on
the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of DeKalb County prepared by FEMA and
dated January 2, 2009. The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of
the Village of Kirkland shall be according to the best data available from
federal, state, or other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that the
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
152.06.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA. See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this
subchapter equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor
and materials must be included in this determination. The term includes
REPETITIVE LOSS BUILDINGS (see definition).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this subchapter in which
the cumulative percentage of improvements:
         (a)   Equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started, or
         (b)   Increases the floor area by more than 20%.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. The term
does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.02 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   This subchapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available
base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and
IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the South Branch
Kishwaukee River and the Bull Run, Kingsbury, and Owens Creeks shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance
Study of DeKalb County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
dated January 2, 2009.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH
Zone” or AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the county
wide Flood Insurance Rate Map of DeKalb County.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an “A Zone” on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of DeKalb
County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by
the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated DeKalb County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the Village of Kirkland, or that may be annexed into the Village of
Kirkland, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of DeKalb County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated January 2, 2009.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.03 CODE OFFICIAL, DUTIES.
   The Code Official shall be responsible for the general administration of
this subchapter and ensure that all development activities within the
floodplains under the jurisdiction of the Village of Kirkland meet the
requirements of this subchapter. Specifically, the Code Official shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with §
152.04;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
152.05;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
152.06 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) or flood-proof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
§
152.07;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of
152.08;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
152.10 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in §
152.99 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this subchapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this
subchapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this subchapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this subchapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to
the floodplain map.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.04 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Code Official. The Code Official shall not issue a
development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements
of this subchapter.
   (B)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
152.07; and
      (5)   The cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed
engineer or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this
requirement.
   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Code
Official shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher
than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the
date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the requirements of this subchapter. Conversely, any
development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and
hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map,
is subject to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (D)   The Code Official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
   (E)   The Code Official shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
Code Official shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and
local permits have been obtained.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.05 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map,
and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in §
152.06(B), no development shall be allowed which, acting in combination with
existing and anticipated development will cause any increase in flood heights
or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The following specific
development activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
         (a)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of 1.0 feet, and
         (b)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half feet at a point 1,000 feet upstream of
the proposed structure.
         (c)   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         (d)   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
         (e)   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the State of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit.
         (f)   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 3: The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier
cells, or other similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 4:
         (a)   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         (b)   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         (c)   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         (d)   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         (e)   All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction grades
and re-vegetated.
         (f)   All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety
Code, and federal requirements must be met.
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5:
         (a)   The boat dock must not extend more than 50 feet into a waterway
and no more than one-quarter of the width of the waterway and shall not extend
beyond the navigational limited established by the IDNR and Corps of Engineers.
         (b)   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet.
         (c)   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed 50% of the landowner's shoreline
frontage nor 50 feet.
         (d)   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet of the projected
property line.
         (e)   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         (f)   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         (g)   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with floatation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         (h)   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         (i)   Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow.
         (j)   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of Engineers.
      (5)   (a)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6.
         (b)   The following activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit:
            1.   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or
septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
            2.   The construction of light poles, sign posts, and similar
structures.
            3.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
            4.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
            5.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70
square feet in size, nor ten square feet in any dimension. Only one such
building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
            6.   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:
         (a)   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         (b)   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures.
         (c)   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8:
         (a)   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of
the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet of cover shall be provided. The
river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition.
         (b)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (c)   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5), shall
be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed.
         (d)   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten days prior to
the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
         (a)   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. Urban
areas are defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten years. (The Department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban).
         (b)   In addition to the materials listed in division (A)(8)(a) above,
other materials (e.g. tire revetments) may be utilized in rural areas provided
all other conditions of this permit are met.
         (c)   The following materials shall not be used in any case:
            1.   Auto bodies;
            2.   Garbage or debris;
            3.   Scrap lumber;
            4.   Metal refuse;
            5.   Roofing materials;
            6.   Asphalt or other bituminous materials; or
            7.   Any material which would cause water pollution as defined by
the Environmental Protections Act (415 ILCS 5).
         (d)   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, 1,000 feet.
         (e)   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         (f)   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         (g)   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank.
         (h)   1.   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-
width and cross-sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
            2.   For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along
the bank, toe of the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the
cross-sectional area of the natural channel be reduced by more than 10% nor the
volume of material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of the stream
bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and to
lessen the quantity of material required.
         (i)   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         (j)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (k)   In the ease of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            1.   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s), and
            2.   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot.
         (l)   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
         (a)   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with
the requirements of the local floodplain ordinance.
         (b)   The principle structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         (c)   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed 500 square
feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another property, and must
not involve the placement of any fill material.
         (d)   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within 50 feet of the
bank of the stream channel.
         (e)   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         (f)   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         (g)   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
         (a)   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed 1,000 feet.
         (b)   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel, and
         (c)   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and down stream of the site.
         (d)   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            1.   Removed from the floodway;
            2.   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would
be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross-sectional
area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than 10%, nor the
volume of material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of streambank;
            3.   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area
such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            4.   Used to stabilize and existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            5.   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
Department in accordance with the conditions of the approval, or
            6.   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         (e)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 12:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            1.   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater
induced by the existing structure, and
            2.   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         (c)   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR).
         (d)   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the Department's Statewide Permit Number 9 (Minor Shoreline, Channel and
Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide Permit Number 11 (Minor
Maintenance Dredging Activities).
         (e)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 13:
         (a)   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         (b)   The term TEMPORARY shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, clue to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         (d)   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         (e)   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or
stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents
that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of Special Condition
Number 3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a
minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the
backwater induced by the temporary structure.
         (f)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         (g)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         (h)   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5).
         (i)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State Floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in §
152.06(A) may be permitted only if:
      (1)   The permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.06 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
152.05, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet.
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively
subsequent to the adoption of this subchapter. If substantially improved, the
existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of
this section.
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this subchapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage).
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year.
      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
152.01.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood-
waters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot above grade with a minimum of two openings. The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation, and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            1.   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            3.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            4.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      (3)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade.
         (d)    The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed
four feet at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry flood-proofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      (3)   Flood-proofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
flood-proofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with §
152.07(B)(2), and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Administrative Code § 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180
days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of division (D) above
unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck.
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
400 square feet.
      (6)   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model, and
      (10)   Must either:
         (a)   Be entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by used of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage or shed must be non-habitable.
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principle structure on the same lot.
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for
every one square foot of floor area.
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $10,000 in market value or
replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 500 square feet.
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning.
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.07 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Village of Kirkland shall take into account hazards, to the extent
that they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (B)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of §§
152.05 and
152.06. Any proposal for such development shall include the following data:
      (1)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      (2)   The boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
      (3)   A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
   (C)   Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.08 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§
152.06 and
152.07, the following standards apply:
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a flood-proofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or flood-proofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
152.07.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
flood-proofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater. Flood-
proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances
will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated
to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all
critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.09 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the Village of Kirkland shall notify adjacent
communities in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the
alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.10 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Whenever the standards of this subchapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Code Official for
a variance. The Code Official shall review the applicant's request for a
variance and shall submit his/her recommendation to the Village Board. The
Village Board may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the intent of this subchapter.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      (6)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      (7)   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (C)   The City Council shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance
from the requirements of the building protections standards of §
152.06 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risk to life and property, and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (D)   Variances to the building protection requirements of §
152.06 which are requested in connection with reconstruction, repair, or
alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in the
definition of historic structures in §
152.01, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
§§
152.05 and
152.06 subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.11 LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this subchapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
subchapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the
floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This subchapter does not
create liability on the part of the Village of Kirkland or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damage that results from proper reliance on this
subchapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 152.12 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect on January 2, 2009, from
and after its passage, approval, and publication as required by law.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.25 FLOOD INSURANCE ASSURANCE.
   (A)   (1)   The village hereby assures the Federal Insurance Administration
that it will enact as necessary, and maintain in force for those areas having
flood hazards, adequate land use and control measures with effective
enforcement provisions consistent with the criteria set forth in § 1910 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations; and vests the Zoning
Administrator with the responsibility, authority and means to:
         (a)   Delineate or assist the Administrator, at his or her request, in
delineating the limits of the areas having special flood hazards on available
local maps of sufficient scale to identify the location of building sites;
         (b)   Provide such information as the Administrator may request
concerning present uses and occupancy of the floodplain;
         (c)   Cooperate with federal, state and local agencies and private
firms which undertake to study, survey, map and identify the floodplain, and
cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to management of the
adjoining floodplain in order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards; and
         (d)   Submit on the anniversary date of the community's initial
eligibility an annual report to the Administrator on the progress made during
the past year within the community in the development and implementation of
floodplain management measures.
      (2)   The village hereby appoints the Zoning Administrator to maintain
for public inspection and to furnish upon request a record of elevations (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures located in the special flood hazard areas.
If the lowest floor immediately above must also be recorded, and the village
agrees to take such other official action as may be reasonably necessary to
carry out the objectives of the program.
   (B)   (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review all building permit
applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed
new construction or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and mobile
homes) must:
         (a)   Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
         (b)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage; and
         (c)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review subdivision proposals and
other proposed new developments to assure that:
         (a)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
         (b)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage; and
         (c)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall require new or replacement water
supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be
located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(1983 Code, § 8-2-1) (Ord. 539, passed 12-2-1974; Ord. 540, passed 12-2-1974)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or
failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed
to be a violation of §§
152.01 through
152.12.
      (2)   Upon due investigation, the Code Official may determine that a
violation of the minimum standards of §§
152.01 through
152.12 exist. The Code Official shall notify the owner in writing of such
violation.
      (3)   If the owner fails after ten-days’ notice to correct the violation:
         (a)   The Village Attorney shall make application to the circuit court
for an injunction requiring conformance with §§
152.01 through
152.12 or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure
compliance with §§
152.01 through
152.12.
         (b)   Any person who violates §§
152.01 through
152.12 shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than $50 or more than
$750 for each offense.
         (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues, and
         (d)   The Village of Kirkland shall record a notice of violation on
the title of the property.
      (4)   (a)   The Village of Kirkland shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
         (b)   The Code Official is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing,
indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary,
to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
         (c)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Village Board. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
            1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation, and
            2.   The time and place of the hearing.
         (d)   At the hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City
Council shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
      (4)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village of Kirkland from taking
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
(Ord. 08-22, passed 11-17-2008)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
153.01   Subdivision ordinance adopted by reference
§ 153.01 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The subdivision ordinance and appendix a to the subdivision ordinance and
all amendments thereto are adopted herein by reference as if appearing in
total.
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Title
   
154.002   Intent and purpose
   
154.003   Rules of construction
   
154.004   Minimum requirements; other laws
   
154.005   Scope of regulations
   
154.006   Definitions
General Regulations
   
154.015   Lot coverage
   
154.016   Lot area and dimension
   
154.017   Access to public street
   
154.018   Number of buildings on a zoning lot
   
154.019   Accessory buildings, structures and uses
   
154.020   Permitted accessory buildings, structures and uses
   
154.021   Mobile homes
   
154.022   Existing special uses
   
154.023   Uses not specifically permitted in districts
   
154.024   Sewage disposal facilities
   
154.025   Vision clearance triangle
Zoning Districts and Maps
   
154.035   Districts established
   
154.036   Maps
   
154.037   District boundaries
   
154.038   Zoning of streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad
rights-of-way
   
154.039   Annexed territory
Agricultural Districts
   
154.050   Purpose
   
154.051   A Agricultural District
Residence Districts
   
154.060   Purpose
   
154.061   R-1 Single-Family Residence District
   
154.062   R-2 Single-Family Residence District
   
154.063   R-3 Single-Family Residence District
   
154.064   R-4 Multi-Family Residence District
Business Districts
   
154.075   Purpose
   
154.076   B-1 General Commercial District
   
154.077   B-2 Highway Commercial District
   
154.078   B-3 Convenience Commercial District
Manufacturing Districts
   
154.090   Purpose
   
154.091   M-1 General Manufacturing District
Conservancy Districts
   
154.100   Purpose
   
154.101   C Conservancy District
Performance Standards
   
154.110   General
   
154.111   Definitions
   
154.112   Smoke
   
154.113   Odor
   
154.114   Toxic matter
   
154.115   Fire and explosive hazards
   
154.116   Glare
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
154.125   Purpose
   
154.126   General provisions; parking and loading
   
154.127   Additional regulations; parking
   
154.128   Design and maintenance
   
154.129   Location of accessory off-street parking facilities
   
154.130   Schedule of parking requirements
   
154.131   Off-street loading regulations
   
154.132   Schedule of loading requirements
Signs
   
154.145   Permitted Signs - All Districts
   
154.146   Permitted Signs - Agricultural District
   
154.147   Permitted Signs - Residence Districts
   
154.148   Permitted Signs - Business Districts
   
154.149   Permitted Signs - Manufacturing District
   
154.150   Permitted Signs - Conservancy District
Planned Developments
   
154.160   Purpose
   
154.161   Zoning map
   
154.162   Procedure
   
154.163   Content of petition
   
154.164   Construction of improvement
   
154.165   Street classification
   
154.166   Standards
Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
   
154.170   Purpose; goals; legislative findings; interpretation
   
154.171   Definitions
   
154.172   Applicability
   
154.173   General requirements
   
154.174   Permitted uses
   
154.175   Special use permits
   
154.176   Equipment buildings or cabinets and other related facilities
   
154.177   Removal of abandoned antennas and towers
   
154.178   Non-conforming structures
   
154.179   Annual reporting of information
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
   
154.180   Continuance of use
   
154.181   Discontinuance of use
   
154.182   Reclassification of nonconforming use
   
154.183   Repairs and alterations
   
154.184   Damage and destruction
   
154.185   Additions and enlargements
   
154.186   Exempted buildings, structures and uses
   
154.187   Conversion to special use
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.200   Organization
   
154.201   Zoning Administrator
   
154.202   Zoning certificates
   
154.203   Occupancy certificates
   
154.204   Procedure in case of violation
   
154.205   Variations
   
154.206   Appeals; scope
   
154.207   Amendments
   
154.208   Special use permits
   
154.209   Reapplications
   
154.210   Minimum lot and yard requirements; official zoning map
   
154.211   Fees
   
154.212   Enforcement
   
154.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Official Zoning Map
   
Appendix B:   Minimum Lot and Yard Requirements by District
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the zoning ordinance of the
village.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
      (1)   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience
and general welfare;
      (2)   Securing adequate natural light, pure air and safety from fire and
other dangers;
      (3)   Lessening or avoiding the hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation of runoff of storm or flood waters;
      (4)   Lessening or avoiding congestion in public streets and highways;
      (5)   Conserving the value of land or buildings in the village; and
      (6)   Preserving and enhancing aesthetic values in the village.
   (B)   The intent of this chapter is to: divide the village into districts
for the purpose of classifying, regulating and restricting the location of
trades, industries and commercial enterprises; to regulate the location of
buildings arranged, intended and designed for specific uses; to regulate and
limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected; to classify, regulate
and determine the area of front, rear and side yards, courts and other open
space about buildings; to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of the
land and lot areas within the village; to create a board of zoning appeals; to
define certain terms in this chapter; to provide penalties for its violation;
and to designate the time when this chapter shall take effect.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-2) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.003 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural the
singular, where the context requires.
   (B)   The word SHALL is mandatory and not discretionary. The word MAY is
permissive.
   (C)   The word LOT shall include the words PIECE, PARCEL and TRACT; and the
phrase USED FOR shall include the phrases ARRANGED FOR, DESIGNED FOR, INTENDED
FOR, MAINTAINED FOR and OCCUPIED FOR.
   (D)   All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot; if a
fraction is one-half foot or less, the integral foot next below shall be taken.
   (E)   Any words not defined as set forth in §
154.006 shall be construed in their general accepted meanings as defined in the
most recent publication of Webster's dictionary.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.004 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; OTHER LAWS.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals and welfare.
   (B)   Relationship with other laws. Where the conditions imposed by any
provision of this chapter upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of
buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or any other law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive (or which impose higher standards or requirements) shall
govern.
   (C)   Effect on existing agreements. This chapter is not intended to
abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement, provided that
where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive (or impose higher
standards or requirements) than the easements, covenants or other private
agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall govern.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-4) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.005 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Changes in structures or use. Except as may otherwise be provided in
§§
154.180 through
154.187, all buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings
established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing
buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing
uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations to this chapter
which are applicable to the zoning districts in which the buildings, uses or
land shall be located.
   (B)   Nonconforming buildings, structures and uses. Any lawful buildings,
structure or use existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter may be
continued, even though the building, structure or use does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located; and
wherever a district shall be changed hereafter, the then existing lawful use
may be continued, subject to the provisions of §§
154.180 through
154.187.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-5) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.006 DEFINITIONS.
   The words and terms, set forth hereunder wherever they occur in this
chapter, shall be interpreted as herein defined.
   ABANDONMENT. An action to give up one's rights or interests in property.
   ABUTS, ABUTTING. To have a common property line or district line.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.
      (1)   An ACCESSORY BUILDING or USE is one which:
         (a)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal
use;
         (b)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal
building or principal use served; and/or
         (c)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of
occupants of the principal building or principal use served.
      (2)   An ACCESSORY USE includes but is not limited to the following:
         (a)   A children's playhouse, garden house and private greenhouse;
         (b)   A garage, shed or building for domestic storage;
         (c)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot
with any retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations;
         (d)   Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities
on the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless such storage
is excluded by the district regulations;
         (e)   Incinerators incidental to residential use;
         (f)   Nonpaying guest house or rooms for guests within an ACCESSORY
BUILDING, provided such facilities are used for the occasional housing of
guests of the occupant of the principal building and not for permanent
occupancy by others as housekeeping units;
         (g)   Servant's quarters comprising part of an accessory garage and
solely for occupancy by a servant or household employee (and his or her family)
of the occupants of the principal dwelling;
         (h)   Swimming pool, private, for use by the occupant and his or her
guests;
         (i)   Off-street motor car parking areas; and loading and unloading
facilities;
         (j)   Signs (other than advertising signs) as permitted and regulated
in each district incorporated in this chapter;
         (k)   Carports; and
         (l)   Public utilities-telephone, electric, gas, water and sewer
lines, their supports and incidental equipment.
   ACREAGE. Any tract or parcel of land which has not heretofore been
subdivided or platted.
   ADJACENT. To lie near or close to, in the neighborhood or vicinity of.
   ADJOINING. Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near.
   AGRICULTURE. Land, or land and structures, the principal uses of which are
the growing of farm or truck garden crops and one or more of the following:
dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and animal and
poultry husbandry, and accessory uses customarily incidental to agricultural
activities, including farm dwellings.
   AIRPORT, HELIPORT. Any area of land or water which is used or intended for
the landing and take-off of aircraft, together with all structures, tie-down,
storage and parking located thereon.
   ALLEY. A right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to
abutting properties.
   ALTERATION. A change in size, shape, occupancy or use of structures.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. A structure or portion thereof designed or used for the
care, observation or treatment of domestic animals.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is
arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit.
Complete kitchen, bath and toilet facilities permanently installed must always
be included for each APARTMENT.
   AUDITORIUM. A room, hall or building made a part of a church, theater,
school, recreation building or other building assigned to the gathering of
people as an audience to hear lectures, plays and other presentations.
   AUTO LAUNDRY–SELF SERVICE. A structure where water and cleaning facilities
are provided for customers to wash their own vehicles; passenger cars and
trucks of not more than one and one-half tons capacity are permitted.
   AUTOMOBILE AND TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area other than a street, used
for the display or sale of new or used automobiles or trailers to be displayed
and sold on the premises.
   AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY. A building or portion thereof, where automobiles are
washed with the use of mechanical devices.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn
or damaged motor vehicles or trailers, collision service including body, frame
or fender straightening or repair and painting of vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor
service to automobiles, but not automobile repair, including any operation
specified under AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline, stored only in
underground tanks, diesel fuel, kerosene, lubrication oil or grease for
operation of automobiles are offered for sale directly to the public, on the
premises and including minor accessories and servicing of automobiles; but not
including major automobile repairs; and including washing of automobiles where
no device is employed. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor
fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises
shall be classified as a public garage. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS shall not
include sale or storage of automobiles, trailers, trailer sales or rental (new
or used).
   AWNING. A roof-like mechanism retractable in operation, which projects from
the wall of a building.
   BASEMENT (CELLAR). A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than
one-half of its height is above the established curb level or above the average
level of the adjoining ground where the curb level has not been established, a
BASEMENT shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
   BILLBOARD. Any structure or portion thereof upon which a sign or
advertisement is used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include
bulletin boards used to announce church services or to display court or other
public office notices, or signs offering the sale or lease of the premises on
which the sign is located.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or
streets, by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or
shorelines of waterways or corporate boundary lines of municipalities.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A residential building or portion thereof other than a
motel, apartment hotel containing lodging rooms for accommodation of three or
more persons who are not members of the keeper's family, and where lodging and
meals or both are provided by prearrangement and for definite periods.
   BUILDING. Any covered structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure
of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY BUILDING or USE.
   BUILDING AREA. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open
space requirements of this chapter have been complied with.
   BUILDING, COVERAGE. The area of a zoning lot occupied by buildings and
structures including accessory buildings.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by open space on the same zoning
lot.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from grade to the highest point
of the coping for a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the
mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
Chimneys, towers, spires, elevator penthouses, cooling towers and similar
projections other than signs shall not be included in calculating building
height.
   BUILDING LINE. The line nearest the front of and across a zoning lot,
establishing the minimum open space to provide between the front line of a
building or structure and the street right-of-way line.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot.
   BULK. The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and location of the same with respect to one another and including
the following:
      (1)   Size and height of buildings;
      (2)   Locations of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets or other buildings;
      (3)   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area
ratio);
      (4)   All open spaces allocated to the buildings;
      (5)   Amount of lot area per dwelling unit; and
      (6)   Required parking area.
   BUS LOT. Any lot or land area used for the storage or layover of passenger
buses or motor coaches, including school buses.
   CLINIC, MEDICAL or DENTAL. A medical center or medical clinic is an
establishment where three or more licensed physicians, surgeons or dentists
engage in the practice of medicine or dentistry, operating on a group or
individual basis with pooled facilities, such as coordinated laboratory, X-ray
and allied departments, and the diagnosis and treatment of humans, which need
not but may include a drug prescription center (not a drug store) for the
dispensing of drugs and pharmaceutical products to the patients of the
physicians, surgeons and dentists.
   CLOSED CUP FLASH POINT or SIMILAR TEST TYPE. The lowest temperature at which
a combustible liquid under prescribed conditions will give off a flammable
vapor which will propagate a flame. The Tag closed cup tester shall be
authoritative for liquids having a flash point below 175°F. The Pensky-Martens
testers shall be authoritative for liquids having flash points between 175°F
and 300°F.
   CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide
members and whose facilities are restricted to members and their guests. Food
and alcoholic beverages may be served on its premises, provided they are
secondary and incidental to the principal use.
   CONDITIONAL USES. See USE, CONDITIONAL.
   CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure which:
      (1)   Complies with all the regulations of this chapter or of any
amendment thereto governing bulk of the district in which the structure is
located; or
      (2)   Is designed or intended for a permitted or special permitted use as
allowed in the district in which it is located.
   CONTIGUOUS. In actual contact.
   CONVALESCENT HOME. Nursing home.
   COURT. An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings and which is bounded on three or more sides by
such building or buildings.
   DECIBEL. A unit of measurement of the intensity of loudness of sound. Sound
level meters employed to measure the intensity of sound are calibrated in
decibels. A decibel is technically defined as 20 times the logarithm to the
base ten of the ratio of the sound pressure in microbars to a reference
pressure of 0.0002 microbar.
   DISPLACEMENT (EARTH). The amplitude or intensity of an earthborn vibration
measured in inches. The displacement is one-half the total earth movement.
   DISTRICT. A section or part of the unincorporated portion of the village
wherein this chapter is in force, within which uniform regulations and
requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this
chapter.
   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. An establishment or part thereof, the principal use of
which is to provide facilities for serving or consuming commodities which are
purchased by customers waiting in automobiles for consumption off the premises.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for
residential purposes, including single-family, two-family and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including mobile homes or other trailers or lodging rooms in
hotels, motels or lodging houses.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling joined to other dwellings by party walls or
vertical cavity walls, and above ground physically unifying horizontal
structural elements.
   DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by open
space on the same lot.
   DWELLING, EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room,
but which shall include a bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove
directly off the principal room.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units.
   DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED. A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a party
wall, or vertical cavity wall and above-ground physically unifying horizontal
structural elements.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing one dwelling unit in a
detached building unless otherwise specified.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED. A dwelling containing two dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as
living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete single
kitchen facilities permanently installed to serve the entire family, shall
always be included within each dwelling unit.
   EARTHBORN VIBRATION. A cyclic movement of the earth due to the propagation
of mechanical energy.
   ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION CENTER. A terminal at which electric energy is
received from the transmission system and is delivered to the distribution
system only.
   EQUIVALENT OPACITY. The shade on the Ringelmann Chart that most closely
corresponds to the density of smoke other than black or gray.
   ESTABLISHMENT BUSINESS. A structure or lot used in whole or in part as a
place of business, the ownership or management of which is separate and
distinct from the ownership or management of any other place of business
located on the same or other lot.
   FAMILY. One person or two or more persons each related to the other by
blood, marriage or legal adoption (together with their domestic servants) or a
group of not more than four persons not so related, maintaining a common
household in a dwelling unit. A FAMILY may include, in addition thereto, not
more than two roomers, boarders or permanent guests, whether or not gratuitous.
   FENCE. A structure, tree or shrub hedge which is a barrier and used as a
boundary or means of protection or confinement.
   FLOODPLAIN AREA. That continuous area adjacent to a stream or stream bed or
any stormwater retention area and its tributaries, whose elevation is equal to
or lower than the intermediate regional flood elevation for areas of the
village as determined in South Branch Kishwaukee River Flood Plain Information
prepared by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Rock Island District in 1971.
   FLOOR AREA–FOR DETERMINING FLOOR AREA RATIO. The sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors including also the basement floor of a building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerlines
of walls separating two buildings.
      (1)   The FLOOR AREA shall also include the horizontal areas on each
floor devoted to: elevator shafts and stairwells; mechanical equipment, except
if located on the roof when either open or closed, i.e. bulkheads, water tanks
and cooling towers; habitable attic space; interior balconies and mezzanines;
enclosed porches; and accessory uses.
      (2)   The FLOOR AREA of structures used for bulk storage of materials,
i.e., grain elevators and petroleum tanks, shall also be included in the FLOOR
AREA, and such floor area shall be determined on the basis of the height of
such structures, with one floor for each ten feet but not less than those floor
height intervals, it shall be construed to have an additional floor. The
horizontal area in each floor of a building devoted to off-street parking and
off-street loading facilities and the horizontal area of a cellar floor shall
not be included in the FLOOR AREA.
   FLOOR AREA–FOR DETERMINING OFF-STREET PARKING and OFF-STREET LOADING
REQUIREMENTS. When prescribed as the basis of measurement for off-street
parking spaces and  off-street loading spaces for any use, shall be the sum of
the gross horizontal area of the several floors of the building, excluding
areas used for accessory off-street parking facilities and the horizontal areas
of the basement and cellar floors that are devoted exclusively to uses
accessory to the operation of the entire building. All horizontal dimensions
shall be taken from the exterior of the walls.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area
within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot.
   FOOT CANDLE. A unit of illumination, equivalent to the illumination at all
points which are one foot distant from a uniform point source of one candle
power.
   FREE BURNING. The rate of combustion of a material which burns actively and
easily and supports combustion.
   FREIGHT TERMINAL (MOTOR). A building in which freight is brought to the
building by motor truck or railroad freight cars.
   FREQUENCY. Signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound wave
in an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
   FRONTAGE. All the property fronting on one side of a street between the
nearest intersecting streets or between a street and right-of-way, waterway or
other similar barrier.
   GARAGE, BUS. Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of
passenger motor buses or motor coaches used in transportation, including school
buses.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building designed and used for the storage of
motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is
accessory and in which no occupation or business for profit is carried on. Not
more than one of the motor vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more
than 3,000 pounds payload.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof other than a private or
storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing or repairing motor
vehicles. Hiring, selling or storing of motor vehicles may be included.
   GARAGE, STORAGE or OFF-STREET PARKING. A building or portion thereof
designed or used or land used exclusively for storage of motor vehicles, and in
which motor fuels and oils are not sold and motor vehicles are not equipped,
repaired, hired or sold.
   GRADE. The established grade of the street or sidewalk. Where no such grade
has been established, the GRADE shall be the evaluation of the sidewalk at the
property line. Where no sidewalks exist, the GRADE shall be the average
elevation of the street adjacent to the property line, except in cases of
unusual topographic conditions as determined by the Zoning Administrator, the
GRADE shall  be the average elevation of the finished surface of the ground
adjoining the exterior walls of a building or at the base of a structure.
   GROSS DENSITY. The ratio between the total number of dwelling units on a lot
and total lot area in acres.
   GROUND FLOOR AREA. The lot area covered by a principal building, measured at
highest ground grade, adjacent to building from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls, but excluding open porches or terraces and garages or carports.
   GUEST HOUSE. Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on
the same premises with the principal building for use by temporary guests of
the occupants of the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities
nor be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
   GUEST, PERMANENT. A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a lodging
house, rooming house, boarding house, hotel, apartment hotel or motel
accommodation as his or her domicile and place of permanent residence.
   HOME OCCUPATION. In all residence districts, any customary HOME OCCUPATION
operated for profit shall be permitted, provided that:
      (1)   It is conducted entirely within the dwelling by a member of the
family residing in the dwelling and when the HOME OCCUPATION is incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes;
      (2)   It is conducted from a detached or attached accessory building or
requires internal or external alteration, or involves construction features or
use of equipment not customary in a dwelling, and the entrance to the space
devoted to such occupation shall be from within the dwelling and not more than
one-fourth of the floor area of a story including also a cellar of the dwelling
if it is devoted to the HOME OCCUPATION;
      (3)   There is no display or activity that will indicate from the
exterior of the dwelling that it is being used in whole or in part for any use
other than a dwelling; except one nameplate, no more than one square foot in
area which contains only the name of the occupant of the dwelling and the home
occupation conducted therein and is attached to the dwelling and not
illuminated, shall be permitted;
      (4)   It is conducted by only a member of the family residing on the
premises, plus only one additional person, whether or not a member of the
family;
      (5)   No stock-in-trade is kept or sold, including also such as are made
on the premises, or services rendered on the premises that require a receipt or
delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment by other than carrier mail service
or the passenger automobile of the person conducting the home occupation;
      (6)   A home occupation conducted by a professional person shall be only
for consultation, instruction or performance of religious rites, but not for
the general practice of the profession; and
      (7)   Teaching of musical instruments and dancing shall be conducted only
in a single-family detached dwelling and then to not more than two pupils at
one time, and academic or religious instructions may be given to not more than
six pupils at one time in a single-family detached dwelling, and not more than
one pupil at one time in any other type dwelling unit.
   HOSPITAL or SANITARIUM. An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance
and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care for not less
than 24 hours in any week, of three or more nonrelated individuals suffering
from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal physical conditions.
   HOTEL, APARTMENT. A building containing dwelling units or individual guest
rooms, the majority of which are for permanent guests. Maid and janitor service
may be provided but kitchen facilities are not necessarily included.
   HOTEL, MOTEL, INN or AUTO COURT. An establishment containing lodging
accommodations designed for use by transients or travelers or temporary guests.
Facilities provided may include kitchen, maid service, laundering of linen used
on the premises, telephone and secretarial or desk service, meeting rooms,
restaurants, cocktail lounges and other ancillary uses customarily incidental
to the use.
   IMPACT NOISE. A short duration sound which is incapable of being accurately
measured on a sound level meter.
   IMPULSIVE. Discrete vibration pulsation occurring no more than one per
second.
   INCOMBUSTIBLE. A material which will not ignite nor actively support
combustion during an exposure of five minutes to a temperature of 1,200°F.
   INTENSE BURNING. The rate of combustion described by a material that burns
with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. Examples include
sawdust, magnesium (powder, flaked or strips) and rocket fuels.
   JUNK YARD. An open area of land and any accessory building or structure
thereon, which is used for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling,
packing, disassembling or handling waste or scrap materials, including
vehicles, machinery and equipment not in operable condition or parts thereof,
and other metals, paper, plastics, rags, rubber tires and bottles. Two or more
vehicles not in operating condition stored on a zoning lot shall be classified
as a JUNK YARD. A JUNK YARD includes an automobile wrecking yard, but does not
include an establishment located in the applicable manufacturing district,
engaged exclusively in processing of scrap iron or other metals to be sold only
to establishments engaged in manufacturing of steel or metal alloys.
   KENNEL. Any premises or portion thereof on which more than three dogs, cats,
or other household domestic animals over six months of age are kept or on which
more than two such animals are maintained, boarded, bred or cared for in return
for remuneration or are kept for the purpose of sale.
   LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL. A place devoted to experimental study such as
testing, analyzing, manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products is not
included within this definition.
   LABORATORY, RESEARCH. A building or group of buildings in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation,
but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as
incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
   LAUNDERETTE. A business that provides coin-operated, self-service type
washing, drying, dry cleaning and ironing facilities, provided that: not more
than four persons, including owners, are employed on the premises; and no
pickup or delivery service is maintained.
   LIVING SPACE RATIO. The square footage of open space, less the space used
for vehicular movement, that exists for each square foot of building floor
area.
   LOADING and UNLOADING SPACE or BERTH, OFF-STREET. An open, hard-surfaced
area of land other than a street or a public way, the principal use of which is
for the standing, loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and
trailers, to avoid undue interference with public streets and alleys. Such
space shall not be less than ten feet in width, 35 feet in length, and 14 feet
in height, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.
   LODGING HOUSE. A building designated for and used as a single- or two-family
dwelling, all or a portion of which contains lodging rooms which accommodate
persons who are not members of the keeper's family. Lodging or meals or both
are provided for compensation for three or more but not more than ten persons.
   LODGING ROOM. A room or suite of rooms rented as sleeping and living
quarters, but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual
bathroom. In a suite of rooms, each room which provides sleeping accommodations
shall be counted as one lodging room for the purpose of this chapter.
   LOT. A tract of land which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is
designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit, under single ownerships or under single control. Therefore, a
LOT may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear
lines of a lot.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut for their full
length upon streets, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of
such two sides is less than 135°.
   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percentage of the lot occupied by buildings or
structures, including accessory buildings or structures.
   LOT DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two,
more or less, parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. Both street lines
shall be deemed front lot lines.
   LOT INTERIOR. A lot that is not a corner lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot abutting a street. The lot line with
the shortest dimension shall be considered the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, INTERIOR. A lot line which does not abut a street.
   LOT LINE, REAR. An interior lot line which is most distant from and is
almost parallel to the front lot line and in the case of an irregular or
triangular shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot which is
parallel to and at maximum distance from the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
   LOT LINES. The property lines bounding a lot.
   LOT OF RECORD. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision
recorded or registered, pursuant to statute, with the County Recorder.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the street lot lines which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
   LOT WIDTH. The minimum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a
lot measured at the building between setback line.
   MAINTENANCE. The routine upkeep of a structure or equipment including the
replacement or modification of structural components or equipment in order to
keep them unimpaired and in operable condition.
   MANUFACTURE. The making of anything by any agency or process.
   MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment, the principal use of which is
manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning,
servicing or testing of materials, goods or products.
   MARQUEE or CANOPY. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which
projects from the wall of a building.
   MICRON. A unit of length, equal to one-one thousandth part of one millimeter
(.001 millimeter).
   MOBILE HOME. A mobile unit designed and constructed for dwelling purposes
which contains cooking, sanitary and electrical facilities and has a gross
floor area of 220 square feet or more.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A lot, parcel or tract of land developed with facilities
for accommodating two or more mobile homes, only by nontransient dwellers
remaining continuously for more than one month, whether or not a charge is
made. It shall not include a sales lot in which unoccupied mobile homes or
other trailers are parked for the purpose of inspection or sale, except mobile
homes located on a site in the MOBILE HOME PARK which are occupied or vacant
for not more than 90 days after occupancy may be sold or offered for sale.
   MODERATE BURNING. Implies a rate of combustion described by a material which
supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns. Examples: wood, timber
and logs.
   MOTEL. See HOTEL.
   NAMEPLATE. A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the
names, address and telephone number of the manager; or a sign indicating the
name, address and/or the practice of a permitted home occupation therein.
   NO ACCESS STRIP. A strip of land within and along a rear lot line of a
through lot adjoining a street which is designated on a recorded subdivision
plat or property deed as land over which motor vehicular travel shall not be
permitted.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure lawfully established which:
      (1)   Does not comply with all the regulations of this chapter or of any
amendment hereto governing the bulk of the district in which it is located; or
      (2)   Is designed or intended for a nonconforming use.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A structure and the use thereof or the use of land that
does not conform with the regulations of this chapter or any amendment thereto
governing use in the district in which it is located, but conformed with all of
the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements applicable at the time the
structure was erected, enlarged or altered, and the use thereof or the use of
land was established.
   NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL. A material which is capable of causing injury to
living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental
effects to the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
   NURSERY SCHOOL. An establishment for the part-time care of five or more
children (at any time) of pre-elementary school age, in addition to the members
of the family residing therein.
   NURSING HOME-CONVALESCENT HOME and SIMILAR INSTITUTIONS. A home for the
aged, chronically ill, care of children, infirm or incurable persons or a place
of rest for those persons  suffering bodily disorders, in which three or more
persons, not members of the family residing on the premises, are received and
provided with food, shelter and care; but not including hospitals, clinics or
similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of
disease or injury, maternity cases or mental illness.
   OCTAVE BAND. A prescribed interval of sound frequencies which classifies
sound according to its pitch.
   OCTAVE BAND FILTER. An electronic frequency analyzer designed according to
standards of the American Standards Association and used in conjunction with a
sound level meter to take measurements of sound pressure level in specific
octave bands.
   ODOROUS MATTER. A material that produces an olfactory response among human
beings.
   OFF-STREET PARKING AREA or LOT. Land which is improved and used, or a
structure which is designed and used exclusively for the storage of passenger
motor vehicles, either for accessory off-street parking spaces or commercial
off-street parking spaces, when permitted herein by district regulations.
   OPEN SALES LOT. Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling or
renting merchandise stored or displayed out-of-doors prior to sale (such as
automobiles, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats, trailers, garages,
snowmobiles or other commodities).
   OPEN SPACE. Total area in square feet of all uncovered open space of the
land area within the site to be developed plus one-half of covered open spaces,
such as carports.
   OPEN SPACE RATIO. The square footage of site open space provided for each
foot of building floor area.
   OWNER. Any individual, firm or corporation having a possessory interest
entitled to exclusive possession in land, or several such owners acting
jointly.
   PARKING SPACE. An area, enclosed in a building or unenclosed, reserved for
the parking of one motor vehicle, and which is accessible to and from a street,
drive or alley.
   PARTICULATE MATTER. Material other than water which is suspended in or
discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at
outdoor ambient conditions.
   PARTY WALL. A common wall which extends from its footing below grade to the
underside of the roof and divides the buildings
   PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A criteria established to control smoke and
particulate matter, noise, odorous matter, toxic matter, vibration, fire and
explosion hazards, glare and radiation hazards generated by or inherent in uses
of land or buildings.
   PERMANENT OPEN SPACE. A compact and contiguous land area, that is designated
on the Comprehensive (Master) Plan for educational, religious, recreational or
institutional purposes, or such land which is not so designated but which is
recommended for such designation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
approved by the Village Board at or before the time of approval of a
subdivision or planned development.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land which is planning as a whole for
development under single ownership or control and which, by virtue of this
unified planning and development, provides greater amenities, convenience or
other benefits than would normally be had through the development of diverse
smaller tracts under multiple ownership.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Village Planning and Zoning Commission.
   PRE-1960 OCTAVE BANDS. The frequency intervals prescribed by the American
Standards Association in ASA Standard A24. 10-1953 Octave Band Filter Set.
   PREFERRED FREQUENCIES. A set of octave bands described by the band center
frequency and standardized by the American Standards Association in ASA
Standard N.S1.6-1960, Preferred Frequencies for Acoustical Measurements.
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. Any publicly owned open area, including but not limited
to the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, waterways, parkways and
streets.
   PYROPHORIC DUST. A dust in a finely divided state that is spontaneously
combustible in air.
   RADIATION HAZARDS. The deleterious and harmful effects of all ionizing
radiation, which shall include all radiation capable of producing ions in their
passage through matter. Such radiations shall include but not be limited to
electro-magnetic radiations such as x-rays and gamma rays and particulate
radiations such as electrons or beta particles, protons, neutrons and alpha
particles.
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land containing railroad tracks and
auxiliary for track operations, but not including freight depots or stations,
loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops or car
yards.
   RECREATION SPACE. Total area in square feet which is countable as open space
but is not paved in streets, walks or driveways and is suitable for recreation
pursuits. The smallest countable recreation area is 1,000 square feet. Any part
of an area having a dimension of less than 20 feet shall not be included as
countable RECREATION SPACE.
   RECREATION SPACE RATIO. The square footage of space for active recreation
provided for each space foot of building area.
   REFUSE. All waste products resulting from human habitation, except sewage.
   RESERVOIR PARKING SPACES. Those off-street parking spaces allocated for
temporary standing of automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.
   RINGELMANN CHART. The chart described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines
Information Circular 6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray
for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke-density.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street which is used or intended to be used for
the travel of motor vehicles.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a street line and the
nearest wall of a building or side of a structure facing the street line, or
edge of the area of operation of a principal use, when no building or structure
is involved.
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, illustration, display or device
which is affixed to, painted or represented upon a structure or land and which
directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or
business. For the purpose of definition, a SIGN may be single-faced or multi-
faced; however, a SIGN shall not include any display of any court, public or
official notice, nor shall it include the flag, emblem, insignia of a nation,
political unit, school, religious or charitable institution or organization. A
SIGN shall also include a permanent sign located within a building in such a
manner as to be viewed or intended for view primarily from the exterior to the
building.
   SIGN, ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD). A structure including a billboard on which is
portrayed information which directs attention to a business, commodity, service
or entertainment or other activity not related to use on the lot upon which the
sign structure is located.
   SIGN, BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
entertainment or other service activity conducted on the lot upon which the
sign is located.
   SIGN, CHURCH BULLETIN BOARD. A sign attached to the exterior of a church or
located elsewhere on the church premises, used to indicate the services or
activities of the church and including its name, if desired.
   SIGN, FLASHING. An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
kept constant or stationary in intensity or color at all times when sign is in
use. Illuminated signs which indicate the time, temperature, date or similar
public service information shall not be considered FLASHING SIGNS.
   SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF. The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual message or copy area. It
does not include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of
the sign surface and not forming an integral part of the display.
   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign indicating the name and address of a building,
or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation
therein.
   SIGN, POLITICAL. Any sign painted, posted or displayed in any way in behalf
of any candidate or political party. The sign shall be removed by the applicant
not later than 30 days after the election for which the sign was erected.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign which is affixed to any building wall or other
structure and extends beyond the building wall or parts thereof or structure
more than 18 inches.
   SIGN, ROOF. A sign erected, constructed and maintained above the roof (eave
line) of any building.
   SIGN, WALL. A sign which is affixed to an exterior wall of any building,
when a sign shall project not more than 18 inches from the building wall or
parts thereof.
   SMOKE. The visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust or
combustion processes which is made up of particulate matter.
   SMOKE UNIT. The number obtained when the smoke density in the Ringelmann
Number is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of
this calculation:
      (1)   A Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once a minute
during the period of observation;
      (2)   Each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during which
it is observed; and
      (3)   The various products are then added together to give the total
number of SMOKE UNITS observed during the entire observation period.
   SOLAR FARM. A solar energy system or systems consisting of one or more solar
panels which is or are ground mounted, but which is or are not attached to
another structure or building, and which shall operate for a term not to exceed
40 years.
   SOUND LEVEL. The intensity of sound of an operation or use as measured in
decibels.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument for the measurement of sound pressure
levels constructed in accordance with the standards of the American Standards
Association and calibrated in decibels.
   STABLE, PRIVATE. A structure which is located on a lot on which a dwelling
is located, and which is designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for
housing horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling, but in no
event for hire.
   STABLE, PUBLIC. A building where horses are kept for remuneration, hire or
sale.
   STACKING REQUIREMENTS. For the purpose of this chapter, the number of cars
that must be accommodated in a reservoir space while awaiting ingress or egress
to specified business or service establishments. A structure for the display
and sale of only farm products which are produced on the premises.
   STORY. That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it. The floor of a story may have split levels, provided that there are not
more than four feet difference in elevation between the different levels of the
floor. A basement shall be counted as a STORY, except when used for storage
garages for use of occupants of a building or other facilities common for the
rest of the building. A mezzanine floor shall be counted as a STORY when it
covers over one-third the area of the floor next below it or if the vertical
distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is 24 feet or
more.
   STORY, HALF. A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than three
feet above the floor of such story.
   STREET FRONTAGE. All of the property fronting on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead-end street, all of
the property along one side of the street between an intersecting street and
the end of the dead-end street.
   STREET LINE. The street right-of-way line abutting a property line of a lot.
   STREET, ROAD or HIGHWAY. A public or private right-of-way or easement which
is designated as a permanent right-of-way or easement for common uses as the
primary means of vehicular access to properties abutting on it.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders or any substantial change in
the roof or in the exterior walls, except such repair or replacement as may be
required for the safety of the building.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground (including but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing buildings, advertising signs, back stops for tennis courts and
pergolas).
   TAVERN or LOUNGE. A building or part thereof where liquors are sold to be
consumed on the premises, but not including restaurants where the principal
business is serving food.
   THEATER, DRIVE-IN. A parcel or tract of land containing facilities for
projecting motion pictures on an outdoor movie screen which are viewed from the
patron's automobile parked on the premises.
   THREE-COMPONENT MEASURING SYSTEM. Instruments which measure simultaneously
earth-born vibrations in horizontal and vertical planes.
   TOURIST HOME. A building which contains a single dwelling unit and in which
meals or lodging or both are provided or offered to transient guests for
compensation. Does not include a hotel, apartment hotel or motel.
   TOURIST PARK. A parcel or tract of land containing facilities for locating
three or more travel trailers, mobile homes, camping tents or other similar
temporary sleeping facilities for use only by transients (tourists).
   TOXIC MATTER OR MATERIAL. Those materials which are capable of causing
injury to living organisms by chemical means.
   TRAILER or MOBILE HOME, CAMPS OR PARKS. Any premises occupied or designed to
accommodate one or more families living in a house trailer or mobile home.
   TRAILER, CAMPING SPORTS. A trailer designed and constructed for temporary
dwelling purposes which does not contain certain built-in sanitary facilities
for the purpose of this chapter, is dwelling.
   TRAILER, TRAVEL. A trailer designed and constructed for dwelling purposes
which may contain cooking, sanitary and electrical facilities. It shall include
units constructed for dwelling purposes and attached to motor vehicles, such as
camping units mounted upon pickup trucks.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained and
shall include standards of this chapter.
   USE, ACCESSORY. One which is incidental to the dominant use of the premises.
   USE, PERMITTED. Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations and, when applicable, performance standards of this chapter for the
district in which the use is located.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The dominant use of land or structures as distinguished from
a subordinate or accessory use.
   USE, SPECIAL. A use as designated in the Illinois Statutes that has unusual
operational, physical or other characteristics that may be different from those
of the predominant permitted uses in a district, but which is a use that
complements and is otherwise or can be made compatible with the intended
overall development within a district. Compliance with special standards not
necessarily applicable to other permitted use or uses in the district shall be
required for a use, as regulated in this chapter.
   USED CAR LOT. A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers or trucks are
displayed in the open for sale or trade.
   VENDING MACHINE. A machine for dispensing merchandise or services, designed
to be operated by the customer.
   VIBRATION. The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth at
designated frequency - cycles per second.
   VISION CLEARANCE. An unoccupied triangular space at the corner of a corner
lot or at a corner created by the intersection of a private access with a
public street; such triangle being bounded by: the street (R.O.W.) lines in the
case of a corner lot, and the street line and the inner pavement or surface
line of a private access; and a setback line connecting points determined by
measurements from the intersection.
   WRECKING YARD. An area of land where three or more motor vehicles, machinery
or equipment not in operable condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the
open.
   YARD. An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or
group of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level
upward, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, and which extends along
a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the
yard regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot line
and the building line.
   YARD, INTERIOR SIDE. A side yard which adjoins another lot or an alley
separating the side yard from another lot.
   YARD LINE. A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which the
applicable yard extends and which is not nearer to the lot line at any point
than the required depth or width or the applicable yard. A structure or other
obstruction shall not encroach into the area between the YARD LINE and the
adjacent lot line, except for such permitted obstructions in yards as are set
forth in this chapter.
   YARD, REAR. A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, near lot lines and
the rear yard line.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard line,
side yard line and side lot line.
   YARD, SIDE–ADJOINING A STREET. A yard which is bounded by the front lot
line, side yard adjoining a street line and rear lot line.
   YARD, TRANSITIONAL. The required rear or side yard between a business or
manufacturing district and a residential district.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The person charged with the responsibility for
administering and enforcing this chapter.
   ZONING DISTRICTS. The districts into which the area of Kirkland has been
divided for zoning regulations and requirements as set forth on the Zoning
District Map or maps.
   ZONING LOT. A parcel of land which is designated by its owner or developer
as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single
ownership or control. Therefore, a ZONING LOT may or may not coincide with a
lot of record.
   ZONING MAP. The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as part thereof,
designating zoning districts.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-4-
2019)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 154.015 LOT COVERAGE.
   (A)   Maintenance of yards, courts and other open spaces. The maintenance of
yards, courts and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a
building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of the building or of
the property on which it is located, as long as the building is in existence.
Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open spaces or minimum
lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or
for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, other open space or
minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
   (B)   Division of zoning lots. No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be
divided in two or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning lots resulting
from each such division shall conform with all the applicable area and bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
   (C)   Required yards for existing buildings. No yards now or hereafter
provided for a building existing on the effective date of this chapter shall
subsequently be reduced below if already less than the minimum yard
requirements of this chapter for equivalent new construction.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-6) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.016 LOT AREA AND DIMENSION.
   (A)   Contiguous parcels. When two or more parcels of land, each of which
lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the
requirements of the use district in which it is located, are contiguous and are
held in one ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
   (B)   Lots or parcels of land of record. Any single lot or parcel of land,
held in one ownership, which was of record at the time of adoption of this
chapter, that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot width and area,
may be utilized for a permitted use; provided that yards, courts or usable open
spaces are not less than 75% of the minimum required dimensions and that the
lot or parcel is not less than 5,000 square feet in area and has a lot frontage
of not less than 50 feet.
   (C)   Private sanitary sewage facility requirements. Every use which is to
be served by a private sanitary sewage facility shall comply with the
requirements of any existing state and village regulations.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-7) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.017 ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREET.
   Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, every residential building
shall be constructed or erected upon a parcel of land which abuts upon a public
street, unless a permanent easement of access to a public street not less than
25 feet in width was of record prior to the adoption of this chapter, and
except as provided herein for planned developments. Driveway approaches shall
be constructed of gravel, asphalt or concrete. If the approach is constructed
of gravel, it shall be six inches deep; if constructed of asphalt, it shall be
two inches of asphalt over two inches of gravel; and if constructed of
concrete, it shall be four inches of concrete over four inches of gravel. All
driveway approaches shall be pitched so that water does not drain onto the
street.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-8) (Ord. 99-15, passed 9-7-1999; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.018 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT.
   Except in the case of planned developments, not more than one principal
detached residential building shall be located on a residential zoning lot.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-9) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.019 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be compatible with the
principal use, and no accessory building or structure shall be constructed on
any lot prior to the construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory. The following regulations shall apply to uses in all residential
districts:
   (A)   Accessory buildings and structures. Accessory buildings, structures
and uses shall not be erected or altered in required yards, courts or other
open areas, except those that are herein permitted as obstructions in yards,
courts or other open areas.
   (B)   Detached accessory buildings provisions. Except as herein otherwise
required for a specific accessory use, detached accessory buildings, as herein
permitted as obstructions in required rear yards, shall:
      (1)   Be not more than one story or 15 feet in height, whichever is
lower;
      (2)   Cover not more than 30% of the area of the rear yard; and
      (3)   Be located not less than five feet from a lot line of adjoining
lots, except:
         (a)   On corner lots, not nearer to the lot line that the distance of
the required side yard for the lot adjoining the rear lot line and not nearer
to the side street line the distance required for a side yard adjoining a
street, or in the case of a reverse corner lot, the required front yard on the
lot adjoining the rear lot line; and
         (b)   On through lots that do not have a rear lot line adjoining a no-
access strip, not nearer to the rear lot line adjoining a street than the
distance required for a front yard.
   (C)   Detached accessory buildings; other restrictions.
      (1)   No detached building accessory to a single-family detached dwelling
hereafter erected or altered at any location on a lot shall be more than one
story of a building with a flat roof, or 20 feet for a gable, mansard or
gambrel roof, nor shall it be nearer than ten feet from the principal building
on the lot.
      (2)   No detached accessory building hereafter erected or altered shall
project nearer to a lot line adjoining a street than the distance equivalent to
the shortest distance between the lot line and the nearest wall of the
principal building, except an attached private garage may project nearer to a
lot line adjoining a street.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-10) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.020 PERMITTED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   The following accessory buildings, structures and uses are permitted and may
be obstructions in yards and courts as follows:
Notes:
F   Denotes permitted obstruction in front yards and side yards adjoining
streets.
S   Denotes permitted obstruction in interior side yards.
R   Denotes permitted obstruction in rear yards.
C   Denotes permitted obstruction in open courts.
 
A.   Awnings or canopies, which may project not more than 3 feet in a required F S R C
yard or court
B.   Arbors or trellises, and where trellises are attached to the principal        R C
building they may also project into front yards, side yards and courts
C.   Air conditioning equipment shelters                                           R C
D.   Architectural entrance structures on a lot not less than 2 acres in area oF S R
at entrance roadways into subdivisions containing 100 or more lots
E.   Balconies                                                                     R C
F.   Bay windows—projecting not more than 3 feet into a yard                 F S R C
G.   Chimneys, attached—projecting not more than 24 inches into a yard or couFtS R C
 
H.   Eaves and gutters on principal buildings or attached accessory
buildings—projecting not more than 4 feet into a front and rear yard, nor more F S R C
than 24 inches into a side yard or court
I.   Fallout shelters, attached or detached, when conforming also with other      R
codes and ordinances of the village
J.   Fences, open—not more than 5 feet in height, except in business and
manufacturing districts, and those enclosing the schools and other public and    F S R
quasi-public uses
K.   Fences, solid—not more than 6 feet in height in business districts, not
more than 8 feet in manufacturing districts, and in residence districts, solid     S R
fences not more than 6 feet in height
L.   Fire escapes, open or enclosed, of fire towers—may project into a required
front or side yard adjoining a street not more than 5 feet and into a required   F S R C
interior yard or court not more than 3-1/2 feet
M.   Flagpoles                                                                F S R C
N.   Garages or carports, attached or detached                                  S R
O.   Growing of farm and garden crops in the open                                 R
P.   Lawn furniture, such as benches, sundials, bird baths and similar        F S R C
architectural features
Q.   Open off-street loading spaces                                               R
R.   Open off-street parking spaces which shall be located not less than 2-1/
2 feet from a lot line, or not less than 10 feet from a lot line, or not less
than 10 feet from a building wall in courts, or greater distance if required
herein for a specific use, and in the manufacturing districts and all business
districts, and all business districts, except a B-1 District, open off-street
parking spaces may be in a required front yard or side yard adjoining a street
as hereinafter regulated
S.   Ornamental light standards                                               F S R C
T.   Playground and laundry-drying equipment                                      R C
U.   Playhouses and open-sided summer houses                                      R
V.   Sheds and storage buildings for garden equipment and household items as
accessory to dwellings and buildings, and structures customarily incidental to       R
the pursuit of agriculture
W.   Signs and nameplates as herein regulated                                 F S
X.   Sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features of the principal   F S R C
buildings, projecting not more than 18 inches into a yard or court
 
 
Y.   Steps, open—necessary for access to and from the dwelling or an accessory
building, steps as access to the lot from the street, and in gardens or terraces,   F S R C
provided there are no more than 8 steps for access to and from a principal or
accessory building
Z.   Swimming pools, private—when conforming also with other codes or ordinances ofR
the village
AA.   Terraces, patios and outdoor fireplaces                                        R
BB.   Tennis courts, private                                                         R
CC.   Trees, shrubs and flowers                                                      R
DD.   Other accessory buildings, structures and uses as herein permitted in        S R
district regulations as accessory to a specific permitted use
EE.   On corner lots within that part of a yard, court or other open area located
within a radius of 25 feet from the point of intersection of the 2 street right-of-
way lines forming the lot corner, no buildings, structures or shrubs as herein
permitted as obstructions in front or side yards adjoining a street shall be        F S
erected, altered or planted which have a height more than 30 inches above the
ground grade in this area, and trees planted in such areas shall be maintained in a
manner that trees shall not have branches lower than the 8 feet above the ground
grade elevation in this area
 
(1983 Code, § 9-1-11) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.021 MOBILE HOMES.
   The following regulations shall apply to mobile homes:
   (A)   A mobile home shall not be considered an accessory use for the
purposes of this chapter.
   (B)   No mobile home shall be stored, parked or occupied for living purposes
(connection to any public utility shall constitute occupancy for the purposes
of this chapter) except:
      (1)   In an approved mobile home park, provided that public or community
sewer and water facilities are available for each mobile home;
      (2)   A camping or trailer or sports trailer, as defined in this chapter,
may be stored in a side or rear yard;
      (3)   No mobile home shall be used as a dwelling unit on any lot, plat or
tract of land other than the one approved as a mobile home park by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the Village Board and licensed by the Illinois State
Board of Health, except that full-time, temporary or permanent employees on
agricultural pursuits may be housed in mobile homes on the premises, if
adequate sanitary facilities are provided and a distance of 600 feet is
maintained from residential subdivision; and/or
      (4)   A mobile home may be used as a temporary office incidental to
construction on or development of the premises on which the mobile home is
located only during the period of time that the construction or development is
actively under way.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-12) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.022 EXISTING SPECIAL USES.
   When a use is classified as a special use under this chapter, and exists as
a permitted use at the date of adoption of this chapter, it shall be considered
a special use without further action of the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the Village Board.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-13) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.023 USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS.
   When a use is not specifically listed in the section devoted to permitted
uses it shall be assumed that the uses are hereby expressly prohibited, unless
by a written decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission it is determined
that the use is similar to and not more objectionable than uses listed.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-14) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.024 SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   Sewage disposal facilities shall be connected to the sewage disposal system
of the village. In any district where sewage service is not available, the
width and area of all lots shall be sufficient to permit the use of an on-site
sewage disposal system designed in accordance with applicable state and local
requirements. In no case, however, shall the minimum lot size required in the
zoning district in which the structure is to be located be reduced below the
specified minimum.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-15) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.025 VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE.
   In each quadrant of both: every intersection of any street with a collector
or arterial street as designated on the Master Plan Map, and every intersection
of a collector or arterial street with a private or public driveway or
accessway providing egress for a parking area of 1,000 square feet or more,
there shall be designed a vision clearance of triangle or triangles bounded by
the inner street lines (right-of-way), or the street line and driveway lines,
as the case may be, and a line connecting them 35 feet from their intersection.
Within these triangles no object shall be allowed above the height of two and
one-half feet above the streets and/or driveways if it obstructs the view
across the triangle. This provision shall not apply to tree trunks, posts or
wire fences.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-16) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS
§ 154.035 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   For the purpose of provisions of this chapter, Kirkland, Illinois, is hereby
organized into the following zoning districts:
   (A)   Agricultural District: A Agricultural District;
   (B)   Residence districts:
      (1)   R-1 Single-Family Residence (low density);
      (2)   R-2 Single-Family Residence (medium density);
      (3)   R-3 Single-Family Residence (high density); and
      (4)   R-4 Multi-Family Residence.
   (C)   Business districts:
      (1)   B-1 General Commercial;
      (2)   B-2 Highway Commercial; and
      (3)   B-3 Convenience Commercial.
   (D)   Manufacturing District: M-1 General Manufacturing; and
   (E)   Conservancy District: C Conservancy District.
(1983 Code, § 9-2-1) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.036 MAPS.
   The boundaries of the zoning districts heretofore designated are hereby
established as shown on the maps entitled "Official Zoning Map, Kirkland,
Illinois" and "Official Flood Plain Overlay Zoning Map, Kirkland, Illinois"
which maps accompany and are made a part of this chapter, and shall have the
same force and effect as if the zoning maps together with all notations,
references and other information shown thereon, were fully set forth and
described herein.
(1983 Code, § 9-2-2) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
Cross-reference:
   Official Zoning Map, see
Appendix A to this chapter
§ 154.037 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Whenever uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   District boundary lines are either the centerlines of railroads,
highways, streets, alleys or easements or the boundary lines of sections,
quarter sections, divisions of sections, tracts or lots, unless specifically
indicated otherwise.
   (B)   In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is
indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth
of such strips shall be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the maps
measured at right angles from the centerline of the street or highway, and the
length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the map from
section, quarter section or division lines, or centerlines of streets, highways
or railroad rights-of-way unless otherwise indicated.
   (C)   Where a lot held in one ownership and of record on the effective date
of this chapter is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be
construed to be within the less restricted district, provided that this
construction shall not apply if it increases the less restricted frontage of
the lot more than 25%.
(1983 Code, § 9-2-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.038 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS, WATERWAYS AND RAILROAD
RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way, if
not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone
as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways or
waterways or railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street, alley,
public way, waterway or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary,
the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be
deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline.
(1983 Code, § 9-2-4) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.039 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   Any additions to the incorporated area of the village, resulting from
annexation shall be automatically classified in the A Agricultural District
until such time as the Village Board designates the permitted use of land in
accordance with the administrative provisions of this chapter.
(1983 Code, § 9-2-5) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
§ 154.050 PURPOSE.
   The Agricultural District is established to provide for a continuation of
agricultural pursuits and to also provide a holding zone for areas required for
future urban developments and to promote the logical growth of uses in the
village. These areas are intended to be rezoned in accordance with the use
designations appearing on the Master Plan Map when urban development needs so
necessitate and when the logical extension of utilities and public facilities
can be ensured. This will discourage haphazard and premature development from
occurring at the fringes of the village.
(1983 Code, § 9-3-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.051 A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Agriculture - an area which is used specifically for the purpose of
producing crops, livestock, poultry or dairy products;
      (2)   One-family detached dwellings and accessory uses;
      (3)   Home occupations;
      (4)   Private stables may be permitted for not more than three horses or
ponies or two animals for 4-H Club or other similar club activity for each five
acres of a zoning lot, if such stables are animal houses and are located 150
feet or more from the nearest residence or business district;
      (5)   Signs, as permitted or required in §§
154.145 through
154.150;
      (6)   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to
extend beyond the completion date of the construction;
      (7)   Temporary real estate office in conjunction with a new housing
development, limited to the selling or renting of new units in the development
and in no case to be in operation for more than one year following completion
of construction of the housing development;
      (8)   Railroad rights-of-way;
      (9)   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed the construction and when located on the same lot where the construction
is being undertaken or a contiguous lot thereto; and
      (10)   Accessory uses to agriculture:
         (a)   Those customarily accessory to the pursuit of agriculture,
provided that permanent structures for the shelter of livestock, poultry and
other farm animals shall be located not less than 100 feet from a lot line; and
         (b)   Roadside stands, for the sale of produce and poultry grown and
raised on or in the immediate area of the premises, but not including live
animals, and provided that such stand shall contain not more than 600 square
feet of floor area. Each roadside stand shall have facilities approved by the
Zoning Administrator, for vehicular ingress and egress, and adequate off-street
parking.
   (B)   Special use. Special uses may be allowed as per §§
154.160 through
154.166.
   (C)   Off-street automobile parking facilities. Automobile parking
facilities shall be provided as required in §§
154.125 through
154.132.
   (D)   Lot size.
      (1)   Existing residential use. A subdivision, for the purpose of the
sale or transfer of ownership of one lot, which contains an existing
residential structure, shall be not less than five acres in area and have a
width at the established building line of not less than 300 feet.
      (2)   Nonfarm residence. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter
erected shall be located on a zoning lot having an area of not less than five
acres, and a width at the established building line of not less than 300 feet.
All or part of the zoning lot may be devoted to permitted agricultural uses.
There shall be only one dwelling to a zoning lot.
      (3)   Special use. The lot size for a special use shall be designated in
the permit granting the special use but shall not be less than one acre.
   (E)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the
building, structure or enlargement.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 40 feet shall be
provided.
      (2)   Side yard. A side yard on each side of the principal building of
not less than 100 feet; except where a side yard adjoins a street, the minimum
width of such yard shall be not less than that established above for front
yards.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 100 feet shall be provided.
   (F)   Lot coverage. Not more than 15% of the area of the zoning lot may be
occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
   (G)   Maximum floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed the
following:
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings and agricultural uses—not applicable.
      (2)   The maximum floor area ratio for special uses shall be established
at the time the special use permit is granted.
   (H)   Solar farm. A solar farm is a special use within the A Agricultural
District.
      (1)   All solar farm special use permits shall be subject to the
following standards and regulations:
         (a)   Setback. The solar farm above ground components must be set back
at least 25 feet from all property lines. However, for any solar farm above
ground improvements including, but not limited to, fences or solar panels,
abutting a state route, the solar farm above ground components shall be set
back 150 feet from the centerline of such state route. In addition, solar farm
above ground components must be set back at least 50 feet from the centerline
of any non-state route right-of-way.
         (b)   Visual screening. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment that is
visible outside the perimeter of the property on which the solar farm is
located must be screened from view of roads and dwelling units located within
1,000 feet of the solar farm in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection. Required screening and berms shall be located within required
setbacks, but outside of any paved road surface on land dedicated to the
village by the owner, and must comply with one of the following options or a
similar alternative approved by the Village Board at the time of special use
permit approval as follows:
            1.   A landscaped area at least ten feet in width with at least one
shrub per five linear feet, plus at least one evergreen tree per 25 linear feet
of perimeter area. Shrubs must be at least three feet in height at the time of
planting. Evergreen trees must be at least 5 feet in height at the time of
planting; or
            2.   A landscaped area at least ten feet in width with a solid wall
or privacy fence with a minimum height of eight feet. At least one evergreen
tree is required per 30 linear feet of the fence or wall.
            3.   In addition, a landscaped berm of at least five feet in height
may be installed in the required setback area relative to any adjacent parcel
on which a residence is situated. Such berm shall be landscaped with one
evergreen with a minimum height of five feet every 25 linear feet.
            4.   Every evergreen in the landscaped area described in (b)1. or
(b)2. above, at the time of planting, shall be at least five feet in height. In
the event that a shrub or tree dies within any such landscaped area, such shrub
or tree shall be promptly replaced by the then owner of the subject property,
weather permitting. No portion of the landscaped area or berm shall be situated
within any right of way.
         (c)   Glare. The solar energy system utilized must be designed,
constructed and sited to insure glare or reflections on adjacent properties and
roadways will not materially and negatively impact the use of such adjacent
properties and roadways by their owners and travelers and to not interfere with
traffic, including air traffic, or otherwise create a safety hazard. In the
event that glare concerns are documented and presented to the village following
commercial operation, the solar farm owner will take actions to address those
concerns, including adding landscaping or privacy fencing as necessary or
otherwise modifying the project site to address such concerns.
         (d)   Soil and ground cover.
            1.   Top soils shall not be removed from the site during
development unless the removal is expressly approved as part of the special use
permit.
            2.   Perennial vegetative ground cover must be maintained or
established in all areas containing a solar energy system and in required
setbacks to prevent erosion and manage stormwater run-off. The ground cover
shall also include an area that is suitable habitat for pollinators such as
bees.
         (e)   Compliance with endangered species laws. The applicant shall be
in compliance with federal and state laws regarding endangered species.
         (f)   Lighting. A solar farm may not be artificially illuminated,
unless required by the FAA or other applicable government agency or authority
or approved by the village as part of the special use process. If lighting is
approved by the village, such lighting shall be limited to that required for
safety and operational purposes and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting
properties. Lighting of the solar panels shall be directed downward and shall
incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
         (g)   Underground utilities. On-site power lines communications and
utility connections must be placed underground unless expressly provided
otherwise in the text of the body of the ordinance granting the special use
permit. Such undergrounding requirement includes but is not limited to those
power, communication or other lines running between banks of solar panels, but
does not include transmission lines and interconnection facilities that will be
used by the solar farm to connect to electric lines, electric substations or
interconnections with buildings.
         (h)   Signage.
            1.   Any sign on a solar farm shall comply with the village's sign
ordinances. A sign consistent with the village's sign ordinance shall be
required to identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone
number.
            2.   Solar panels shall not be used for displaying any advertising
except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the
solar panels.
         (i)   Abandonment and decommissioning. A solar farm that: (a) fails to
transmit any energy to the electric distribution system within any period of 12
or more consecutive months; and (b) where the owner/operator is not pursuing
the repair of such solar farm will be presumed to have been abandoned. If the
village reasonably believes an abandonment to have occurred in accordance with
the prior sentence, the village shall provide written notification of such
belief to the owner/operator and the owner/operator shall have 30 days after
receipt of such written notice to reply to such notification with evidence
refuting such contention. In the event the owner/operator fails to refute such
contention within such 30-day period, the village may presume that the solar
farm has been abandoned unless, prior to the village: (i) accessing any cash or
letter of credit posted by owner as security for the decommissioning; or (ii)
taking over and commencing the decommissioning, the village is provided with
clear and convincing evidence otherwise.
            1.   Any solar farm that has been abandoned must be decommissioned
and removed within 180 days.
            2.   Decommissioning must consist of:
               a.   Physical removal of all solar panel installations,
structures, foundations, equipment, security barriers or fences and
transmission lines from the site to a depth below grade of three feet.
               b.   Recycling or disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in
accordance with local, state, and federal regulations.
               c.   Stabilization, restoration and/or re-vegetation of the
site.
               d.   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to allow the owner
or operator to leave landscaping or designated foundations three feet or less
below grade in place in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
            3.   Decommissioning plan.
               a.   A decommissioning plan prepared by a qualified engineering
firm outlining the anticipated means and costs of removing the solar farm must
be submitted with the building permit application associated with the special
use permit application.
               b.   The decommissioning plan shall ensure that the owner or
operator properly removes the equipment and facilities upon the end of project
life or after their useful life. The plan must include provisions for the
removal of all structures and foundations, the removal of all electrical
transmission components and the restoration of soil and vegetation in
accordance with this section.
               c.   The owner/operator must provide a present-day
decommissioning cost estimate and identify the parties responsible for
decommissioning. This estimate will include the cost to remove equipment, less
applicable salvage values.
               d.   The owner/operator must submit a summary of the
decommissioning plan to all property owners owning properties adjacent to the
solar farm site. Before issuance of a special use permit, the owner/operator of
the solar farm must provide to the Village Administrator a certificate signed
by the solar farm owner certifying that a summary of the decommissioning plan
has been sent by certified mail to all of such property owners. In addition,
prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction of a solar farm on
all, or a portion, of the property, the village shall require cash in an escrow
account or an irrevocable letter of credit, in an amount equal to 125% of the
present-day decommissioning cost estimate provided by the owner/operator under
§
154.051(H)(1)(i)3.a., designating the village as beneficiary, issued by a
financial institution with an office in Illinois upon which the letter of
credit may be drawn and substantially in the form attached to Ord. 2019-01 as
Exhibit A or otherwise in a form approved by the Village Attorney. The letter
of credit shall provide that the village may draw upon the funds upon the
occurrence of any of the following events: (i) a breach or failure by the owner
or operator to complete all or a portion of such plan; ( ii) a material breach
or failure to comply with any requirement or condition of any zoning ordinance
relative to a solar farm on the subject property; or (iii) such letter of
credit is about to expire and has not been, or will not automatically be
renewed; provided, however, that such draw shall not occur in the event of
items (i) and (ii) above unless owner has failed to cure such breach or failure
within 15 days of being notified in writing by the village of such breach or
failure. The village may also draw upon such letter of credit to compensate any
adjacent property owner for property proven to have been damaged as a direct
result of a drain tile on the subject property being damaged by the owner/
operator of the subject property. In the event that a letter of credit rather
than a cash escrow is utilized, such irrevocable letter of credit shall be
renewed by the owner of the subject property or operator of the solar farm
without interruption for the term of the special use permit. In the event that
such letter of credit lapses, such lapse shall result in the revocation of the
special use permit for the solar farm by the village if not remedied within 15
days of the village notifying the owner of such lapse or 30 days of such lapse.
         (j)   Monitoring and maintenance. The owner/operator of the solar farm
is responsible for keeping the solar farm in a safe, sound and well-maintained
condition, including painting, grounds keeping, structural repairs, internal
access drives and the integrity of security measures. The owner of the solar
farm will certify to the village at the start of commercial operations that the
solar farm is in compliance with the site plan, and its operation will comply
with all federal, state and local regulations in effect at that time.
         (k)   Avoidance and mitigation of damages to public infrastructure.
            1.   Roads. If the subject property is adjacent to a state route,
such state route shall be used for the purpose of transporting components and
equipment for construction, operation or maintenance of the solar farm. The
owner/operator shall obtain applicable permits from the applicable highway
authority prior to construction or as needed to remain in compliance with all
state laws and regulations.
            2.   Existing road conditions. The owner/operator must conduct a
pre-construction survey in coordination with the applicable highway authority
to determine the condition of existing roads within the village that will be
utilized by the solar farm. The pre-construction survey must include
photographs and a written agreement to document the condition of the roads and
applicable public facilities. The owner/operator is responsible for reasonable
ongoing road maintenance and dust-control measures identified by the applicable
highway authority for all vehicles used for construction of the solar farm
during all phases of construction and installation. The owner/operator shall
conduct, within 30 days of completing construction, a second video survey of
all existing roads used by the solar farm for construction activities. Prior to
starting construction, the owner/operator shall deliver or have delivered to
the village a letter of credit or cash escrow in the amount of $20,000 as
security for the village to cover, in the event of a failure of the owner/
operator to meet its obligations, the costs of the village performing the
obligations of the owner/operator to make any necessary road repairs to the
existing roads used by the solar farm for construction activities required due
to the impact of such construction activities on such roads. Such letter of
credit or cash escrow shall serve as the sole source and amount from owner/
operator to cover the costs incurred by the village for its undertaking any
such future road repairs to existing roads required due solely to solar farm
construction activities that the owner/operator has failed to perform. The
village shall release such letter of credit or cash escrow with any unused
amounts remaining thereon or therein upon completion of any such necessary road
repairs.
            3.   Drainage and detention systems. The owner/operator is
responsible for identifying the location of all drain tiles (or, alternatively,
the information required in §
154.051(H)(1)(k)3., as an alternative to a drain tile study), detention and
subsurface drainage systems on the property and submitting such information to
the village at the time of application. In addition, the applicant shall
identify detention, drain tile (or, alternatively, the information required in
§
154.051(H)(1)(k)3.), or subsurface drainage systems that will be incorporated
into the site stormwater permit and for preparing a plan for maintaining such
drainage systems during construction and operation of the solar facility.
Owner/operator is responsible for repairing, at all times, including but not
limited to as part of decommissioning, any damage to drain tiles and other
drainage systems that result from construction, operation, or maintenance of
the solar farm.
         (l)   Financial assurance. The owner/operator must provide reasonable
evidence of financial ability to construct the solar farm and all required
improvements, as determined by the Village Board at the time of special use
permit approval.
         (m)   Height. The height of any solar energy system, including panels,
shall not exceed 12 feet and six inches as measured from adjoining grade at
base to the highest elevation of the equipment, when oriented at maximum tilt
position. This limitation does not apply to transmission lines and
interconnection facilities or operations and maintenance facilities.
         (n)   Airports. For solar units within 500 feet of an airport or
within approach zones of an airport, the applicant must complete and provide
the results of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool (SGHAT) for the airport
traffic control tower cab and final approach paths. Solar farms shall not be
located adjacent to or within a control zone of any airport.
      (2)   All applications for special use permit approval for a solar farm
shall include the customary submittal requirements for special use permit
applications. In addition, the following information and documentation listed
below must be submitted by the later of the date of the submittal of the
application for special use or the date of the Village Board's having approved
this division (H).
         (a)   A project description. Applicant shall provide a general
description of the project, which will be subject to revision prior to
application for the project building permit. Such description shall include the
total generating capacity, the equipment manufacturer, the type and model of
solar panels proposed, the number of solar panels, the nameplate generating
capacity of each solar panel, the proposed height of each solar panel as
installed and overall dimensions thereof.
         (b)   Site plan, which may utilize or be based upon an ALTA survey,
showing property lines and physical features, including roads, setbacks,
floodplain (if applicable), buildings, the assumed location of solar panels,
rights of way, and zoning district designation for the subject property and all
abutting properties. Such site plan shall also include or be accompanied by the
following:
            1.   All existing and proposed underground and above ground
utilities including, but not limited to, overhead electric lines on the solar
farm site including any for the transmission of energy from the solar farm to
any buyer.
            2.   Ingress and egress from the site as proposed during
construction and thereafter, which indicates the proposed road surface and
cover on the subject property.
            3.   Wetland boundaries.
            4.   A drain tile study identifying existing drain tiles on the
subject property, or, alternatively, a narrative and supporting evidence
indicating to the satisfaction of the Village Enforcement Officer that drain
tiles are not likely to be present within the development site. This evidence
may consist of:
               a.   Soil maps;
               b.   Historic aerial photographs;
               c.   Historic topographic maps; and
               d.   Wetland maps.
            5.   A signed reimbursement agreement, in a form approved by the
village, which provides for an initial deposit of $10,000 for the village's
professionals fees associated with such application and review by the village.
            6.   Location and size of any abandoned wells or septic systems.
            7.   Vertical elevation drawings.
            8.   Number, location, and spacing of solar panels/arrays.
            9.   Solar energy equipment schematic drawing.
      
            10.   Identification of access to, and traffic control for, the
project site, during construction and operation of the solar farm.
            11.   Elevation drawing(s) (and/or photographs and/or architect's
renderings) and site plan showing location, size and design details of solar
farm, including but not limited to how the power generated will be delivered
and proposed meter connections.
            12.   Endangered Species EcoCat and IDNR Consultation Termination.
            13.   IHPA consultation initiation in accordance with 20 ILCS 3420
(Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation Act).
            14.   Natural Resources Inventory Report from DaKalb County Soil
and Water District.
            15.   ALTA survey and title report for the site.
            16.   Wetland boundary map/delineation reports with an U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers jurisdictional determination letter.
            17.   A tree survey and tree preservation plan for trees within the
site that are identified as significant either in the: (1) Natural Resource
Information Report from the SWCD; or (2) identified as an oak stand of high
ecological significance by the DeKalb County Conservation District.
            18.   Landscape plans.
            19.   Grading and excavation plan.
            20.   A map shall be provided identifying all offsite tributary
areas. A calculation of flow depths on overland flow paths including all onsite
and offsite tributary area is also required.
            21.   Stormwater management report shall identify volumes of
depressional storage before and after improvement.
            22.   Easement documents (proposed and existing).
            23.   Sight distance studies for access points.
            24.   Phasing map or plan, as applicable.
      (3)   No solar farm shall be constructed, installed or modified as
provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit. The
application for a building permit for a solar farm must be accompanied by the
fee required for a building permit. All applications for a building permit for
a solar farm must include the information and documentation listed below in
addition to the customary submittal requirements for a building permit. All
material modifications to a solar farm made after issuance of the required
building permit shall require approval by the village.
         (a)   Interconnection service agreement or evidence of filing required
interconnection service applications with the electric utility.
         (b)   Operation and maintenance plan of the solar farm, including
measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, dust control and
maintenance plans for roads, stormwater controls, as well as general procedures
for operation and maintenance of the solar farm.
         (c)   Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or
corporation constructing and installing the solar farm.
         (d)   Manufacturer specifications and installation methods of the
solar panels, poles and racks and other major equipment and devices including:
wattage capacity, dimensions of panels, mounting mechanisms and/or foundation
details and structural requirements.
         (e)   Evidence that the system shall conform to applicable industry
standards including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
         (f)   A certificate of compliance demonstrating that the equipment
comprising the solar farm has been tested and approved by Underwriters
Laboratories (UL) or other approved independent testing agency.
         (g)   No solar farm shall be constructed, installed or modified as
provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit. The
application for a building permit for a solar farm must be accompanied by the
fee required for a building permit.
         (h)   The solar farm owner or operator shall provide a copy of the
project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the local fire chief.
All means of shutting down the solar farm shall be clearly marked. The owner or
operator shall identify a responsible person by title for public inquiries
throughout the life of the solar farm.
         (i)   Description of the hours of operation for construction and
maintenance of the facility, numbers of employees and type of traffic to be
generated from the site (TIS).
         (j)   Water usage impact study indicating any impact on county and
village water resources.
         (k)   Complaint resolution process. The applicant shall submit a
process to review and address any complaints that may arise from neighboring
property owners during the construction and operation of the solar farm.
         (l)   Waste disposal plan. All solid waste generated from supplies,
equipment, parts, packaging or operation of the facility shall be removed from
the site in a timely manner and disposed of in an appropriate manner. Any
hazardous waste generated by the facility including but not limited to
lubricating materials shall be removed consistent with all local, state and
federal rules and regulations.
         (m)   Weed/grass control plan.
         (n)   Signage plan. Signs warning of the high voltage associated with
the solar farm shall be posted at every entrance to the facility, at the base
of all pad mounted transformers and substations. A sign that provides emergency
contact information, such as phone number, shall be posted near the tower and
the operations and maintenance building.
         (o)   Fence plan (eight foot minimum) with appropriate warning
signage.
         (p)   A fire protection plan for the construction and operation of the
facility, and emergency access to the site.
         (q)   A permanent, nonexclusive easement, in a form approved by the
village, providing for a blanket ingress and egress easement in and upon the
subject property in favor of the village allowing it, in its sole discretion,
to: i) remove all solar panel installations, structures, facilities, equipment,
and security barriers or fences, as well as transmission lines from the subject
property to a depth below grade of three feet; ii) remove and recycle or
dispose of all solid or hazardous waste in accordance with local regulations,
and state and federal law; and iii) stabilize, restore or re-vegetate the
subject property and to restore the soil on the subject property if the solar
farm is deemed abandoned in accordance with §
154.051(H)(1)(a). Such easement shall be conveyed to the village no later than
30 days after expiration of a building permit for a solar farm. The sole
purpose of the easement will be to enable the village, in the event the village
determines in its reasonable discretion that there has been a material breach
by the owner/operator in the implementation of the decommissioning plan for the
subject property, to enter and exit the property in order to complete the
decommissioning.
         (r)   Stormwater management permit application including stormwater
management report, drainage plan and erosion control plan.
         (s)   Grant by warranty deed(s) with plats of dedication from the
owner of the property to the appropriate governmental unit(s) dedicating a
right-of-way from the center line of the road to three feet adjacent to the
roadway adjacent to the subject property.
         (t)   An encroachment, cooperation or similar agreement from owner of
gas or other pipelines to grade over their pipeline.
         (u)   A current general liability policy covering bodily injury and
property damage naming the village as additional insured with limits of at
least $2,000,000 per occurrence and $4,000,000 in aggregate.
         (v)   Copy of NOI, copy of SWPPP for construction and post
construction and copy of approved NPDES permit.
         (w)   Structural engineering plans for foundation and design of solar
panels racking and support given local soil and climate conditions.
         (x)   Storm sewer calculations.
         (y)   Signed, sealed and dated engineer's opinion of probable
construction costs for infrastructure improvements relevant to stormwater
management and municipal services.
         (z)   Soils reports with logs.
         (aa)   IDOT approval, if required.
         (bb)   All material modifications to a solar farm made after issuance
of the required building permit shall require approval by the village. Any
material modification must be reviewed and acted upon by the village within a
60 day period after being submitted by the owner to the village for approval.
         (cc)   The decommissioning plan required to be submitted pursuant to §
154.051(H)(1)(a)3.
   All other requirements of the agricultural district shall apply unless
relief is provided by the village. In addition, the village may require as a
condition of such special use that a development or annexation agreement be
entered into by the parties.
(1983 Code, § 9-3-2) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009;
Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-4-2019)
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
§ 154.060 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the residential zones is to provide for a variety of living
conditions (densities) within the village to meet the full range of local
housing needs. The R-1 Single-Family Residential District provides for families
wishing to live on large lots. The R-2 Single-Family Residential District
provides for medium-density single-family developments. The R-3 Single-Family
Residential District provides for a high-density development for the location
of smaller residential units and also for mobile home park development. The R-
4 Multi-Family Residential District provides for single, two-family and multi-
family developments. It provides for the conversion of single-family structures
in the established portions of the village where older two-story homes
predominate and provides new areas for multi-family development.
(1983 Code, § 9-4-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.061 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings and their accessory uses;
      (2)   Home occupations;
      (3)   Signs, as permitted or required in §§
154.145 through
154.150;
      (4)   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to
extend beyond the completion date of the construction; and
      (5)   Temporary real estate office in conjunction with a new housing
development limited to the selling or renting of new units in the development
and in no case to be in operation for more than one year following completion
of construction of the housing development.
   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed as per §§
154.160 through
154.166.
   (C)   Off-street automobile parking facilities. Automobile parking
facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in §§
154.125 through
154.132.
   (D)   Lot size.
      (1)   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be on a
lot having an area of not less than 12,150 square feet, and a width at the
established building line of not less than 90 feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot sizes for special use shall be prescribed and
conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no
case shall any such lot have an area of less than that stipulated above.
   (E)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the
building, structure or enlargement.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 30 feet shall be
provided. Where lots comprising 50% of the frontage on the same street and
within the same block are developed with buildings having front yards with a
variation of not more than ten feet in depth, the average of such front yards
shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage, but in no
case shall a front yard of more than that stipulated above be required.
      (2)   Side yard. A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not less
than ten feet; except where a side yard adjoins a street the minimum width on
the street side shall be that stipulated for front yards.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 40 feet.
   (F)   Lot coverage. Not more than 35% of the lot area may be occupied by
buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
   (G)   Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be as
follows:
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings - not applicable.
      (2)   Special uses - as specified at the time the special use permit is
granted.
(1983 Code, § 9-4-2) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.062 R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the R-1 District.
   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed as per §§
154.160 through
154.166.
   (C)   Off-street automobile parking facilities. Automobile parking
facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in §§
154.125 through
154.132.
   (D)   Lot size.
      (1)   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be on a
lot having an area of not less than 9,600 square feet and a width at the
established building line of not less than 80 feet; and
      (2)   All nonresidential principal uses as permitted in this division
shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than that
stipulated above.
   (E)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the
building, structure or enlargement.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 25 feet shall be
provided. Where lots comprising 50% of the frontage on the same street and
within the same block are developed with buildings having front yards with a
variation of not more than ten feet in depth, the average of the front yards
shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage, but in no
case shall a front yard of more than that stipulated above be required.
      (2)   Side yard. A side yard on each of the zoning lot of not less than
eight feet, except where a side yard adjoins street, the minimum width on the
street side shall be that stipulated for front yards.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 30 feet.
   (F)   Lot coverage. Not more than 35% of the lot area may be occupied by
buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
   (G)   Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be as
follows:
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings - not applicable.
      (2)   Special uses - as specified at the time the special use permit is
granted.
(1983 Code, § 9-4-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.063 R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the R-2 District.
   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed as per §§
154.160 through
154.166.
   (C)   Off-street automobile parking facilities. Automobile parking
facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in §§
154.125 through
154.132.
   (D)   Lot size.
      (1)   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be on a
lot having an area of not less than 7,350 square feet and a width at the
established building line of not less than 70 feet;
      (2)   Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and
conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no
case shall any such lot have an area of less than that stipulated above.
   (E)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the
building, structure or enlargement.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 20 feet shall be
provided. Where lots comprising 50% of the frontage on the same street and
within the same block are developed with buildings having front yards with a
variation of not more than ten feet in depth, the average of such front yards
shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage, but in no
case shall a front yard of more than that stipulated above be required.
      (2)   Side yard. A side yard on each side of the principal building of
not less than six feet, except where a side yard adjoins a street the minimum
width on the street side shall be that stipulated for front yards.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 30 feet.
   (F)   Lot coverage. Not more than 35% of the lot area may be occupied by
buildings and structures including accessory buildings.
   (G)   Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be as
follows:
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings - not applicable.
      (2)   Special uses - as specified at the time the special use permit is
granted.
(1983 Code, § 9-4-4) (Ord. 91-14, passed - -; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.064 R-4 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Any of the uses permitted in the R-3 District;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings; and
      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings, including apartments, row houses and the
like.
   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed as per §§
154.160 through
154.166.
   (C)   Off-street automobile parking facilities. Automobile parking
facilities shall be provided as permitted or required in §§
154.125 through
154.132.
   (D)   Lot area per dwelling.
      (1)   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be
located on a lot having an area of not less than 7,350 square feet, and a width
at the established building line of not less than 70 feet.
      (2)   Every building hereafter erected or altered or providing two or
more dwelling units shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than
2,500 square feet and a width at the established building line of not less than
80 feet;
      (3)   Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and
conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no
case shall any such lot have an area of less than that stipulated above.
      (4)   Dwelling units must have the following minimum square feet per
unit:
         (a)   One bedroom - 550;
         (b)   Two bedroom - 650; and
         (c)   Three bedroom - 775.
   (E)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the
building, structure or enlargement.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 20 feet shall be
provided.
      (2)   Side yards. On every zoning lot, side yards shall be provided as
follows:
         (a)   For one-family detached dwellings, the same regulations shall
apply as in the R-3 District; and
         (b)   For two-family and multiple-family dwelling units, the side yard
on each side of each building shall be a minimum of six feet in width. On
corner lots there shall be maintained a side yard of not less than 20 feet on
the side adjacent to the street.
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 30 feet.
   (F)   Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratios shall be as
follows:
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings - not applicable.
      (2)   Two-family and multiple-family dwellings - 0.325.
      (3)   Special uses - as specified at the time the special use permit is
granted.
   (G)   Other requirements. The following requirements shall apply to two-
family and multi-family developments.
      (1)   The recreation space ratio, defined as the minimum square footage
of recreation space required for each square foot of floor area, is not less
than .14;
      (2)   The open space ratio, defined as the minimum square footage of open
space required for each square foot of floor area, is not less than 2.2; and
      (3)   The living space ratio, defined as the minimum square footage of
nonvehicular outdoor space required for each square foot of floor area, is not
less than 1.4.
(1983 Code, § 9-4-5) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 93-3, passed - -; Ord.
09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 154.075 PURPOSE.
   Business district regulations are intended to govern the locations and uses
of a full range of business and commercial establishments needed to serve the
village, its trade area and passers-by.
   (A)   The B-1 General Commercial District is intended to provide for the
continued development of the existing principal business and shopping
facilities in the village.
   (B)   The B-2 Highway Commercial District is intended to provide appropriate
areas for commercial establishments which are oriented to the motoring public
or which require large sites for off-street parking or the outdoor display or
storage of merchandise.
   (C)   The B-3 Convenience Commercial District is intended to provide for
minor shopping facilities at the edges of residential neighborhoods to provide
for the day-to-day needs for goods and services. These should not be the type
or magnitude to compete directly with the uses found in the B-1 District.
(1983 Code, § 9-5-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.076 B-1 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Residential uses that are located on the second story or higher of
a structure housing a business or shopping facility permitted in this district;
      (2)   Appliance sales and repair;
      (3)   Art galleries and studios;
      (4)   Bakery shops, beauty parlors, chiropody, massage or similar
personal service shops;
      (5)   Banks and financial institutions, including drive-in teller
facilities;
      (6)   Beauty shops;
      (7)   Bicycle shops;
      (8)   Book and stationary stores;
      (9)   Bowling alleys;
      (10)   Camera and photographic supply shops;
      (11)   Candy and ice cream shops;
      (12)   Carpet, rug and linoleum stores;
      (13)   China and glassware stores;
      (14)   Clubs and lodges, but not including gun clubs;
      (15)   Cocktail lounges;
      (16)   Coin and stamp stores;
      (17)   Costume rental shops;
      (18)   Currency exchanges;
      (19)   Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair shops,
when conducted for retail sale on the premises only;
      (20)   Department stores;
      (21)   Drug stores;
      (22)   Dry goods stores;
      (23)   Dry cleaning and pressing establishments, when using nonflammable
cleaning agents approved by the Fire Chief;
      (24)   Electrical appliance stores and repairs, but not including
appliance assembly or manufacturing;
      (25)   Employment agencies;
      (26)   Florist shops and conservatories for retail trade on the premises
only;
      (27)   Food, meat and fruit stores;
      (28)   Frozen food stores and food lockers;
      (29)   Funeral parlors;
      (30)   Furniture store and upholsterers, when conducted as a part of the
retail operation and secondary to the main use;
      (31)   Furrier, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only;
      (32)   Gift shops;
      (33)   Government offices;
      (34)   Grocery stores;
      (35)   Hardware stores;
      (36)   Haberdasheries;
      (37)   Hobby stores;
      (38)   Household appliance stores and repair;
      (39)   Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of
draperies, slipcovers and other similar articles, when conducted as a part of
the retail operations and secondary to the main use;
      (40)   Jewelry and watch repair shops;
      (41)   Launderettes, automatic self-service types or hand laundries;
      (42)   Leather goods and luggage stores;
      (43)   Libraries;
      (44)   Loan offices;
      (45)   Locksmiths;
      (46)   Mail order establishments;
      (47)   Musical instrument sales and repair, retail trade only;
      (48)   Newsstand;
      (49)   Offices, business and professional, medical clinics;
      (50)   Optician, optometrist;
      (51)   Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, but not including the
assembly or manufacture of such articles;
      (52)   Package liquor stores;
      (53)   Paint and wallpaper stores;
      (54)   Parks and open spaces;
      (55)   Parking lots, open and other than accessory, for the storage of
private passenger automobiles, and subject to the provisions of §§
154.125 through
154.132;
      (56)   Pawn shops;
      (57)   Pet shops, but not including animal hospitals;
      (58)   Photography studios;
      (59)   Picture framing, when conducted for retail trade on the premises
only;
      (60)   Postal substations;
      (61)   Public utility collection offices;
      (62)   Restaurants, tearooms or cafes, when the establishment is not of
the drive-in type;
      (63)   Sewing machine sales and service;
      (64)   Shoe and hat stores;
      (65)   Signs, as permitted in §§
154.145 through
154.150;
      (66)   Sporting goods stores;
      (67)   Taverns;
      (68)   Taxidermist shop;
      (69)   Telegraph offices;
      (70)   Telephone exchanges;
      (71)   Telephone outdoor;
      (72)   Tobacco shops;
      (73)   Toy stores;
      (74)   Travel bureau and transportation ticket office;
      (75)   Typewriter and adding machine sales and service;
      (76)   Variety stores;
      (77)   Village administrative offices and functions; and
      (78)   Accessory uses, including off-street parking and loading
facilities as permitted or required in accordance with the provisions of §§
154.125 through
154.132.
   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed as per §§
154.160 through
154.166.
   (C)   Conditions of use. All uses permitted in this District shall be
commercial establishments dealing directly with consumers, or residences
located on the second story or higher of a structure housing a business or
shopping facility permitted in this District and otherwise meeting the
standards for residences permitted in this District, and shall be subject to
the following conditions:
      (1)   All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street
parking and loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
      (2)   There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products
other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to the business
conducted on the same premises.
      (3)   Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to
odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes.
      (4)   When business uses are located adjacent to residence districts,
adequate fencing or screen planting shall be provided along all adjacent lot
lines or alleys or driveways and all lighting shall be installed so as to be
directed away from the residence district.
      (5)   Residential uses are not permitted on the first floor or below of
any structure in this District. Residential uses existing on the first floor or
below of any structure in this District as of the date of this amendment shall
be permitted only until either the transfer of the property to another owner or
damage or destruction to the property occurs as described in §
154.184, which ever occurs first, at which time such residential use will not
be permitted.
   (D)   Off-street automobile parking facilities. Automobile parking
facilities shall be provided as permitted or required in §§
154.125 through
154.132.
   (E)   Lot size. No minimum required.
   (F)   Yard areas. No minimum yards shall be required.
   (G)   Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio for a building
or buildings on a zoning lot, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed
2.0.
(1983 Code, § 9-5-2) (Ord. 08-09, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.077 B-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following commercial uses and their accessory
appurtenant uses are permitted:
      (1)   Automobile sales and service;
      (2)   Automobile laundries;
      (3)   Automobile service stations - for the retail sale and dispensing of
fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories and supplies, including
installation and minor services customarily incidental thereto; facilities for
chassis and gear lubrication and not more than four vehicles are permitted only
if enclosed in a building. Gasoline pumps may be located in the required yard
along a street, but not closer to the right-of-way line than 30 feet;
      (4)   Automobile, motor bikes or motor scooter sales and service shops,
including repairing, but not the painting or repairing of trucks of over one
and one-half tons, and accessory auto parts sales as an activity accessory to
the principal use. Outdoor display of new and used autos is permitted, but not
more than 50% of the zoning lot shall be used for those purposes and the front
yard requirement shall be complied with;
      (5)   Agricultural implement sales and service;
      (6)   Amusement establishments;
      (7)   Bait stations;
      (8)   Building materials, sales and storage;
      (9)   Cartage and express facilities;
      (10)   Cocktail lounges;
      (11)   Contractors offices and storage;
      (12)   Drive-in establishments serving food and beverages for consumption
on the premises;
      (13)   Dry cleaning establishments;
      (14)   Florist shops including greenhouses;
      (15)   Gift stores;
      (16)   Mobile home sales;
      (17)   Monument sales;
      (18)   Motels;
      (19)   Night clubs;
      (20)   Parks, greenways and open spaces;
      (21)   Parking; and
      (22)   Recreation vehicles sales and service, including boats,
snowmobiles, campers and the like.
   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed as per §§
154.160 through
154.166.
   (C)   Conditions of use. All uses permitted in this District shall be
commercial establishments dealing directly with customers and shall be subject
to the following conditions:
      (1)   There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products
other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to the business
conducted on the same premises;
      (2)   Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to
odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes;
      (3)   When commercial uses are located adjacent to residence districts,
adequate fencing or screen planting shall be provided along all adjacent lot
lines or alleys or driveways, and all lighting shall be installed so as to be
directed away from any residence district.
   (D)   Lot size. The lot shall be not less than one-half acre in area and
shall have a lot width at the building setback line of not less than 90 feet.
   (E)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the
building:
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 50 feet shall be
provided. Parking may be permitted in the front yard, provided it is not less
than 20 feet from the street right-of-way line.
      (2)   Side yard. Side yards of not less than 20 feet shall be provided.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 20 feet shall be provided.
   (F)   Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.5.
   (G)   Off-street automobile parking facilities. Automobile parking
facilities shall be provided as permitted or required in §§
154.125 through
154.132.
(1983 Code, § 9-5-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.078 B-3 CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Barber shops;
      (2)   Beauty salons;
      (3)   Coffee shops;
      (4)   Coin-operated laundromats;
      (5)   Drugstores;
      (6)   Gift shops;
      (7)   Laundry and dry cleaners;
      (8)   Package beverage stores;
      (9)   Parking areas;
      (10)   Parks, greenways and open spaces;
      (11)   Professional offices;
      (12)   Superettes; and
      (13)   Taverns.
   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed as per §§
154.160 through
154.166.
   (C)   Conditions of use.
      (1)   All retail uses and service establishments shall be conducted
wholly within an enclosed building except for off-street parking and loading
facilities and except as permitted herein on an open lot.
      (2)   The gross floor area of any single commercial use shall not exceed
2,000 square feet.
   (D)   Lot size. No minimum requirement.
   (E)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged
unless the following yards are provided:
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 50 feet shall be
provided. Parking may be permitted in the front yard, provided it is not less
than 20 feet from the street right-of-way line.
      (2)   Side yard. No minimum requirement.
      (3)   Rear yard. No minimum requirement.
   (F)   Maximum floor area. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.5.
   (G)   Off-street automobile parking facilities. Automobile parking
facilities shall be provided as permitted or required in §§
154.125 through
154.132.
(1983 Code, § 9-5-4) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
§ 154.090 PURPOSE.
   The General Manufacturing District is intended to recognize existing
industrial development within the village and to provide additional land for
possible new or relocated manufacturing uses.
(1983 Code, § 9-6-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.091 M-1 GENERAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Automotive body repairs;
      (2)   Agriculture;
      (3)   Animal feeding yards;
      (4)   Automotive upholstery;
      (5)   Cleaning, pressing and dyeing establishments;
      (6)   Commercial bakeries;
      (7)   Commercial greenhouses;
      (8)   Farm machinery sales and service;
      (9)   Feed mills;
      (10)   Dairy equipment manufacture and sales;
      (11)   Railroad depots;
      (12)   Cooperatives;
      (13)   Laboratories;
      (14)   Machine shops;
      (15)   Printing and publishing;
      (16)   Public utilities;
      (17)   Storage and sale of building materials;
      (18)   Trade and contractors offices and storage;
      (19)   Warehousing and wholesaling;
      (20)   Manufacture, fabrication, packing, packaging and assembly of
products from: glass, leather, metals, paper, plaster, plastics, textiles,
wood;
      (21)   Manufacture, fabrication, processing, packaging and packing of:
confections, cosmetics, electrical appliances, electronic devices, food,
toiletries;
      (22)   Freight yards;
      (23)   Storage; and
      (24)   Facilities for the storage and distribution of propane and propane
products, including propane storage facilities, office buildings and other
reasonable, necessary improvements to properly function as such.
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
      (1)   Airports;
      (2)   Planned industrial developments;
      (3)   Junk yards and automobile salvage yards, provided they are
contained within completely enclosed buildings or screened by a solid wall or
fence at least 12 feet high, and that any such use shall not be located closer
than 100 feet to any residence district;
      (4)   Stone and gravel quarries and crushing, grading, washing and
loading equipment and structures;
      (5)   Areas for the disposal of solid wastes;
      (6)   Sewage treatment plants;
      (7)   Commercial service facilities, provided all such services are
physically and sales-oriented toward industrial district users and employees
and other users are only incidental customers; and
      (8)   Storage of petroleum and petroleum products.
   (C)   Conditions of use. All uses are subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or
storage of goods, materials or products shall conform with the performance
standards set forth herein below;
      (2)   (a)   All production, servicing and processing shall take place
within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise specified. Within 100
feet of a residence district all storage shall be in completely enclosed
buildings or structures or may be open to the sky but shall be enclosed by
solid walls or fences (including solid doors or gates thereto) at least eight
feet high, but in no case lower in height than the enclosed storage, and
suitably landscaped;
         (b)   However, open off-street loading facilities and open off-street
parking of motor vehicles under one and one-half tons capacity may be
unenclosed throughout the district, except for such screening of parking and
loading facilities as may be required; and
      (3)   Uses established on the effective date of this subchapter, and by
its provisions are rendered nonconforming, shall be permitted to continue,
subject to the regulations of §§
154.180 through
154.187.
   (D)   Lot size. Any principal use hereafter erected shall be located on a
lot having an area of not less than 10,000 square feet and an average width of
not less than 80 feet.
   (E)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the
use.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 20 feet shall be
provided.
      (2)   Side yard. Side yards not less than ten feet shall be provided.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 20 feet shall be provided.
   (F)   Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall not
exceed 0.5.
(1983 Code, § 9-6-2) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009;
Ord. 2020-07, passed 10-19-2020)
CONSERVANCY DISTRICTS
§ 154.100 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the Conservancy District is to identify, in undeveloped areas,
the location of soils which have a high probability of imposing development
difficulties for urban-type developments. The delineation and interpretation of
soil conditions is based upon soils information provided by the U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Soils Conservation Service. Where a developer or owner can
demonstrate that either on-site soils tests show that the soils are adequate to
accommodate the type of development contemplated; or development plans clearly
indicate that construction methods will overcome any inherent soil
difficulties, the parcel in question should be rezoned to a district consistent
with the uses indicated on the Master Plan Map.
(1983 Code, § 9-8-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.101 C CONSERVANCY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Agricultural activities, provided no structures requiring
foundations are constructed;
      (2)   Parks, greenways and open spaces, provided no structures requiring
foundations are constructed;
      (3)   Public and private recreation uses, provided no structures
requiring foundations are constructed;
      (4)   Utility transmission lines; and
      (5)   Wildlife preserves.
   (B)   Lot size. Not applicable.
   (C)   Yard areas. Not applicable.
(1983 Code, § 9-8-2) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 154.110 GENERAL.
   Any use established in the Manufacturing District after the effective date
of this chapter shall be so operated as to comply with the performance
standards set forth hereinafter for the district in which the use shall be
located. No use lawfully established on the effective date of this chapter
shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with,
the performance standards established for the district in which the use is
located.
(1983 Code, § 9-9-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.111 DEFINITIONS.
   It is recommended that the definitions of technical terms used in the
performance standards be listed in the section in which the terms are used;
thus they are as follows:
   (A)   Noise.
      AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE, INC. A national organization
dedicated to the promulgation of the authoritative standards in many technical
fields.
      dB(A). Decibels as read on the sound level meter when set for the A-
weighted filter. The A-weighted filter approximates the sensitivity of the
human ear as to frequency response.
      DECIBEL (dB). A unit which describes the sound pressure level or
intensity of sound. A sound level meter is calibrated in decimals.
      IMPACT NOISE. A short duration sound such as those from a foregoing
hammer or punch press.
      OCTAVE BAND. A prescribed interval of sound frequencies which classifies
sound according to its pitch.
      PREFERRED FREQUENCY OCTAVE BANDS. A standardized series of octave bands
prescribed by the American Standards Association in S1.6-1960, Preferred
Frequencies for Acoustical Measurements.
      SOUND LEVEL METER. An electronic instrument which includes a microphone,
an amplifier and an output meter which measures noise and the sound pressure
levels in a specified manner. It may be used with the octave band analyzer that
permits measuring the sound pressure level in discrete octave bands.
      SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The intensity of a sound measured in decibels,
mathematically described as 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio
of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbar.
   (B)   Vibration.
      THREE-COMPONENT RECORDING SYSTEM. A complement of instruments or
seismograph which can record simultaneously vibrating vectors in three
mutually-perpendicular directions.
      VIBRATION. The periodic displacement or oscillation of the earth.
   (C)   Smoke and particulate matter.
      PARTICULATE MATTER. Material other than water which is suspended in or
discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid.
      RINGELMANN NUMBER. The shade of smoke as it appears on the Standard
Ringelmann Chart published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular No.
8333 (1967).
      SMOKE. Small gas-borne particles other than water that form a visible
plume in the air.
   (D)   Odor.
      ODOR THRESHOLD. The lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that
will produce an olfactory response in a human being.
   (E)   Toxic matter.
      THRESHOLD LIMIT VALUE. The maximum allowable airborne concentration of a
toxic material, as established by the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists.
      TOXIC MATTER. Materials which are capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts.
   (F)   Fire and explosive hazards.
      ACTIVE TO INTENSE BURNING. A rate of combustion described by material
that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. Examples
include sawdust, powdered magnesium, pyroxylin and other solids deemed by the
Fire Department to have equivalent burning characteristics.
      DETONABLE MATERIALS. Materials which decompose by detonation. Such
materials include explosives, unstable compounds and fissionable matter.
      FLASHPOINT. The lowest temperature at which a flammable liquid will
momentarily burn under prescribed conditions. The closed cup flash point shall
be authoritative and the test shall be run in accordance with the appropriate
ASTM procedure.
      SCF. Standard cubic feet, which is the measure of the volume of a gas
reduced to 14.73 pounds per square inch pressure absolute and 60°F.
   (G)   Glare.
      FOOT CANDLE. A unit of illumination. Technically, the illumination at all
points one-foot distance from a uniform point source of one candle power.
   (H)   Noise. Noise shall be measured at any adjacent lot line and/or
district boundary, as indicated in Table 1. At the specified points of
measurement, the sound pressure level of any activity or operation (except
those not under direct control of the industrial use, such as transportation
facilities) shall not exceed the values tabulated in Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The instruments used for these
measurements shall conform to all current and American National Standards
Institute specifications. Impact noises shall be measured by means of an impact
noise analyzer. Impact noises are those whose peak values are more than 3 dB
higher on the fast response than the r.m.s. values indicated on the sound level
meter.
      (1)   Table 1.
 
   TABLE 1
Manufacturing Adjacent Commercial District Residential District Boundary
District      Lot Line Boundary
M-1           A        B                   C
Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the permissible sound levels
across residential district boundaries shall be reduced by 5 dB in each
octave band, or in the overall band for impact noise.
 
      (2)   Table 2.
 
TABLE 2
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVELS, PREFERRED FREQUENCY OCTAVE BAND, DECIBELS
Preferred Center Frequency, Cycles/Second A  B  C
31.5                                      88 86 83
63                                        79 75 71
125                                       69 64 59
 
TABLE 2
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVELS, PREFERRED FREQUENCY OCTAVE BAND, DECIBELS
Preferred Center Frequency, Cycles/Second A  B  C
250                                       62 57 52
500                                       58 53 47
1,000                                     54 49 44
2,000                                     51 46 40
4,000                                     49 44 37
8,000                                     47 41 35
 
   Measurement of the sounds levels may also be made by using a weighted scale
sound level meter. The levels in Table 2 shall be considered to have been met
if the weighted levels are no greater than the following:
      (3)   Table 3.
 
TABLE 3
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVELS, dB(A), FOR SCREENING PURPOSES
Required Level Sound Level, dB(A)
A              60
B              55
C              50
 
      (4)   Table 4.
 
TABLE 4
Manufacturing Adjacent Commercial District Boundary Residential District
District      Lot Line                              Boundary
M-1           A        B                            C
 
      (5)   Table 5.
         (a)   Particle velocity as specified below may be measured directly,
or if computed on the basis of displacement and frequency, measurements shall
be computed from the formula 6.28D, where F is the frequency of the vibration
in cycles per second and D is the single amplitude displacement of the
vibration in inches.
         (b)   The maximum permissible particle velocity of the ground
vibration specified above shall be:
 
TABLE 5
PARTICLE VELOCITY
Applicable Limit Steady State, Inches/Second Impact Inches/Second
A                0.10                        0.20
B                0.02                        0.04
 
         (c)   The maximum particle velocity shall be the vector sum of three
simultaneous mutually perpendicular components.
         (d)   For the purpose of this subchapter, STEADY STATE VIBRATIONS are
vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more
frequent than 100 per minute. Discrete impulses which do not exceed 100 per
minute shall be considered impact vibrations.
(1983 Code, § 9-9-2) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.112 SMOKE.
   (A)   For the purpose of grading the density of equivalent capacity of
smoke, the Ringelmann Chart described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information
Circular 7718 shall be employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of
a density of equivalent greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart is
prohibited at all times except as otherwise provided hereinafter.
   (B)   Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, roads and the like within like lot boundaries
shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing,
wetting or other acceptable means. The open burning of refuse, paint, oil,
debris and any other combustible material is prohibited in all industrial
districts.
   (C)   Particulate matter loadings in pounds per acre described below shall
be determined by selecting a continuous four-hour period which will result in
the highest average emission rate.
   (D)   The emission of smoke having a density or equivalent opacity in excess
of Ringelmann No. 1 is prohibited; however, for two minutes in any 60-minute
period, smoke up to and including Ringelmann No. 2 shall be permitted.
   (E)   The rate of emission of particulate matter from all stacks and vents
within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed one pound per acre of lot
area per hour.
(1983 Code, § 9-9-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.113 ODOR.
   (A)   The release of materials capable of becoming odorous either by
bacterial decomposition or chemical reaction from any operation or activity
shall not exceed the odor threshold concentration beyond the district boundary
line, measured either at ground level or habitable elevation.
   (B)   Odor thresholds shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D 1391-57,
Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres (Dilution Method), or
its equivalent.
(1983 Code, § 9-9-4) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.114 TOXIC MATTER.
   The measurement of toxic matter shall be at ground level or habitable
elevation and shall be the average of any 24-hour sampling period. The release
of any airborne toxic matter shall not exceed 2.5% of the threshold limit value
across district boundary lines for those toxic materials currently listed in
Threshold Limit Values adopted by the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists. If a toxic substance is not contained in this listing,
the applicant shall satisfy the village that the proposed levels will be safe
to the general population.
(1983 Code, § 9-9-5) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.115 FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS.
   (A)   Detonable materials. Activities, involving the storage, utilization or
manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be in
accordance with the following regulations.
      (1)   Such materials shall include but are not limited to: all primary
explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and tetracene; all
high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid; propellants and
components thereof, such as dry nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides,
hyrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium
powder, potassium chloride and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as
dynamite, nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds such as acetylides,
tetrazoles and ozonides, unstable oxidizing agents such as perchloric acid,
perchlorates and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35%; and
nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, reactor elements such as
Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.
      (2)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products
which decompose by detonation is limited to five pounds.
   (B)   Fire hazard solids. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials which are active to intense burning shall be conducted within spaces
having fire resistive construction of no less than two hours and protected with
an automatic fire extinguishing system. Outdoor storage of such materials shall
be no closer than 40 feet from lot lines.
   (C)   Fire hazard liquids and gases.
      (1)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or
gases which produce flammable or explosive vapors shall be permitted only in
accordance with this section, exclusive of the storage of finished products in
original sealed containers (55 gallons or less) which shall be unrestricted.
      (2)   (a)   The total storage capacity of flammable liquids and gasses
shall not exceed those quantities permitted in the following table.
 
TABLE 6
STORAGE CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES
Liquids                                              Gases
Above Ground Flash Point Below Ground Flash Point °FAbove Ground  Below Ground
°F
Less than   125-300      Less than 125 125-300
125
50,000 gal. 200,000 gal. 20,000 gal.   40,000 gal.   1.5 x 106 SCF 3 x 106 SCF
 
         (b)   The storage of flammable liquids having a flash point of 300°F
or higher may be permitted without restriction in all manufacturing districts.
(1983 Code, § 9-9-6) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.116 GLARE.
   In all manufacturing districts, any operation or activity producing glare
shall be conducted so that direct or indirect light from the source shall not
cause illumination in excess of 0.5 foot candle when measured in a residential
district.
(1983 Code, § 9-9-7) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 154.125 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to alleviate or prevent the congestion of
the public streets and to promote the safety and welfare of the public by
establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading and
unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which property is
put.
(1983 Code, § 9-10-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.126 GENERAL PROVISIONS; PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Scope of regulations. The off-street parking and loading provisions of
this subchapter shall apply as follows:
      (1)   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date of this subchapter, accessory parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations and the
district in which the building or uses are located; however, where a permit has
been issued prior to the effective date of this subchapter, and provided that
construction has begun within 90 days of the effective date, and completed
within a year, parking and loading facilities as required hereinafter need not
be provided.
      (2)   When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises
shall be increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for required
parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required
herein shall be provided for such increase in the intensity of use.
      (3)   No building or structure lawfully erected or use lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this subchapter shall be required to
provide such additional parking or loading facilities, unless and until the
aggregate increase in units of measurement shall equal not less than 15% of the
units of measurement existing upon the effective date of this subchapter, in
which event parking or loading facilities are required shall be provided for
the total increase.
      (4)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall be
changed hereafter to a new use, parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required for the new use. If the building or structure was erected
prior to the effective date of this subchapter, additional parking or loading
facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the
new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to
the parking and loading provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Existing parking and loading facilities. Accessory off-street parking
or loading facilities which are located on the same lot as the building or use
served and which were in existence on the effective date of this subchapter or
were provided voluntarily after the effective date shall not hereafter be
reduced below, or if already less than, shall not further be reduced below, the
requirements of this subchapter for a similar new building or use.
   (C)   Permissive parking and loading facilities. Nothing in this subchapter
shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or
loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, provided
that all regulations herein governing the location, design, improvement and
operation of the facilities are adhered to.
   (D)   Damage or destruction. For any conforming or legally nonconforming
building or use which is in existence on the effective date of this subchapter,
which subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion
or other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off-
street parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time
of such damage or destruction shall be restored or continued in operation;
however, in no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or
loading facilities in excess of those required by this subchapter for
equivalent new uses or construction.
   (E)   Control of off-site parking facilities. When required parking
facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building
or use served by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the
same possession or ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use
to which the parking facilities other than on the same zoning lot until and
unless the Planning and Zoning Commission has reviewed the plans and heard the
applicant and made findings that the common ownership or possession of the
zoning lot and the site of the parking facilities are reasonably certain to
continue, and that the off-site parking facilities will be maintained at all
times during the life of the proposed use or building.
(1983 Code, § 9-10-2) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.127 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS; PARKING.
   (A)   Use of parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities accessory to
residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which
the facilities are accessory or by guests of the occupants. Under no
circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to residential
structures be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of
automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors or customers
of business or manufacturing establishments.
   (B)   Joint parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities for different
buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively
in any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each
constituent use would be permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so
located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements of
each use.
   (C)   Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking
spaces required by this subchapter results in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in
excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space.
   (D)   Size.
      (1)   A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet in
width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive of access drives or aisles,
ramps, columns or office or work areas. The space shall have a vertical
clearance of at least seven feet.
      (2)   Aisle widths shall be less than the following, perpendicular
parking 20 feet; angle parking two-way traffic 16 feet, one-way 12 feet.
   (E)   Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off-street
parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movements. No driveway across public property, nor curb cut, shall exceed a
width of 40 feet.
   (F)   In yards. Off-street parking required for uses permitted in
residential districts may be located in a required rear yard only. Off-street
parking for permitted uses in manufacturing, industrial or business districts
may be located in a required rear or front yard, except the 20 feet adjacent to
the front lot line and ten feet adjacent to the rear lot line.
(1983 Code, § 9-10-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.128 DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Open and enclosed parking spaces. Accessory parking spaces located on
the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or enclosed
in a building. Accessory parking spaces located in a residence district
elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use served shall be open to the
sky except when otherwise allowed.
   (B)   Screening and landscaping. All open automobile parking areas
containing more than four parking spaces shall be effectively screened on each
side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residence district or
any institutional property by a wall, fence or densely planted compact hedge
not less than five feet nor more than seven feet in height. Such required
screening shall conform with the front yard requirements of the district in
which the parking is located.
   (C)   Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas, except a single parking
space accessory to a one-family dwelling, shall be improved with a compacted
macadam base or equal, not less than four inches thick, surfaced with asphaltic
concrete or some comparable all-weather dustless material.
   (D)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas
shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to
create a nuisance.
   (E)   Signs. Accessory signs are permitted in parking areas.
   (F)   Repair and service.
      (1)   No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in
conjunction with accessory open off-street parking facilities provided in a
residence district, except when approved as part of a planned development.
      (2)   The sale of gasoline and motor oil in conjunction with accessory
off-street parking facilities is not permitted in any residence district.
   (G)   Floor area exemptions. When two or more uses are located on the same
zoning lot, only one exemption in terms of floor area, as set forth in the
Schedule of Parking Requirements in §
154.130, shall be taken.
(1983 Code, § 9-10-4) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.129 LOCATION OF ACCESSORY OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.
   The location of off-street parking spaces in relation to the use served
shall be as prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be walking
distances between the parking spaces and main entrance to the use served.
   (A)   For uses in a residence district. Parking spaces accessory to
dwellings shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. Spaces
accessory to uses other than dwellings may be located on a lot adjacent to, or
directly across a street or alley from the lot occupied by the use served, but
in no case at a distance in excess of 300 feet from the use.
   (B)   For uses in business and manufacturing districts. All required parking
spaces for manufacturing uses shall be within 500 feet of the use served, and
parking spaces for commercial uses shall be within 300 feet of the use served.
(1983 Code, § 9-10-5) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.130 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   For the following uses, accessory off-street parking shall be provided as
required hereinafter. If the use falls under division (B)(1) below ("retail
stores and banks"), on-street parking within one block of the premises may be
used to satisfy the accessory off-street parking requirements. Parking spaces
required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees
on duty, or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time.
   (A)   Residential uses, as follows:
      (1)   One-family dwellings and two-family dwellings. Two parking spaces
shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings (including apartment-hotels). One and
one-half spaces per dwelling shall be provided for each efficiency and one
bedroom unit. Two spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided for dwelling units
containing two or more bedrooms.
      (3)   Tourist courts, tourist homes, motels and motor hotels. One parking
space shall be provided for each dwelling unit lodging room, plus one space for
the manager and each employee, plus parking as required herein for other
ancillary uses such as restaurants and meeting rooms.
      (4)   Hotels, transient. One parking space for each dwelling unit and one
parking space for each two lodging rooms shall be provided.
      (5)   Lodging houses. One parking space shall be provided for each two
lodging rooms, plus one space for the owner or manager.
      (6)   Private clubs and lodges. One parking space shall be provided for
each 200 square feet of floor area.
   (B)   Retail and service uses, as follows:
      (1)   Retail stores and banks. One parking space shall be provided for
each 200 square feet of floor area. Drive-in banks or other similar drive-in
establishments shall provide three stacking spaces per teller or customer
service window.
      (2)   Automobile service stations. One parking space shall be provided
for each employee.
      (3)   Automobile laundry. Five stacking spaces shall be provided for each
wash, rack, plus one parking space for each employee.
      (4)   Bowling alleys. Five parking spaces shall be provided for each
alley, plus such additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated
uses - bars, restaurants and the like.
      (5)   Establishments dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the
premises. One parking space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of floor
area.
      (6)   Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment or furniture
repair shops. One parking space shall be provided for each 600 square feet of
floor area.
      (7)   Motor vehicle sales and machinery sales. One parking space shall be
provided for each 300 square feet of floor area.
      (8)   Theaters (indoor). One parking space shall be provided for each
three seats.
      (9)   Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors. Twenty parking spaces
shall be provided for each chapel or parlor plus one parking space for each
funeral vehicle kept on the premises; in addition there shall be provided
stacking space for not less than ten automobiles for funeral processional
assembly.
      (10)   Offices - business, professional and governmental. One parking
space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of floor area.
      (11)   Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouses and storage
buildings other than accessory). One parking space shall be provided for each
600 square feet of floor area.
      (12)   Establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing or repairing of materials, goods or products. One parking
space shall be provided for each employee, based upon greatest number of
employees on any one shift, plus one parking space for each vehicle used in the
conduct of the enterprise.
   (C)   Community services uses, as follows:
      (1)   Church, school, other institutional auditoriums. One parking space
shall be provided for each three auditorium seats. Adequate space shall also be
provided for buses used in connection with the activities of the institution,
and all loading and unloading of passengers shall take place upon the premises.
      (2)   Clinics, health centers and similar uses. One parking space shall
be provided for each employee and doctor, plus one space for each 200 square
feet of floor space.
      (3)   Hospitals. One parking space shall be provided for each two
hospital beds, plus one parking space for each two employees, other than the
staff doctors, plus one parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
      (4)   Libraries. One parking space shall be provided for each 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
      (5)   Municipal or privately-owned recreation building or community
center, art galleries or museums. One parking space shall be provided for each
employee, plus one space for each 300 square feet of floor space.
      (6)   Public utility and public service uses. One and one-half parking
spaces shall be provided for each employee, plus one space for each vehicle
used in the conduct of the enterprise.
      (7)   Schools-nursery, elementary and high. One parking space shall be
provided for each employee, plus ten spaces for each 100 pupils.
   (D)   Places of assembly, as follows:
      (1)   Stadiums, arenas, auditoriums (other than church, college or
institutional schools), convention halls, exhibition halls and other similar
places of assembly. Parking spaces equal in number to 50% of the capacity in
persons shall be provided.
      (2)   Institutions for the care of the insane or feeble-minded. One
parking space shall be provided for each staff doctor, plus spaces adequate in
number, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, to serve the visiting
public.
      (3)   Rest homes or nursing homes. One parking space shall be provided
for each four beds plus one parking space for each two employees (other than
staff doctors), plus one parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
      (4)   Sanitariums, convalescent homes or institutions for aged or for
children. One parking space shall be provided for each four beds, plus one
parking space for each two employees (other than staff doctors), plus one
parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
      (5)   Theaters, automobile drive-in. Reservoir parking space equal to 10%
of the vehicle capacity of the theaters shall be provided.
   (E)   Serving employees/residents and visitors. For the following uses,
parking spaces shall be provided in adequate number, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator, to serve persons employed or residing on the premises as
well as the visiting public.
      (1)   Airports or aircraft landing fields; heliports;
      (2)   Convents and monasteries;
      (3)   Crematoriums and mausoleums;
      (4)   Fraternal or religious institution;
      (5)   Outdoor amusement establishments - fairgrounds, permanent
carnivals, kiddie parks and other similar amusement centers;
      (6)   Penal and correctional institutions;
      (7)   Rectories and parish houses; and
      (8)   Swimming pools.
   (F)   Mixed uses. When two or more uses are located on the same zoning lot
within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the sum of the
separate requirements for each use shall be provided. No parking space or
portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless
otherwise authorized by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (G)   Other uses. For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking
requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required
for the most similar listed use, or as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(1983 Code, § 9-10-6) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 2021-01, passed 1-4-
2021)
§ 154.131 OFF-STREET LOADING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Location. All required loading berths shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two tons
capacity shall be closer than 50 feet to any property in a residence district
unless completely enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly painted solid
fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet in height. No
permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 25 feet of the
nearest point of intersection of any two streets.
   (B)   Size. Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at
least ten feet in width; be at least 25 feet in length, exclusive of aisles and
maneuvering spaces; and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
   (C)   Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements.
   (D)   Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches thick, surfaced with not
less than two inches of asphaltic concrete or some comparable all-weather
dustless material.
   (E)   Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any
residence or business district.
      (1)   Space allocated to any off-street berth shall not, while so
allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking
facilities or portions thereof.
      (2)   For special exceptions other than prescribed for hereinafter,
loading berths adequate in number and size to serve the uses, as determined by
the Zoning Administrator, shall be provided.
      (3)   Uses for which off-street loading facilities are required herein
but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum
prescribed for such required facilities shall be provided with adequate
receiving facilities off any adjacent alley, service drive or open space on the
same lot which is accessible by motor vehicle.
(1983 Code, § 9-10-7) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.132 SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   For the uses listed in this Schedule of Loading Requirements table, off-
street loading berths shall be provided on the basis of gross floor area of
buildings or portions thereof devoted as such uses in the amounts shown herein.
SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
                                                                                 Gross
                                                                                 Floor Area Required Number and
Use                                                                              in         Minimum Horizontal
                                                                                 Square     Dimensions of Berths
                                                                                 Feet
a.   Hospitals, sanitariums other institutional uses                          10,000 to  1–(10 ft. x 25 ft.)
                                                                                 200,000
                                                                                 For each
                                                                                 additional 1 additional (10 ft.
b.   Hotels, clubs and lodges, except as set forth in item e. below           200,000 or x 25 ft.)
                                                                                 fraction
                                                                                 thereof
                                                                                 10,000 to  1–(10 ft. x 25 ft.)
                                                                                 20,000
                                                                                 20,000 to  1–(10 ft. x 50 ft.)
c.   Hotels, clubs and lodges, containing any of the following: retail shops, 150,000
convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or professional     For each
offices (other than accessory)                                                   additional 1 additional (10 ft.
                                                                                 150,000 or x 50 ft.)
                                                                                 fraction
                                                                                 thereof
d.   Retail stores                                                            5,000 to   1–(10 ft. x 25 ft.)
                                                                                 10,000
e.   Establishments dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the premis10,000 to  2–(10 ft. x 25 ft.
                                                                                 25,000     ea.)
f.   Motor vehicle and machinery sales                                        25,000 to  2–(10 ft. x 50 ft.
                                                                                 40,000     ea.)
                                                                                 For each
g.   Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouse and storage buildinadditional 1 additional (10 ft.
other than accessory)                                                            200,000 or x 50 ft.)
                                                                                 fraction
                                                                                 thereof
h.   Auditoriums, convention halls, exhibition halls, sports arenas, stadiums 10,000 to  1–(10 ft. x 25 ft.)
                                                                                 20,000
                                                                                 20,000 to  1–(10 ft. x 25 ft.)
                                                                                 100,000
                                                                                 For each
i.   Bowling alleys                                                           additional 1 additional (10 ft.
                                                                                 100,000 or x 50 ft.)
                                                                                 fraction
                                                                                 thereof
 
SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
                                                                              Gross
                                                                              Floor Area Required Number and
Use                                                                           in         Minimum Horizontal
                                                                              Square     Dimensions of Berths
                                                                              Feet
                                                                              10,000 to  1–(10 ft. x 25 ft.)
                                                                              100,000
                                                                              For each
                                                                              additional 1 additional (10 ft.
                                                                              100,000 or x 25 ft.)
j.   Banks and offices–business, professional and governmental           fraction
                                                                              thereof
                                                                              For each
                                                                              additional 1 additional (10 ft.
                                                                              500,000 or x 25 ft.)
                                                                              fraction
                                                                              thereof
                                                                              5,000 to   1–(10 ft. x 25 ft.)
                                                                              10,000
k.   Establishments engaged in production processing, cleaning, servicing, 10,000 to  1–(10 ft. x 50 ft.)
testing or repair of materials, goods or products                             40,000
                                                                              40,000 to  2–(10 ft. x 50 ft.
                                                                              100,000    ea)
                                                                              For each
                                                                              additional 1 additional (10 ft.
l.   Warehouses and storage buildings                                      100,000 or x 50 ft.)
                                                                              fraction
                                                                              thereof
                                                                              8,000 to   1–(10 ft. x 25 ft.)
                                                                              25,000
                                                                              For each
m.   Theaters                                                              additional 1 additional (10 ft.
                                                                              50,000 or  x 25 ft.)
                                                                              fraction
                                                                              thereof
                                                                              8,000 to   1–(10 ft. x 25 ft.)
                                                                              100,000
                                                                              For each
n.   Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors                        additional 1 additional (10 ft.
                                                                              100,000 or x 25 ft.)
                                                                              fraction
                                                                              thereof
 
(1983 Code, § 9-10-8) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
SIGNS
§ 154.145 PERMITTED SIGNS – ALL DISTRICTS.
   Permitted signs for all districts are highway direction signs and markers,
announcing the location or directing traffic to given locations, which include
but are not limited to the following:
   (A)   Service areas–automobile, food, lodging;
   (B)   Public and quasi-public information signs; and
   (C)   Business or business districts.
(1983 Code, § 9-11-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.146 PERMITTED SIGNS – AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   The following nonflashing, nonilluminated signs are allowed:
   (A)   Signs advertising the sale or rental of the property on which the sign
is located, or the sale of agricultural products grown or produced on the
property; however, no such signs shall exceed 12 square feet in area. No sign
shall be placed closer than ten feet to the property line, provided the Zoning
Administrator may require a greater setback or other location so that the sign
will not obstruct the view along any street, or at any intersection, private
driveway, field entrance or other point of ingress or egress;
   (B)   Church bulletin boards, located on the site, which shall not exceed 24
square feet in area, nor be any closer than 30 feet to a street right-of-way;
and
   (C)   Church directional signs, not to exceed two square feet in area.
(1983 Code, § 9-11-2) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.147 PERMITTED SIGNS – RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   In all residence districts, the following classes of signs are permitted in
accordance with the regulations set forth:
   (A)   Nonflashing, nonilluminated accessory signs.
   (B)   Name plates and identification signs, subject to the following:
      (1)   Area and number. For one- and multi-family dwellings, there shall
be not more than one name plate, not exceeding one square foot in area, for
each dwelling unit, indicating the name or address of the occupant or a
permitted occupation.
      (2)   Height. No sign shall project higher than one story or 15 feet
above curb level, whichever is lower.
   (C)   For sale and to rent signs, subject to the following:
      (1)   Area and number. There shall be not more than one such sign per
zoning lot, except that on a corner lot two signs, one facing each street,
shall be permitted. No sign shall exceed 12 square feet in area nor be closer
than eight feet to any other zoning lot.
      (2)   Projection. No sign shall project beyond the property line into the
public way.
      (3)   Height. No sign shall project higher than one story or 15 feet
above curb level, whichever is lower.
   (D)   Signs accessory to parking area, subject to the following:
      (1)   Area and number. Signs designating parking area entrances or exits
are limited to one sign for each exit or entrance and to a maximum size of two
square feet each. One sign per parking area, designating the conditions of use
or identity of the parking area and limited to a maximum size of nine square
feet shall be permitted. On a corner lot two such signs, one facing each
street, shall be permitted.
      (2)   Projection. No sign shall project beyond the property line into the
public way.
      (3)   Height. No sign shall project higher than seven feet above curb
level.
   (E)   Nonflashing business signs, subject to the conditions stipulated.
Church bulletins are subject to the following:
      (1)   Area and number. There shall be not more than one sign per zoning
lot, except that on a corner lot two signs, one facing each street, shall be
permitted. No signs shall exceed 16 square feet in an area nor be closer than
eight feet to any other zoning lot, or street right-of-way.
      (2)   Projection. No sign shall project beyond the property line into the
public way.
      (3)   Height. No sign shall project higher than one story or 15 feet
above curb level, whichever is lower.
(1983 Code, § 9-11-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.148 PERMITTED SIGNS – BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
   In all business districts the following signs are permitted, subject to the
requirements set forth hereinafter.
   (A)   Name plates. All signs and name plates permitted in the residential
districts.
   (B)   Signs on marquees, canopies and awnings.
      (1)   Restrictions imposed hereinafter on the projection of signs across
property lines into the public way shall not apply to signs located on marquees
or canopies, provided that any sign located on a marquee or canopy shall be
affixed flat to the surface thereof and, further, that no sign shall extend
vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of the marquee or canopy, except
that individual, free-standing letters may project to a height of not exceeding
24 inches above same.
      (2)   Restrictions imposed herein on the projection of signs across
property lines into the public way shall not apply to signs located on awnings,
provided that any sign located on an awning shall be affixed flat to the
surface thereof, shall be nonilluminated and nonflashing and shall indicate
only the name and address of the establishment on the premises. Further, no
such sign shall extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of the
awning.
   (C)   Signs on pylons, standards, clocks and supports. Signs, clocks or
other advertising devices erected upon standards or separate supports shall be
placed so as to be entirely within the property lines of the premises upon
which they are located, and no part of the sign or standard shall have a total
height greater than 20 feet above the level of the street upon which the sign
faces, or above the adjoining ground level if the ground level is above the
street level; nor shall the surface of any such sign exceed an area of 100
square feet.
   (D)   Signs on masonry pylons. Signs may be placed on the face of a masonry
pylon when the pylon is constructed as an integral part of the building and the
pylon does not project above the roof lines more than 12 feet, and the type,
design and construction of the pylon complies with all of the requirements
herein and in applicable building codes.
   (E)   Regulations. In all business districts, the permitted signs are
subject to the following:
      (1)   Area. The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot
shall not exceed three times the lineal feet of frontage of the zoning lot. The
gross area of all flashing signs shall not exceed two times the lineal frontage
of the lot.
      (2)   Location. The sign or signs shall front the principal street, a
parking area, or in the case of a corner building, on that portion of the side
street wall within 50 feet of the principal street.
      (3)   Projection.
         (a)   Signs suspended from any building shall not project more than 24
inches beyond the building line, and the bottom of the sign shall not be less
than eight feet above the finished grade of the sidewalk.
         (b)   Any sign projected or suspended from a building shall not exceed
12 feet in height, and its location and arrangement shall be subject to
approval by the Zoning Administrator. No sign except those suspended from
buildings shall be erected or placed between the street line and the building
line.
      (4)   Height. No sign shall project higher than 30 feet above curb level,
and in no case shall a sign project above the roof line.
(1983 Code, § 9-11-4) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.149 PERMITTED SIGNS – MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
   The following signs are permitted, and shall be governed as follows:
   (A)   All signs and name plates permitted in the business districts.
   (B)   Billboards, advertising and poster panels shall not have an area
exceeding 275 square feet.
   (C)   The gross area in square feet of all signs of a zoning lot shall not
exceed six times the lineal feet of frontage of the zoning lot, provided the
gross area of flashing signs shall not exceed three times the lineal feet of
frontage of the lot.
   (D)   No sign shall project higher than 45 feet above the ground level
beneath it.
   (E)   No advertising sign shall be located within 500 feet of any public
park of more than five acres in area.
   (F)   No advertising sign shall be located within 75 feet of any property
located in a residence district.
(1983 Code, § 9-11-5) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.150 PERMITTED SIGNS – CONSERVANCY DISTRICT.
   Regulations of signs in the Agricultural District shall apply.
(1983 Code, § 9-11-6) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
§ 154.160 PURPOSE.
   Planned developments are intended to encourage the most imaginative and best
possible design of building forms and site planning for tracts of land where
unitary plans would best adapt to topographic and other natural features of
such sites. Under this procedure, well-planned residential, industrial,
commercial and other types of land use, individually or in combination, may be
developed with complete design flexibility. Planned developments must be
environmentally compatible. They should have a more beneficial effect upon the
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the village, and
particularly in the immediate surroundings, than would developments built in
conformity with standard district regulations. Sites of planned developments
shall be of sufficient size to accommodate self-contained developments and to
create their own character. Planned developments are of such substantially
different character from other special uses that the following additional
standards are established to guard against their use solely as a means of
intensifying the use of land.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-10-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.161 ZONING MAP.
   Approved planned developments shall be delineated and designated by number
on the Zoning District Map. A file, available for inspection by the public,
shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator for each planned development so
designated. The file shall contain a record of the approved development plan
and all exceptions authorized therein.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-10-2) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.162 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   A preapplication conference shall be held with the Planning and
Zoning Commission. At this conference the applicant shall provide information
as to the location of the proposed planned development; the uses and
approximate area of use category; a list of any and all exceptions to the
subdivision and zoning regulations of the village and any other information
necessary to clearly explain the planned development.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and consider the
proposal as to its compatibility with the Comprehensive (Master) Plan and the
goals and policies for planning of the village and advise the applicant on the
information, documents, exhibits, drawings and limitations on the proposal that
should be included in the application to the village for a special use permit
for planned development.
   (B)   The applicant shall request the special use permit, by letter
addressed to the chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission, to be
placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Planning and Zoning
Commission for a preliminary discussion of the proposed planned development,
and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the proposed planned
development at the meeting, which may be continued from time to time. The
applicant shall present such exhibits and written information as may be
necessary to fully acquaint the Planning and Zoning Commission with the
proposed development which shall include but not necessarily be limited to the
following:
      (1)   A tentative sketch plan, which may be in freehand sketch form,
showing the location and extent of the types of land uses proposed;
      (2)   The existing topography at five-foot contour intervals which may be
taken from U.S.G.S. information;
      (3)   Existing streets surrounding the subject property;
      (4)   Existing utilities including storm drainage facilities;
      (5)   The following shall be provided by either graphic exhibits or
written statement:
         (a)   The density of residential uses and the number of dwelling units
by type;
         (b)   The ancillary and nonresidential uses to be provided in a
residential planned development;
         (c)   The off-street parking and other service facilities proposed;
and
         (d)   The exceptions or variations to the village zoning or
subdivision requirements being requested as part of the planned development
application.
   (C)   Within 30 days after final adjournment of the meeting, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall submit to the Village Board a report in writing
containing its recommendation.
   (D)   The formal petition for a planned development shall be addressed to
the Village Board and shall be filed with the Village Clerk. Ten copies of the
petition shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission. Attached to
each copy shall be copies of the supporting documents and exhibits hereinafter
provided for.
   (E)   The hearing date shall be set and the notice of the hearing shall be
published at least once, not more than 30 days or less than 15 days before the
hearing date in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the village.
   (F)   The petition shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the report of such shall be submitted to the Village Board. The report of
the findings and recommendations shall be accompanied by such plans, exhibits
and agreements as shall have been presented by the petitioner, each identified
for reference by letter or number, together with any suggested changes therein.
   (G)   The Village Board may grant a special use for a planned development
which shall be by specific ordinance and which shall contain, or to which shall
be appended, all terms and conditions of the special use permit, including
covenants and agreements, guarantees, performance bonds, plats and the like.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-10-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.163 CONTENT OF PETITION.
   The formal petition shall contain, in addition to all other requirements,
the following:
   (A)   A site plan of the planned developments. This plan shall be at a scale
of not less than one inch equals 100 feet which shall show all proposed streets
(public and private), street classifications, rights-of-way, pavement width of
street and driveways, all principal and accessory buildings and their use, lot
sizes, building lines, easements for utility services, off-street parking,
service areas, open space, recreation facilities and any other information
necessary to clearly show the proposed elements of the planned development;
   (B)   (1)   Preliminary architectural plans for all residential buildings
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to show the basic planning, the number
of units per building and the number of bedrooms per dwelling unit;
      (2)   Preliminary architectural plans are not required for business or
other nonresidential buildings at the time of this application but must be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its approval prior to
filing an application for a building permit;
   (C)   A topographic survey with two-foot contour intervals and boundary
survey of the subject area, prepared and certified by a registered Illinois
surveyor;
   (D)   A rendered plan of the planned development area showing in contrasting
colors or by other means the respective location of all categories of land use;
   (E)   A map of the general area showing the location of the planned
development site and its relation to the existing roads and streets and use
districts within the immediately adjacent and surrounding area;
   (F)   Preliminary plans and outline specifications of the following
improvements:
      (1)   Roads, streets and alleys, including classifications, width of
right-of-way, widths of paved surfaces and construction details;
      (2)   Sidewalks, including widths of paved surfaces and construction
details;
      (3)   Sanitary and storm sewer system;
      (4)   Water supply system;
      (5)   Street lighting and public area lighting system;
      (6)   Recommendation installations for electric, gas and telephone
facilities and distribution;
      (7)   Sequence of phases or stages of development of the planned
development; and
      (8)   A general landscape planting plan shall be prepared by a landscape
architect and shall meet the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission;
   (G)   Estimates of cost of installation of all proposed improvements,
confirmed by a registered Illinois engineer; and
   (H)   Petitioner's proposed covenants, restrictions and conditions, to be
established as a part of the planned development.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-10-4) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.164 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENT.
   The petitioner shall construct and install the required improvements in
accordance with the village subdivision regulations, as set forth in Chapter
153 of this Code of Ordinances.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-10-5) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.165 STREET CLASSIFICATION.
   Street classifications, definitions and specifications shall be in accord
with the regulations pertaining to same as established in the subdivision
regulations and the Comprehensive (Master) Plan of the village as may be
amended from time to time, as may be modified by the special use permit.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-10-6) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.166 STANDARDS.
   No planned development shall be authorized by the Village Board unless the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall find and recommend, in addition to those
standards established herein for special uses, that the following standards
will be met:
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The uses permitted by such exceptions as may be requested or
recommended are necessary or desirable and appropriate to the purpose of the
development;
      (2)   The uses permitted in the development are not of a nature or so
located as to exercise an undue detrimental influence or effect upon the
surrounding neighborhood;
      (3)   Any industrial park areas established in the planned development
conform to all requirements thereof as set forth elsewhere in this chapter; and
      (4)   All minimum requirements pertaining to commercial, residential,
institutional or other uses established in the planned development shall be
subject to the requirements for each individual classification as established
elsewhere in this chapter, except as may be specifically varied in this chapter
granting and establishing a planned development use. The improvement of
roadways, whether public or private shall conform to the specifications
established by the village.
   (B)   Density. The overall density of the project defined as the number of
living units per acre does not exceed the district regulations for the district
in which it is to be developed.
   (C)   Yards. Yard requirements may be varied or waived, except along the
perimeter of the development.
   (D)   Signs. In accordance with the regulations set forth in §§
154.145 through
154.150.
   (E)   Off-street parking and loading. In accordance with the regulations set
forth in §§
154.125 through
154.132.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-10-7) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
§ 154.170 PURPOSE; GOALS; LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS; INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish general
guidelines for the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas in the
village.
   (B)   Goals.
      (1)   The goals of this subchapter are to:
         (a)   Protect land uses and property values by minimizing the
potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas;
         (b)   Protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and
businesses of the village;
         (c)   Minimize the total number of towers necessary to serve the
community;
         (d)   Promote and encourage the shared use of tower sites as a primary
option, rather than construction of additional single-use structures;
         (e)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
         (f)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a
way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas and
accessory buildings by means of careful siting, design, landscape screening,
and innovative camouflaging techniques;
         (g)   Encourage the use of alternative, small cell distributed antenna
systems as a means to mitigate the aesthetic impact of personal wireless
telecommunications facilities in areas of special economic, historical or
architectural value to the village;
         (h)   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently; and
         (i)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through sound and appropriate engineering and careful siting of tower
structures; and to require removal of such structures when they are no longer
used.
      (2)   In furtherance of these goals, the village shall give due
consideration to its Comprehensive Plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and
environmentally-sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers
and antennas.
   (C)   Legislative findings. The Village Board makes the following
legislative findings concerning the relationship these regulations have with
the village's general plarrning efforts:
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission has conducted several meetings
with public hearings on this subchapter and has reviewed appropriate areas for
towers and antennas in the village to minimize the impact.
      (2)   The Village Board generally adopts the findings and recommendations
of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   The Village Board encourages the location of the towers and
antennas on properties owned by the village or other units of local government
when the setbacks and separation distances set forth in this subchapter can
generally be met.
   (D)   Interpretation.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to and shall not be
interpreted or applied so as to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the
provision of personal wireless services, nor shall the provisions of this
chapter be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between
providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services. To the extent
that any provision or provisions of this chapter are inconsistent or in
conflict with any provision of this subchapter, the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deemed to control.
      (2)   In the course of reviewing any request for any approval required
under this subchapter made by an applicant to provide personal wireless service
or to install personal wireless service facilities, the Village Board shall act
within a reasonable period of time after a complete request is duly filed with
the village, taking into account the nature and scope of the request. There
shall be a rebuttable presumption that a reasonable period of time to take
final action on applications for collocated facilities is 90 days and for new
facilities 150 days; provided that such period shall be tolled during any time
the applicant needs to respond to reasonable requests for additional
information. Any decision to deny such a request shall be in writing and
supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
      (3)   No decision to deny an application for a conditional use permit or
a zoning variation for the construction or installation of a personal wireless
service facility may be based on the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions to the extent that such facility complies with the FCC's regulations
concerning such emissions.
      (4)   Nothing herein shall be construed to release any applicant from
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local building, electrical
and occupational safety laws, regulations, codes and rules.
(Ord. 16-02, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 154.171 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower or
base station and used in communications that radiates or captures
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
   BACKHAUL NETWORK. The lines that connect any provider's towers/cell sites to
one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance
providers, or the public switched telephone network.
   BASE STATION. Includes other structures, excluding towers, that support or
house a personal wireless service facility as of the effective date of this
subchapter or on which new personal wireless service facilities are granted
permission to be erected.
   DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM. A network of spatially separated antenna nodes
connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless
service within a geographic area or structure.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   HEIGHT. 
      (1)   When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured
from the finished grade of the ground beneath the tower to the highest point on
the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
      (2)   ESTABLISHED HEIGHT. The height of a tower, excluding transmission
equipment and other appurtenances, at the time that tower is constructed or on
the effective date of this Code, whichever is later.
   NO-IMPACT ANTENNA FACILITY. An antenna facility which is either:
      (1)   Virtually invisible to the casual observer, such as an antenna
behind louvers on a building, or inside a steeple or similar structure; or
      (2)   Camouflaged so as to blend in with its surroundings to such an
extent that it is no more obtrusive to the casual observer than the base
station which it is:
         (a)   Placed on, such as a rooftop, lighting standard, or existing
tower; or
         (b)   Replacing, such as a school athletic field light standard.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE and PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES. As used
in this subchapter, shall be defined in the same manner as in Title 47, United
States Code, Section 332(c)(7)(C), as amended now or in the future. Generally,
these terms refer to licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services
including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile
radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar
services that are marketed to the general public. For the purpose of this
chapter the term PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES includes each of its
component parts, including ground-mounted support equipment, screening,
landscaping, towers and/or antennas, as deemed appropriate in the context, and
any other appurtenant improvements required as a condition of authority to
construct such facilities.
   PRE-EXISTING TOWERS AND PRE-EXISTING ANTENNAS. Any personal wireless service
facility for which a building permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date hereof, including permitted personal wireless service facilities
that have not yet been constructed so long as such permit is current and not
expired.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily solely for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers,
or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support
thereto.
(Ord. 16-02, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 154.172 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   New towers and antennas. Except as otherwise provided in this
subchapter, all new personal wireless service facilities in the village shall
be subject to these regulations.
   (B)   Excluded items.
      (1)   Amateur radio station/receive only antennas. Any tower, or any
antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a
federally-licensed amateur radio station operator, or is used exclusively as a
receive-only antenna shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
subchapter, and shall be governed by this chapter.
      (2)   Pre-existing personal wireless service facilities. Pre-existing
towers and preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements
of this subchapter, other than the requirements of §
154.173(B) and (C) and §
154.179.
      (3)   AM Array. For purposes of implementing this subchapter, an AM
array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the
outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units
may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
(Ord. 16-02, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 154.173 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Principal or accessory use. An antenna or tower may be considered
either a principal or an accessory use. On any lot, an existing use or
structure shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such
lot.
   (B)   State or federal requirements. 
      (1)   All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of
the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with
the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and
regulations are altered, changed, or modified after the date of approval by the
village, or construction by the owner, then the owner of any personal wireless
service facility governed by this section shall bring such personal wireless
service facility into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
within six months after:
         (a)   The effective date of any such standards and regulations; or
         (b)   The date the facilities are amortized at least 50%, whichever is
later, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling
state or federal agency.
      (2)   Failure to bring any personal wireless service facility into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within such time shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the personal wireless service facility at
the owner's expense.
   (C)   Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of a personal wireless service facility, the owner of a personal wireless
service facility shall ensure that it is designed, constructed and at all times
maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes, as amended from time to time. Owner shall submit plans, stamped
by a professional engineer, sufficient for review and issuance of a building
permit for the tower and all related facilities. If, upon inspection, the
village concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards
and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being
provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such
tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the
personal wireless service facility at the owner's expense. Prior to the
issuance of a building permit the applicant shall post with the village a
performance bond equal to the cost of removing the personal wireless service
facility and all associated equipment.
   (D)   Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
personal wireless service facility complies with applicable regulations,
including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage requirements,
and other such requirements in the district in which the personal wireless
service facility may be located, the dimensions of the entire lot shall
control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on only a portion of
such lot.
   (E)   Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Towers either shall be constructed of and maintain a galvanized
steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, shall be
painted so as to reduce visual glare and obtrusiveness. The color of the tower
shall be designed to facilitate the appearance of the tower to blend with the
natural environment, subject to the approval of the Village Board.
      (2)   At a tower site, the design of the equipment building and/or
cabinet, and any related structures shall, to the extent possible, use
materials, colors, and/or textures that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings; in addition, the village may require as a
condition for approval of the application for special use certain screening or
landscaping.
      (3)   If an antenna is installed on a base station, the antenna and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that
is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the base station so
as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as
possible.
   (F)   Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views. Lighting is permitted during times which construction or
maintenance is being performed on a tower.
   (G)   Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower separation distances
shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in and around the village
irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
   (H)   Signs. No signs shall be allowed on any antenna or tower, except for
any safety warning or other sign required by applicable regulation and a sign
bearing the identity of the owner of the personal wireless service facility.
   (I)   Buildings, cabinets, and support equipment. Buildings, cabinets,
support equipment and other facilities associated with any antenna or tower
shall comply with the requirements of §
154.175
   (J)   Not essential services. Personal wireless service facilities shall not
be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private
utilities.
   (K)   Inventory of existing sites. Each application for a new personal
wireless service facility shall include an inventory of existing personal
wireless service facilities, or sites which have been approved for personal
wireless service facilities, or for which applications or petitions for
approval for personal wireless service facilities have been filed, that are
either within the jurisdiction of the village or within one-quarter mile of the
border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and
design of each tower. The village may share such information with other
applicants applying for approvals or special use permits under this subchapter
or other persons or entities seeking to locate personal wireless service
facilities within the jurisdiction of the village; provided, however, that the
village is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable for location of a personal
wireless service facility. The purpose of requiring this information is to
facilitate and promote collocation of communication facilities.
(Ord. 16-02, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 154.174 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall not require any special use permit.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted in any
zoning district within the village, so long as said antenna or tower conforms
to all other requirements of this subchapter.
      (1)   Any personal wireless service facility located on property owned,
leased, or otherwise controlled by the village, provided a license or lease
authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the village.
      (2)   Any antennas located on an existing tower or base station that does
not substantially change the dimensions of the tower or base station more than
described below:
         (a)   The mounting of the proposed antenna on the tower would increase
the existing height of the tower by more than 10%, or by the height of one
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not
to exceed twenty feet, whichever is greater; or
         (b)   The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve the
installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the
technology involved, not to exceed four, or more than one new equipment
shelter; or
         (c)   The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve adding an
appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the
tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the
level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; or
         (d)   The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve excavation
outside the current tower site, defined as the current boundaries of the leased
or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements
currently related to the site.
(Ord. 16-02, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 154.175 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   General provisions. The following provisions shall govern the issuance
of special use permits for personal wireless service facilities by the village.
   (B)   If the personal wireless service facility is not a permitted use under
§
154.174, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a
tower or the placement of an antenna on a base station.
   (C)   Applications for special use permits under this subchapter shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of the zoning regulations in this
chapter; in particular, any specific regulations of the zoning district in
which the property on which the special use is to be located, except as
modified in this subchapter. In the event of a conflict, the more restrictive
regulation shall control.
   (D)   In granting a special use permit, the Zoning Board may recommend, and/
or the Board of Trustees may impose, conditions for approval to the extent the
village concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any unique adverse
effect of the proposed tower, any equipment building or cabinet, and other
facilities related to the tower, but such conditions may not have the effect of
prohibiting erection of a tower otherwise shown to be necessary at the proposed
location.
   (E)   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
   (F)   Each applicant for special use shall file an application with the
Village Clerk, including the information set forth in §
154.173(B), together with the application fee and a deposit from which the
village shall from time to time pay the costs incurred by the village for
reviewing the application, including fees incurred for any consultant to review
and report on the application. Any balance remaining on said deposit after
final decision of the application shall be refunded to the applicant. The
Village Board shall from time to time set a fee and required deposit amount for
such application.
   (G)   Towers.
      (1)   Information required. In addition to any information required for
applications for special use permits under the the zoning regulations in this
chapter, applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall submit the
following information.
      (2)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height
of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and
zoning (including properties outside the village's boundaries), Comprehensive
Plan classification of the site and all properties within the applicable
separation distances set forth in this subchapter, adjacent roadways, proposed
means of access, setbacks from property lines and structures, elevation
drawings of the proposed facilities, topography, parking, and other information
deemed by the village to be reasonably necessary to assess compliance with this
subchapter.
      (3)   The setback distance between the proposed tower and each of the
following: the nearest residential unit; any residentially zoned property
(including any unplatted residentially zoned property); and any other property
planned for residential uses.
      (4)   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials to be
incorporated into the screening required, if any.
      (5)   A description of the finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination, including any fencing.
      (6)   A description of applicant's compliance with §
154.173(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (H), (I) and (K) and divisions (E) and (F) of
this section.
      (7)   A statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the
tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users.
      (8)   A statement by the applicant describing how/why any existing towers
or base stations cannot be used to provide the service proposed by the new
tower.
      (9)   If the location is leased or to be leased to applicant, agreement
by the owner to terms relating to removal of the personal wireless service
facility and related facilities, as described in this section.
   (H)   Factors considered in granting special use permits for towers. In
addition to any standards for consideration of a special use permit application
pursuant to §
154.208 of this chapter, the Zoning Board and the Board of Trustees shall
consider the following factors in determining whether to recommend issuance of
a special use permit:
      (1)   Height of the proposed tower by comparison to the permitted height
in the relevant zoning district, and whether the application qualifies for a
height variance, if required;
      (2)   Whether uses on adjacent and nearby properties are particularly and
uniquely sensitive to the impacts from towers, and the facts which distinguish
the adjacent and nearby properties from other properties in the village;
      (3)   Whether topography of the land surrounding the proposed site of the
tower affects the perceived height of the tower and the utility of the tower;
      (4)   Whether tree coverage and foliage surrounding the proposed site of
the tower affects the applicant's ability to camouflage the tower;
      (5)   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
      (6)   How the proposed ingress and egress to the proposed site of the
tower affects nearby traffic patterns and whether the surrounding highway
network is capable of supporting the vehicles used to install and service the
tower; and
      (7)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
distributed antenna systems, as discussed in division (I) of this section.
   (I)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the village that no existing
tower, base station or a distributed antenna system can accommodate the
applicant's proposed coverage requirements. An applicant shall submit
information requested by the village related to the availability of suitable
existing towers, other structures or distributed antenna systems. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, base station or distributed
antenna systems can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of
any of the following:
      (1)   There are no existing towers or base stations are located within
the geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
      (2)   Existing towers or base stations are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
      (3)   Existing towers or base stations do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
      (4)   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on existing towers or base stations, or the
antenna on the existing towers or base stations would cause such interference
with the applicant's proposed antenna.
      (5)   The fees, costs, or other contractual provisions for payment or
expense required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or base
station or to adapt an existing tower or base station for sharing are
unreasonable. Total fees, costs or other contractual provisions for payment or
expense which exceed the cost of developing and constructing a new tower are
presumed to be unreasonable.
      (6)   The applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that
there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and base stations
unsuitable.
      (7)   The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does
not require the use of towers or structures, such as a distributed antenna
system, is unsuitable. It shall not be presumed that merely because costs of
alternative technology exceed the cost of developing a new personal wireless
service facility that the alternative technology is unsuitable.
   (J)   Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply:
      (1)   Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 100% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
      (2)   Guys and equipment buildings or cabinets must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements, including the provision of transitional
yards, if required.
   (K)   Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all
towers and antennas for which a special use permit is required:
      (1)   Separation from off-site uses/designated areas. Tower separation
shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of the off-site
uses and/or designated areas as specified in Table 1, including the exceptions
noted therein.
      (2)   Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the minimum
standards established in Table 1.
      (3)   Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for new
towers, and shall be measured as the distance between the proposed tower and
any preexisting towers. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing
or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the
proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation
distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.
 
Table 1.
Off Site Use/Designated Area                                                     Separation
                                                                                 Distance
Residential properties
   Whether single-family, duplex or multi-family                               
   Whether vacant or with a principal structure                                  400 feet
   Whether platted or has a preliminary subdivision plan approved that is not
expired
Non-residentially zoned lands or non-residential used land                       100% of the
                                                                                 tower height
                                                                                 300 feet, as
The Kishwaukee River, Bull Run or any watercourse                                measured from
                                                                                 the shore
                                                                                 500 feet,
Highways                                                                         from the
                                                                                 right-of-way
 
 
Table 2. Existing Towers - Type, Minimum Separation Distance
              Lattice Guyed Monopole      Monopole
                            >75 Feet High <75 Feet High
Lattice       1,000   1,500 500           250
Guyed         1,500   1,750 1,500         1,250
Monopole      500     1,500 250           250
>75 feet high
Monopole      250     1,250 250           250
<75 feet high
 
   (L)   Security fencing/anti-climbing. Notwithstanding anything else to the
contrary contained in the zoning regulations in this chapter, a tower, and any
equipment building or cabinet related thereto, shall be enclosed by fencing for
security purposes. Said fencing shall be not less than six feet in height. The
tower shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; or shall
be designed to discourage climbing; provided however, that the Zoning Board may
recommend and the Board of Trustees may approve a waiver of such requirement as
it deems appropriate.
   (M)   Landscaping. In the event that landscaping is proposed by the
applicant or is otherwise required as a condition for approval of the special
use application, the following requirements shall govern:
      (1)   The standard landscape screen or buffer shall consist of a
landscaped buffer of evergreen trees at least six feet high outside the
perimeter of the facilities and/or any fence.
      (2)   In a location where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping standards may be reduced in the discretion of the
village.
      (3)   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
   (N)   Recommendation; approval. The Zoning Board may recommend, and/or the
Board of Trustees may approve, a waiver or reduction of the burden of any one
or more of the criteria set forth in this subchapter, if either respectively
concludes that the purposes and goals of this subchapter would be better served
thereby; and specifically as to the setback requirement of this subchapter, may
reduce the standard if enforcement of the requirement would effectively
prohibit the proposed facilities.
(Ord. 16-02, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 154.176 EQUIPMENT BUILDINGS OR CABINETS AND OTHER RELATED FACILITIES.
   The equipment building or cabinet, and other related facilities, used in
association with a personal wireless service facility shall comply with the
following.
   (A)   Antenna mounted on a structure or rooftop.
      (1)   For any structure or rooftop which is less than 65 feet in height,
the related equipment building or cabinet, and other facilities, if greater
than 150 square feet of gross floor area in size, or greater than ten feet in
height, shall be located or screened so it is not visible from the ground.
      (2)   Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
   (B)   Antenna mounted on a utility pole or light pole.
      (1)   In residential zoning districts, the equipment cabinet or structure
may be located:
         (a)   In a front or side yard, provided the equipment building or
cabinet and related facilities are no greater than the minimum size available
for such equipment and are located a minimum of six feet from all lot lines.
Such building or cabinet and related facilities shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge with a planted height of at least 36 inches, and an ultimate
height of at least 42 inches to 48 inches.
         (b)   In a rear yard, provided building or cabinet and related
facilities shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with a planted height of at
least 36 inches and an ultimate height of eight feet.
      (2)   Any equipment building or cabinet and related facilities shall be
screened from view of all residential properties which abut or are directly
across the street from such building or cabinet and related facilities by a
solid fence six feet in height or an evergreen hedge with a planted height of
at least 36 inches and an ultimate height of eight feet.
      (3)   Otherwise, any such building or cabinet and related facilities
shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with a planted height of at least 36
inches and an ultimate height of 8 feet.
   (C)   Antenna located on a tower. Any equipment building or cabinet and
related facilities shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard
requirements of the zoning district in which the antenna and tower are located.
   (D)   Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of this
subchapter may be varied by the village by recommendation of the Zoning Board,
and/or approval by the Board of Trustees, in the case of uses permitted by
special use, in order to accommodate or encourage collocation.
(Ord. 16-02, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 154.177 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
   (A)   Any antenna or tower that is not used or operated for a continuous
period of 12 months, or which fails to comply with the requirements of §
154.173(B) or (C) shall be considered abandoned. However, before an antenna or
tower is considered abandoned, the Village Board shall provide the owner
thereof and the owner of the property upon which it is located with at least 45
days advance written notice of the reasons why the village has determined it is
abandoned, notice of the date and time of the meeting when the matter will be
considered and advise them that they will be given the opportunity to be heard
at the meeting.
   (B)   All abandoned or unused portions of a personal wireless service
facility shall be removed within six months of the Village Board's
determination that such facilities are abandoned, unless a time extension is
approved by the Village Board. Before the Village Board makes a finding or
issues an order for removal of the facility resulting from its abandonment, the
applicant and the owner shall be given an opportunity for a pre-deprivation
hearing in the manner described below:
      (1)   When the village believes all or any part of a facility has been
abandoned, the Village Clerk shall cause a notice of facility abandonment to be
sent via first class mail to the owner of the facility. The notice of facility
abandonment shall state the name and address of the owner, the name and address
of the property owner, a summary of the grounds for the village's determination
and describe the opportunity for a hearing. If the village does not have any
records identifying the owner of the facility, the village shall send notice to
the owner, as identified by the tax records of the Chief County Assessment
Officer.
      (2)   Failure to request a hearing within 21 days from the date of the
notice will result in the Village Board making its determination solely on the
basis of evidence presented by the village staff, agents and contractors.
      (3)   A person may challenge the validity of the notice of facility
abandonment by requesting a hearing and appearing in person to submit evidence
which would disprove abandonment, or the term for which the facility has not
been used or operated is less than 12 months. Upon a request for a hearing, the
Village Clerk shall schedule the hearing for a regular or special Village Board
meeting.
      (4)   All parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present
testimony and evidence at the hearing. A request for a continuance of the
hearing date must be made in person before the Village Board and may be granted
upon a showing of good cause. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at
the hearing.
      (5)   Written notice of the Board's determination of abandonment shall be
sent via regular mail, and via certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
owner of the personal wireless service facilities and the owner of the
property, as determined by reference to the records of the Chief County
Assessment Officer.
   (C)   The owner of any antenna or tower designated by the Village Board as
abandoned shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
village.
   (D)   In order to guarantee said removal, the applicant for a building
permit for placement of personal wireless service facilities must post and
maintain as a condition of the permit an irrevocable letter of credit,
performance bond or other security as approved by the Village Attorney, in an
amount equal to 115% of the estimated cost of removal. Terms and conditions
regarding the required removal and performance guarantee provisions of this
subchapter shall be established as a condition of a special use ordinance, if
required.
   (E)   If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision
shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower.
(Ord. 16-02, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 154.178 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Expansion of non-conforming structure. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in this chapter, towers that are constructed, and antennas
that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter shall
not be deemed to constitute the expansion of any non-conforming use or
structure.
   (B)   Pre-existing towers. Any pre-existing tower shall be allowed to
continue such use as exists at the time of adoption of these regulations and
may be expanded only to the extent described in §
154.174(B)(2). Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such a pre-existing
tower, which shall include replacement with a new tower of like construction
and height, provided such new construction otherwise shall comply with the
requirements of this subchapter.
   (C)   Rebuilding of damaged or destroyed nonconforming personal wireless
service facilities. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the
contrary, bona fide non-conforming antennas, antenna structures or personal
wireless service facilities that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt
without having first obtained administrative approval or a special use permit
and without having to meet the separation requirements specified elsewhere in
this chapter.
   (D)   Except as permitted by §
154.174(B)(2), the type, height, and location of the personal wireless service
facility on-site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original
facility approval.
   (E)   A building permit to rebuild the personal wireless service facility
shall comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained
within 180 days from the date the personal wireless service facility is damaged
or destroyed.
   (F)   If no permit is obtained within said time, or if such permit
thereafter expires, the personal wireless service facility shall be deemed
abandoned as specified in §
154.177 and shall lose its designation as a non-conforming structure.
(Ord. 16-02, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 154.179 ANNUAL REPORTING OF INFORMATION.
   Each owner of an antenna, antenna structure, or tower regulated under this
subchapter, and any previously existing antenna, antenna structure, or tower
which would have been regulated under this subchapter had it existed at the
time of permitting for or construction of such facility, shall, on an annual
basis, file with the Village Clerk such information as is required by the
village to aid with the administration of this subchapter. Such information
shall include:
   (A)   Changes in availability of space on any tower for collocation of
additional antennas;
   (B)   Any plan to abandon a position on a tower (thereby leaving space for
the possible collocation of another antenna);
   (C)   Any plan and/or willingness to modify said tower and antenna structure
so as to provide for the possibility of collocation;
   (D)   Any plan to abandon a tower structure;
   (E)   Such other non-proprietary information as may be required by the
village to assist with the administration of this subchapter.
(Ord. 16-02, passed 2-22-2016)
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
§ 154.180 CONTINUANCE OF USE.
   (A)   Any lawfully established use of a building or land, on the effective
date of this chapter, or of amendments hereto, that does not conform to the use
regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a
nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   Any nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use,
provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
   (C)   Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date of this chapter, or of amendments hereto, may be completed in
accordance with the approved plans, provided construction is started within 90
days and diligently prosecuted to completion. The building shall thereafter be
deemed a lawfully established building.
(1983 Code, § 9-12-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.181 DISCONTINUANCE OF USE.
   (A)   Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a
nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the
provisions of this chapter, the premises shall not thereafter be used or
occupied by a nonconforming use, even though the building may have been
originally designed and constructed for the prior nonconforming use.
   (B)   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part
thereof has been discontinued for a period of six months, or whenever there is
evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use,
the use shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and
the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformance with the regulations
of the district; except whenever a nonconforming use dependent on seasonal
trade has been discontinued for a period of one year, the use shall not
thereafter be established and any future use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a
nonconforming use for a period of six months shall constitute abandonment, and
the premises shall not thereafter be used in a nonconforming manner.
(1983 Code, § 9-12-2) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.182 RECLASSIFICATION OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   The provisions of §§
154.180 and
154.181 shall also apply to buildings, structures, land or uses which hereafter
become nonconforming due to any reclassification of zones under this chapter or
any subsequent change in the regulations of this chapter, and any time periods
specified for discontinuance of nonconforming uses shall be measured from the
date of the reclassification or change.
(1983 Code, § 9-12-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.183 REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a
nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
   (B)   No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other
structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
      (1)   When the alteration is required by law;
      (2)   When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the
nonconforming use; or
      (3)   When a building in a residence district containing residential
nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve livability; provided no
structural alteration shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling
units or the bulk of the building.
(1983 Code, § 9-12-4) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.184 DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION.
   If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged
or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50% or more of its replacement value
at that time, the building or other structure can be rebuilt or used thereafter
only for a conforming use and in compliance with the provisions of the district
in which it is located. In the event the damage or destruction is less than 50%
of its replacement value, based upon prevailing costs, the building may then be
restored to its original condition and the occupancy or use of the building may
be continued which existed at the time of the partial destruction. In either
event, restoration or repair of the building or other structure must be started
within a period of six months from the date of damage or destruction, and
completed within one year.
(1983 Code, § 9-12-5) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.185 ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS.
   (A)   A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the
entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use, and is made to
conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (B)   No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered
in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space occupied
by the nonconforming use.
   (C)   No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required usable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the
zoning lot as it existed on the effective date of this chapter, or to displace
any conforming uses in the same building or on the same parcel.
(1983 Code, § 9-12-6) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.186 EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   Whenever a lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conforms
to the use regulations of this chapter, but is nonconforming only in the
particular manner hereinafter specified, the building and use thereof shall be
exempt from the requirements of §§
154.183 and
154.184:
   (A)   In any residence district, where a dwelling is nonconforming if only
as to the number of dwelling units it contains, provided no such building shall
be altered in any way so as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
   (B)   In any business or manufacturing district, where the use is less
distant from a residence district than that specified in the regulations for
the district in which it is located.
   (C)   In any district, where an established building, structure or use is
nonconforming with respect to the standards prescribed in this chapter for any
of the following:
      (1)   Floor area ratio;
      (2)   Yards - front, side or rear;
      (3)   Off-street parking or loading;
      (4)   Lot area;
      (5)   Building height; and/or
      (6)   Gross floor area.
(1983 Code, § 9-12-7) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.187 CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE.
   Any nonconforming use may be made a special use, when the special use is
permitted in the district in which it is located, by granting of a special use
permit.
(1983 Code, § 9-12-8) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.200 ORGANIZATION.
   The administration of this chapter is hereby vested in:
   (A)   Zoning Administrator;
   (B)   Planning and Zoning Commission; and
   (C)   Village Board.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-1) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
Cross-reference:
   Additional provisions for these bodies, see Chapters
30 and
32 of this Code of Ordinances
§ 154.201 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established the office of Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   Duties. The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce this
chapter, and in addition thereto and in furtherance of his or her authority, he
or she shall:
      (1)   Examine and approve an application pertaining to the use of land or
structures when the application conforms with the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Issue zoning certificates, and make and maintain records thereof;
      (3)   Issue occupancy certificates and make and maintain records thereof;
      (4)   Supervise inspections of structures and uses of land to determine
compliance with the terms of this chapter, and where there are violations,
initiate action to secure compliance;
      (5)   Receive from the Village Clerk and file and forward to the Planning
and Zoning Commission all applications and petitions for appeals, variations,
amendments, special use permits, planned developments or for other matters on
which the Planning and Zoning Commission is required to pass under this
chapter;
      (6)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including
but not limited to maps, amendments, the rules of practice and procedure of the
Planning and Zoning Commission variations, appeals and applications therefor,
and records of hearings thereon, including the recording of district amendments
and special uses on the Zoning District Map; and maintain all zoning records
which are a part of the administration of this chapter;
      (7)   Decide or make recommendations on all other matters under this
chapter upon which the Zoning Administrator is required to act;
      (8)   Initiate, direct and review from time to time, a study of the
provisions of this chapter and make reports of his or her recommendations to
the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Board not less frequently
than annually;
      (9)   Assist the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board in the
development of proposed amendments to the provisions of this title as may be
necessary from time to time;
      (10)   Publish periodically this chapter or changes thereto including the
Zoning District Map; and
      (11)   Provide and maintain public information service relative to
matters arising out of this chapter.
   (C)   Salary. The Zoning Administrator shall receive as compensation for all
of his or her services, a salary for a fiscal year in an amount to be
determined by the Village Board from time to time.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-2) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
Cross-reference:
   Additional responsibilities of Zoning Administrator, see Chapter
152 of this Code of Ordinances
§ 154.202 ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Applications for zoning certificates shall be accompanied by building
layout plans in triplicate, drawn to scale, and fully dimensioned, adequate to
show the shape, area and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the elevation
of the lowest area of the lot, the location, the ground area, height and bulk
of existing and proposed structures and, if residential, the number of dwelling
units each structure is designed to accommodate, location and number of off-
street parking and off-street loading spaces, and any other information as may
be required by the Zoning Administrator for the proper enforcement of this
chapter. Wherever a structure or use is of a type for which this chapter
requires off-street parking on a ratio to the number of employees, the number
of employees on which the parking requirements is based shall be shown on the
application. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the owner when the
plans shall have been approved by the Zoning Administrator. The lot and
location of the building thereon shall be staked out on the ground before
construction is started.
   (B)   No permit pertaining to the use of land or structures shall be issued
by an officer, department or employee of the village unless the application for
the permit has been examined by the Zoning Administrator and has affixed to it
the authorization of the Zoning Administrator, indicating that the proposed
structure or use complies with the provisions of the chapter. Where no other
permit is required for the use of the land, this zoning authorization shall be
construed as the permit to so use the land.
   (C)   An application for a permit pertaining to the use of land or
structures which requires compliance with the provisions of this chapter
respecting performance standards shall be signed by the land owner or a
corporate officer, or authorized representative of the owner or corporation,
certifying that the structure and the proposed use thereof complies with the
applicable performance standards of the district in which it is located. The
certificates shall contain sufficient information and detail to enable the
Zoning Administrator to determine that the proposed structure and use can and
will be in compliance with the applicable performance standards. The Zoning
Administrator shall, within 15 working days following receipt of the
application and certificate, approve and authorize or deny the issuance of a
zoning certificate. Approval also indicates that the application complies with
other relevant provisions of the chapter. This authorization shall thereafter
be valid for all purposes for a period of one year, and if incomplete at that
time, may be extended for successive one-year periods by requests in writing to
and written authorizations for the extensions from the Zoning Administrator.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-3) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.203 OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Occupancy certificates shall be applied for coincidentally with
applications for zoning certificates, and shall be issued within ten working
days after completion of construction and the premises inspected by the Zoning
Administrator. Occupancy certificates shall be issued by the Zoning
Administrator to authorize occupancy of the premises in accordance with the
zoning certificates. Pending the issuance of the permanent occupancy
certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued, to be valid for a period
not to exceed 60 days from its date, during the completion of any addition or
during partial occupancy of the premises. If the completion of any occupancy
certificate is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in
writing within ten working days after he or she has been notified in writing
that the premises are ready for occupancy, stating the reasons why a
certificate cannot be issued.
   (B)   No occupancy certificate for a change of use in an existing structure
or land improvement shall be issued until the premises have been inspected and
certified by the Zoning Administrator to be in compliance with applicable
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.
   (C)   A record of occupancy certificates shall be kept on file in the office
of the Zoning Administrator and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any
person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the land or structure
affected. A fee of $5 shall be charged for each original occupancy certificate,
and $1 for each additional copy.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-4) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.204 PROCEDURE IN CASE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever there is found a violation of the terms of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall at once issue written notice to the owner and any other
responsible party, specifying the nature of the violation and citing the
provisions of the chapter which are violated, and the owner and any other party
shall at once take appropriate steps to correct the violation. In case of
failure by the owner or other responsible party to correct the violation within
a reasonable time, the Zoning Administrator shall initiate an action or
proceeding as shall secure compliance with the applicable provision of this
chapter. When compliance is so secured, the Zoning Administrator shall issue an
occupancy certificate certifying such compliance.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-5) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.205 VARIATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine and vary
the regulations of this chapter in harmony with their general purpose and
intent, only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth, where the
Planning and Zoning Commission makes a finding of fact based upon the standards
hereinafter prescribed, that there are practical difficulties or particular
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of
the chapter.
   (B)   Application for variations. An application for a variation shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator on a prescribed form. The application shall
contain such information as the Planning and Zoning Commission may require. No
more than 90 days after the filing of the application, a hearing shall be held
on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least once, not
more than 30 days or less than 15 days before the hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village.
   (C)   Standards of variations. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not
vary the regulations of this chapter, as authorized herein, unless it shall
make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case
that:
      (1)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
the district in which it is located.
      (2)   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances.
      (3)   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality.
      (4)   For the purpose of implementing the above rules, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall also, in making its determination whether there are
practical difficulties or particular hardships, take into consideration the
extent to which the following facts favorable to the applicant have been
established by the evidence:
         (a)   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
condition of the specific property involved would result in a particular
hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of the regulations are carried out.
         (b)   The conditions upon which the petition for a variation is based
would not be applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning
classification.
         (c)   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property.
         (d)   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by the
owner of the property.
         (e)   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located.
         (f)   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion in
the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public
safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood or adversely affect the health, morals or general welfare of the
public.
      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may impose such conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this section, to reduce or minimize the
injurious effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and
better to carry out the general intent of this chapter.
   (D)   Authorized variations. Variations from the regulations of this chapter
shall be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission only in accordance with
the standards, as set forth in this subchapter and may be granted only in the
following instances, and in no others:
      (1)   To permit any yard or setback less than a yard or a setback
required by the applicable regulations;
      (2)   To permit the use of a lot or lots not of record on the effective
date of this chapter for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of
insufficient area of width of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the
respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than 90% of the required
area and width;
      (3)   To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two or more uses, provided that substantial use of the
facility by each use does not take place at approximately the same hours of the
same days of the week;
      (4)   To reduce the applicable off-street parking or off-street loading
facilities required by not more than one parking space or loading space, or 20%
of applicable regulations, whichever number is greater; or
      (5)   To increase by not more than 25% the maximum distance that required
parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served.
   (E)   Decisions. The concurring vote of the five members of the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be necessary to approve a variation.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-6) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.206 APPEALS; SCOPE.
   An appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission may be made by any person or
by any office, department, board or bureau aggrieved by a decision of the
Zoning Administrator under this chapter, in accordance with Illinois Statutes
and the following:
   (A)   An application for an appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk
within 20 days of the date of the action from which the appeal is being filed,
and thereafter the Village Clerk shall forward the application to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for processing. The Village Clerk shall forward to the
Zoning Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and he
or she shall forthwith transmit to the Planning and Zoning Commission all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (B)   An appeal stays all the proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to
the Planning and Zoning Commission, after the notice of appeal has been filed
with him or her, that by reason of fact stated in the certificate a stay would,
in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by a court of record on
application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the
same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney. The Planning and Zoning Commission may affirm or, on
the concurring vote of five members, may reverse wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion
ought to be done or made on the premises, and to that end shall have all the
powers of the office from whom the appeal was taken.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-7) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.207 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adoption. This chapter may be amended, changed or altered only by a
favorable majority vote of the Village Board and only after a public hearing
has been duly advertised and held by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (B)   Kinds of amendments. An amendment to this chapter may be one of the
following:
      (1)   A change in a district's boundary (rezoning);
      (2)   A change in a district's regulations; or
      (3)   A change in any other provision of this chapter.
   (C)   Initiation of proceedings, generally. Proceedings for amending this
chapter shall be initiated by at least one of the following three methods:
      (1)   By petition of an owner or owners of property which is proposed to
be rezoned, or for which district regulation changes are proposed;
      (2)   By recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission; or
      (3)   By action of the Village Board.
   (D)   Required exhibits for rezoning or district regulation changes
initiated by property owners. The boundary survey and plot plan as required for
building permit applications.
   (E)   Procedures. The procedure for a property owner to initiate a rezoning
or district regulation change applying to his or her property is as follows:
      (1)   The property owner or his or her agent shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator to explain his or her situation, learn the procedures and obtain
an application form.
      (2)   The applicant shall file the completed application form together
with the required exhibits with the Zoning Administrator and shall pay a filing
fee of $50.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application and
required exhibits to the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall give notice
of the public hearing to the property owners within the affected zone and
within 250 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question; however,
failure of any property owner to receive the notification shall not invalidate
the proceedings.
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall have notice of the required public
hearing published in the official municipal newspaper.
      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold the public hearing
and shall, within 45 days of filing, recommend one of three actions: approval,
denial or conditional approval.
      (6)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its
recommendation to the Village Board for its official action.
      (7)   The Village Board shall act upon the application within 45 days
after receiving the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-8) (Ord. 03-09, passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-
2009)
§ 154.208 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. Before a building or premises is devoted to any use
classified as a special use in this chapter, a special use permit must be
granted by the Village Board.
   (B)   Exhibits. The following exhibits shall be required unless waived by
the Planning and Zoning Commission:
      (1)   The boundary survey and plot plan as required for building permit
application; and
      (2)   Petition of property owners within 250 feet of property in question
showing not less than 50% of the owners favoring proposals.
   (C)   Procedure. The procedure for obtaining a special use permit is as
follows:
      (1)   The property owner or his or her agent shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator to explain his or her situation, learn the procedures and obtain
an application form.
      (2)   The applicant shall file the completed application form together
with the required exhibits with the Zoning Administrator and shall pay a filing
fee in accordance with §
154.211.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and shall give notice to the public hearing to
all property owners within 250 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in
question; however, failure of any property owner to receive the notification
shall not invalidate the proceedings.
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall have notice of the public hearing
published in the official newspaper.
      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold the public hearing
and shall study the application to determine possible adverse effects of the
proposed special use and to determine what additional requirements may be
necessary to reduce the adverse effects and within 45 days of filing shall
recommend one of three actions: approval, denial or conditional approval.
      (6)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its
recommendation to the Village Board for its official action.
      (7)   The Village Board shall act on the application within 45 days after
receiving the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (D)   Standards.
      (1)   A special use permit may be granted by the Village Board after
demonstration by evidence that:
         (a)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort or general welfare;
         (b)   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
         (c)   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in this district;
         (d)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and necessary
facilities have been or will be provided;
         (e)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
or egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
and
         (f)   The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the Village
Board may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special use as deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance
with the requirements specified in this chapter.
   (E)   Revocation. Where a special use permit has been issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the permit shall become null and void without
further action by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Village Board
unless work thereon commences within one year of the date of granting the
special use, special use permits shall be deemed to authorize only one
particular use and shall expire if that use shall cease for more than 12
consecutive months.
   (F)   Special uses allowed. The schedule of uses, as set forth in the
ordinance establishing this chapter, may be allowed as special uses in the
districts indicated and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and
are hereby adopted by reference as if set out in full herein.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-9) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.209 REAPPLICATIONS.
   At least six months shall elapse between the date of an adverse decision and
the reapplication or repetition for a variation, amendment or special use on
the same zoning lot by the same applicant for the same or similar zoning
classification.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-11) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.210 MINIMUM LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS; OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The table summary of minimum lot and yard requirements by district and the
depiction of the official zoning map for the village are located in Appendices
A and B to this chapter.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-13) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.211 FEES.
   A fee payable to the Village Treasurer by a certified check or cash shall
accompany an application for an appeal, variation, amendment, special use,
zoning certificate or occupancy permit as follows:
    ACTION                                            FEE
(A) Appeal                                            $25
(B) Variation                                         $25
(C) Amendment to District Map or chapter              $50
(D) Special use, nonplanned development               $25
(E) Special use, planned development
       For parcels with gross area of 5 acres or le$50
       Over 5 and through 15 acres                 $75
       Over 15 and through 40 acres                $100
       Over 40 and through 160 acres               $150
       Over 160 acres                              $200
 
(1983 Code, § 9-13-12) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.212 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Zoning Administrator, and anyone designated by him or her, is hereby
designated and authorized to enforce this chapter.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-17) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with,
or who resists enforcement of any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1983 Code, § 9-1-17) (Ord. 532, passed 5-14-1974; Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
APPENDIX A: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
   Editor's Note: The most current Official Zoning Map is available for
inspection at the City Clerk's Office.
(1983 Code, § 9-13-13) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
APPENDIX B: MINIMUM LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT
   Summary of Minimum Lot and Yard Requirements by District
District Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Min. Front Min. Side Min. Rear Max Floor
                       Width    Yard       Yard      Yard      Area Ratio
A        5 acres       300 ft.  40 ft.     100 ft.   100 ft.   Not Applicable
R-l      12,150 sq.ft. 90 ft.   30 ft.     10 ft.    40 ft.    Not Applicable
R-2      9,600 sq.ft.  80 ft.   25 ft.     8 ft.     35 ft.    Not Applicable
R-3      7,350 sq.ft.  70 ft.   20 ft.     6 ft.     30 ft.    Not Applicable
         (1) 7,350     70 ft.   20 ft.     6 ft.     30 ft.    Not Applicable
R-4      sq.ft.
         (2) 9,600     80 ft.   20 ft.     6 ft.     30 ft.    0.325
         sq.ft.
B-l      None          None     None       None      None      2.0
B-2      0.5 acre      90 ft.   50 ft.(3)  20 ft.    20 ft.    0.5
B-3      None          None     50 ft.(3)  None      None      0.5
M-l      10,000 sq.ft. 80 ft.   20 ft.     10 ft.    20 ft.    0.5
C        Not Applicable
FP       Not Applicable
Notes:
(1)   For single-family uses
(2)   For multi-family uses
(3)   Parking permitted within required yard
 
(1983 Code, § 9-13-13) (Ord. 09-07, passed 9-8-2009)
CHAPTER 155: DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITE OR CASH IN LIEU OF LAND
Section
   
155.01   Criteria for dedication of school sites or payment in lieu of fees in
lieu thereof
   
155.02   Criteria for requiring school site dedication
   
155.03   Criteria for requiring a contribution in lieu of school sites
   
155.04   Use of cash contribution in lieu of school site
   
155.05   Objections
   
155.06   General provisions
§ 155.01 CRITERIA FOR DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES OR PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU
THEREOF.
   As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, a planned unit
development or the issuance of a building permit, each subdivider shall be
required to dedicate land for school purposes, make a cash contribution in lieu
of a land dedication, or a combination of both. The village shall determine
whether a land donation, cash donation or combination of both is required with
the concurrence of the school district. The donation shall be made in
accordance with the following criteria.
(Ord. 15-07, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 155.02 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION.
   (A)   Requirement and population ratio. 
      (1)   The ultimate number of students to be generated by a subdivision or
planned unit development shall bear directly on the amount of land required to
be dedicated for school sites. The determination of the number of students to
be generated from a particular development or lot shall be based on data
published by the Illinois School Consulting Service, as set forth in the table
set forth in this section (hereinafter "Population Table").
      (2)   A BEDROOM, as used in this chapter, shall include any den, study,
or extra room located on any floor in a dwelling unit, which is not clearly
identified for some other specific purpose, other than a kitchen (one per
unit), dining room (one per unit), living room (one per unit), bathroom, and
family room (one per unit).
      (3)   In the event a subdivider files a written objection to the
Population Table, he shall submit his own demographic study showing the
estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned
unit development. The Population Table shall be used in calculating any cash in
lieu of land contribution herein, unless objected to as provided in this
chapter. Objections to the Population Table shall be made in accordance with
this chapter to the Village Board. Failure to object to the Population Table in
accordance with this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an
objection at a later time.
STIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
                                 Junior High  High School
Type of Pre- School Elementary   School       Grades      Adults per Total per
Unit    0 - 4 years K-5          Grades 6 - 8 9 - 12      unit       unit
                    5 - 10 years 11 - 13      14 - 17     18 - Up
                                 years        years
STIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
                       Elementary Junior High  High School
Type of    Pre- School K-5        School       Grades      Adults per Total per
Unit       0 - 4 years 5 - 10     Grades 6 - 8 9 - 12      unit       unit
                       years      11 - 13      14 - 17     18 - Up
                                  years        years
Detached Single-Family
2 bedroom  .102        .122       .041         .020        1.694      1.979
3 bedroom  .256        .358       .143         .146        1.962      2.865
4 bedroom  .413        .474       .303         .307        2.176      3.673
5 bedroom  .231        .317       .231         .212        2.606      3.597
Attached Single-Family (Townhouse, Rowhouses, Quadplexes, Duplexes)
1 bedroom  .000        .000       .000         .000        1.068      1.068
2 bedroom  .091        .094       .077         .037        1.775      2.074
3 bedroom  .229        .212       .063         .067        1.809      2.380
4 bedroom  .346        .321       .169         .183        2.317      3.336
Apartments
Efficiency .000        .000       .000         .000        1.360      1.360
1 bedroom  .000        .000       .000         .000        1.734      1.734
2 bedroom  .041        .080       .039         .038        1.554      1.752
3 bedroom  .063        .203       .117         .093        2.310      2.786
 
   (B)   School classification and size of school site. School classifications
and size of school sites within the village shall be determined in accordance
with the "Acreage Per Student Table" set forth in this section. These
requirements for acreage are based upon a review of available data studies and
literature on the subject, including, but not limited to, information provided
by the State Superintendent of Education and the unique characteristics of
DeKalb County, including its generally rural character and its open spaces and
the desire of its residents to maintain this character and open space in their
future school sites. These requirements for acreage shall be presumed as the
appropriate acreage requirements
and shall be used in calculating any contribution herein, unless timely
objected to as provided herein. Objections to these acreage requirements for
any particular development shall be made in accordance with this chapter to the
Village Board. Failure to timely object to these acreage requirements in
accordance with of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an
objection at a later time.
 
AVERAGE PER STUDENT
Grade Level Maximum # Students/School Minimum Acres/School Site Acre/Student
K - 5       600                       11                        .474
6 - 8       750                       28                        .303
High School 1,500                     45                        .777
 
   (C)   Land dedication requirement. The land dedication requirement shall be
determined by multiplying the estimated children to be served in each such
school classification calculated pursuant to the Population Table by the
appropriate number of acres per student contained in the Acreage Per Student
Table. The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have
sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increase in number of
children in each such school classification.
   (D)   Location. The comprehensive school plan and/or the standards adopted
by the affected school district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
(Ord. 15-07, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 155.03 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF SCHOOL SITES.
   (A)   Cash contribution. When the development is small and the resulting
site is too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate
for a school site, the village, with the concurrence of the affected school
district, shall require the subdivider to pay a cash contribution in lieu of
the land dedication.
   (B)   Fair market value. The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be
based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area that otherwise
would have been dedicated as a school site. The fair market value, on a per
acre basis, shall assume that the land is zoned residential, subdivided,
stubbed with village sewer and water, has all appropriate utilities available,
is improved and is otherwise property capable of being used for residential
development. Based upon a study of real estate transactions in DeKalb County
for the past three years, it has been determined that the present fair market
value of such improved land in and surrounding the village as of the effective
date of this chapter is $21,780 per acre. This figure shall be adjusted
annually by the Village Board based on real estate transactions and any other
indicators as to value. The fair market value, as defined above, shall be used
in calculating any cash in lieu of land contribution herein unless timely
objected to as provided in of this chapter. Objections to the fair market
value, as defined above, shall be made in accordance with this chapter to the
Village Board. Failure to make timely objection to the fair market value, as
defined above, in accordance with this chapter shall thereafter waive any right
to raise an objection at a later time.
   (C)   Refund of cash contributions. If any portion of a cash contribution in
lieu of school site dedication is not expended for the purposes set forth
herein 20 years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded to the
subdivider who made such contributions.
(Ord. 15-07, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 155.04 USE OF CASH CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF SCHOOL SITE.
   If the school district determines in its sole discretion that the
acquisition of land is not economically feasible or necessary given the current
and anticipated needs of the school district, then the cash contribution in
lieu of school site donation shall be used for the purpose of constructing
school buildings and facilities necessary to educate the students generated by
the development.
(Ord. 15-07, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 155.05 OBJECTIONS.
   All objections relating to acreage requirements, presumptions as to fair
market value, the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit set
forth in §
155.02, or any other application of this chapter to a particular lot,
subdivision or planned development, shall be referred to the Village Board for
hearing. An objection must be made, if at all, prior to the approval by the
village of the final plat of subdivision or planned unit development. Where a
plat of subdivision is not required, any objection must be made before the
issuance of any building permit. A failure to object by such time shall
constitute a waiver of the right to object to the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Form of objection. All objections shall be in writing and at a minimum
contain the following information:
      (1)   Specific identification of the exact data, calculation or other
determination to which an objection is being made;
      (2)   A detailed written basis for each and every objection made with
specific reference to all data, written documentation and/or testimony on which
each and every objection is based;
      (3)   A specific detailed statement setting forth the proper data,
calculation or determination which the objector believes should be made under
this chapter with specific and detailed reference to any data, documentary
information and oral testimony supporting said position or belief;
      (4)   Copies of all data, and/or any other documentary evidence upon
which the objector intends to rely;
      (5)   Where any data is submitted the objection shall make a specific
reference as to the source of such data;
      (6)   Where any studies performed by or on the behalf of the objector or
any other source are submitted, the objector shall further submit detailed
information concerning the methods and procedures used in the study to collect
and analyze data;
      (7)   Where any documentary or other evidence upon which the objector
relies refers to other sources of information and/or back-up materials from
which data or information was gathered, the objector shall provide copies of
such back-up data and/or information;
      (8)   (a)   A certification swearing that the objector has served full
and complete copies of its objection upon the superintendent of the school
district serving the village. If personal service is used the certification
shall state:
            1.   The date upon which such personal service was made;
            2.   The home and business addresses of the individual making
personal service; and
            3.   The identity and description of the individual to whom service
was actually made.
         (b)   Where service is by certified mail return receipt requested the
certification shall state the day and place on which such mailing was deposited
with the U.S. post office and the name of the individual depositing same with
the U.S. post office.
      (9)   The legal and common description of the properties affected by the
objection.
   (B)   Waiver of objections not made. All objections shall contain every and
any objection being made. Any objections which are not specifically set forth
shall forever be deemed waived.
   (C)   Variances in the form of the objection. Where any objector believes
the information required to be contained in the objection creates an undue
hardship, the objector shall include with its objection a sworn certification
stating specific and detailed reasons why all the information required cannot
be supplied and all reasons why the objector believes that requiring this
information is an undue hardship.
   (D)   Procedure for making an objection. Ten copies of every objection shall
be served upon the Village Clerk. If the objection is served on the Village
Clerk ten or more business days before the next regularly scheduled Board
meeting, the objection shall be formerly presented to the Village Board at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. If the objection is served upon the Village
Clerk less than ten business days before the Board's next regularly scheduled
meeting, the objection shall be formerly presented to the Village Board at the
first regularly scheduled Village Board meeting which is ten or more days after
the date the objection is received by the Village Clerk. When the Village Clerk
receives an objection he or she shall notify the objector and the
superintendent of the school district of the date at which the objection shall
be formerly presented to the Village Board. The objector and/or the objector's
representative shall appear at the date scheduled for the presentment of the
objection to the Village Board. If service of the objection on the
superintendent of the district was made by certified mail, the objector shall
appear on said date and submit to the Board proof that the objection was in
fact received by the superintendent of the school district. The school
district, through its representative, shall also have the right to appear and
address the Village Board on the date the objection is formerly presented to
the Village Board. On the date the objection is formerly presented the Village
Board, the objector and any representatives from the school district shall set
a date for a hearing on the objection. If requested, the school district shall
be given at least 30 calendar days to review and develop information to be
presented at the hearing on the objection. If the school district believes
additional time is necessary, the school district shall request same at the
time the objection is formally presented to the Board. The Village Board shall
give the school district more than 30 days to develop information in
preparation for the hearing if the school district can show good cause for such
additional time. The factors to be considered in determining whether any school
district has shown good cause include but are not limited to:
      (1)   The length of the objection and the amount of supporting data
contained in it;
      (2)   Whether all back-up data studies and reports have been submitted
with the objection;
      (3)   The school district's need to undertake additional study or gather
additional information to present to the board at the hearing; and
      (4)   The complexity of the issues involved.
   (E)   Hearing. The hearing shall take place at a regularly scheduled Village
Board meeting or other special meeting duly noticed and called for said
purpose. The hearing shall take place on the date and time set by the Board.
The Village President shall preside over the hearing and render decisions on
any testimonial and/or evidentiary questions that arise with the advice of the
Village Attorney. The objector and the school district shall have the right to
be represented by counsel and the right to present oral and documentary
evidence to the Board. The objector and the school district shall have the
opportunity to cross-examine each other's witnesses. Any member of the Village
Board shall have the right to ask questions of any witness at any time. The
objector and the school district shall be provided the opportunity to present
rebuttal testimony and/or documentation. After the objector and the school
district have submitted their testimony and documentation, the Board shall give
interested members of the public the right to be heard. The Board shall have
the right to continue the hearing from time-to-time on its own motion or on the
request of the objector and/or the school district. The Board shall deliberate
in public and shall issue its written decision on each objection within 30 days
of the conclusion of the hearing. The Board may accept or reject the objector's
position in whole or in part. All costs of the hearing, including the Village
Attorney fees, court reporter fees, publication costs and the like shall be
paid by the objector. The village may require the objector to make an advanced
deposit to cover such fees and costs.
   (F)   Notice of hearing. At least once, not more than 20 nor less than 15
calendar days before the hearing shall the objector publish in one or more
newspapers published in the village, a notice setting forth the date, time and
place for the scheduled hearing on the objection. The notice shall identify the
nature of the objector's objection, the relief requested, identify the property
or properties involved by both legal and common descriptions and invite any
interested members of the public to attend. At the opening of the scheduled
hearing the objector shall initially furnish to the Village Board proof that it
has complied with the requirements of this division (F).
   (G)   Appeals. The decision of the Village Board shall be final. All appeals
of such decisions shall be on the record of the hearing before the Village
Board and in accordance with the Illinois Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS
5/3-101 et. seq. Appeals shall be filed within 35 days of the written decision
of the Village Board.
(Ord. 15-07, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 155.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Annexation. The dedication of land, cash contribution in lieu thereof
and donation of capital costs required by this chapter of a platted subdivision
shall also be required as a condition of the annexation of any land to the
village, and shall be incorporated in any annexation agreement governing such
land. However, the village reserves the right to negotiate dedications of land
or cash in lieu of land and other donations for other purposes which are
greater than those set forth herein.
   (B)   Indemnification. As a precondition to the school district's collection
of school site dedications, and cash in lieu of land donations and the school
district shall execute an agreement indemnifying the village and its elected
and appointed officials and holding each of them harmless from any damages and
costs which arise out of any challenge to the validity of this chapter.
   (C)   Schedule of donations.
      (1)   The cash in lieu of land contribution and capital cost donation
imposed by this chapter shall be made by a certified or cashier's check payable
directly to the applicable school district and held by the school district for
use as provided in this chapter.
      (2)   Fifty percent of any projected cash in lieu of land donation
imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable for each unit to be built
prior to final plat approval of the subdivision or final approval of a planned
unit development. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for each unit to
be built, the balance of all cash in lieu of land donations relating to that
unit shall be due and payable.
      (3)   In calculating the total amount of any cash in lieu of land
contribution imposed by this chapter, the village shall use the fair market
value of property in effect at the time of building permit issuance.
      (4)   (a)   For cash in lieu of land donations due and payable prior to
final plat approval of a subdivision or final approval of a planned unit
development, the school district shall issue a receipt showing:
            1.   Total projected cash in lieu of land donation;
            2.   The total projected capital cost donation; and
            3.   The amount of the projected cash in lieu of land donation
actually paid.
         (b)   For cash in lieu of land donations payable prior to the issuance
of any building permit, the school district shall issue a receipt for each lot
or unit, which shows that payment of the full cash in lieu of land donation has
been received. Each such receipt issued for donations received prior to the
issuance of building permits shall identify the name of the builder/developer
requesting the permit and specifically designate the subdivision and lot or
unit to which the donation is referred.
      (5)   At the time the first donation is made, the subdivider shall
provide to the school district a copy of the approved plat of subdivision or
other document showing all lots that are proposed to be developed. In the event
any amendments or changes are made to the approved plat of subdivision, the
subdivider shall submit a revised plat of subdivision identifying all lots and
showing all changes or revisions which have been made. The school district
shall use the plats of subdivision provided to mark off those lots for which
the full cash donation has been paid.
   (D)   Severability. If any provision of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances is declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such partial invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or applications of this chapter, the invalid provision shall be
deemed stricken from this chapter as if it were not a part hereof, ab initio,
and the remainder of this chapter shall continue in full force and effect.
   (E)   Reservation of additional land. Where the Comprehensive Plan or
standards of the village call for a larger amount of land for a school site in
a particular subdivision or development than the subdivider is required by this
chapter to dedicate, the land needed in excess of the required dedication shall
be reserved by the subdivider for subsequent acquisition by the village or
other public body designated by the village, provided that such acquisition is
started within one year from the date of approval of the final plat.
   (F)   Combining with adjoining developments. School site dedications may be
combined with dedications from adjoining subdivisions and developments in order
to produce usable school sites without hardship on a particular subdivider.
   (G)   Improved sites. All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for
full service of electrical, water, sewer, and streets (including enclosed
drainage and curb and gutter), as applicable to the location of the site, and
shall otherwise comply with the requirements of the village's subdivision
regulations. At the discretion of the Village Board, the landscaping normally
included within the definition of "improved" sites under the village's
subdivision regulations may be omitted due to the delay time between dedication
of any such school site and the construction of school facilities thereon.
   (H)   Dedication at time of approval official plat. Approval of any final
plat of subdivision or any final planned unit development plat shall be
conditioned upon the dedication of land or cash donations in lieu thereof as
required by this chapter. Dedications of such land or cash in lieu thereof may
be made at such other time as is specifically approved by the Village Board.
   (I)   On-site storage. No storage of any equipment and/or material,
including spoil materials or topsoil, shall be permitted on any land designated
for park and recreational use or for school sites.
   (J)   Topography and grading. The slope, topography and geology of any
dedicated site, as well as its surroundings must be suitable for the building
of school facilities. Wetlands, floodplains, floodways and land that serves as
a component of any storm water control or retention system shall not be
acceptable land donations. Land burdened by highway or any other type of
easements or encroachment also shall not be an acceptable land donation.
(Ord. 15-07, passed 10-5-2015)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.   AGREEMENTS, FRANCHISES AND CONTRACTS
         
II.   ANNEXATIONS
         
III.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS, FRANCHISES AND CONTRACTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.     Date Passed Description
                         Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with DeKalb
02-11        3-5-2002    County for the creation of a Regional Planning
                         Commission
                         Approving and authorizing a tax increment financing
03-01        2-3-2003    (TIF) redevelopment agreement with Blake Leasing
                         Company, LLC
                         Approving membership in and intergovernmental
04-05        3-15-2004   cooperation contract with the Illinois Municipal
                         League Risk Management Association
14-01        1-13-2014   Approving an amendment to an agreement for waste
                         collection with Waste Management of Illinois, Inc.
14-11        5-5-2014    Granting authority to execute a contract for
                         aggregation of the village electrical load
                         Approving loan agreement with Alpine Bank to pay the
16-01        1-19-2016   costs of purchasing real property and providing for
                         the security for and payment of said loan agreement
17-01        5-1-2017    Authorizing aggregation of electrical load
2017-08      7-10-2017   Addressing the payment of cable television franchise
                         fees in the village
2017-09      8-1-2017    Adopting an intergovernmental agreement between the
                         village and the City of Genoa
                         Authorizing Northern Illinois Gas Company (d/b/a Nicor
2018-02      3-5-2018    Gas Company) to construct, operate, and maintain a gas
                         distributing system in and through the village
18-05        6-4-2018    Authorizing aggregation of electrical load
2019-04      3-4-2019    Water pollution control loan program ordinance
                         authorizing loan agreement non-home rule entity
                         Approving reciprocal agreement on exchange of
Res. 2019-02 4-29-2019   information between the village and the Illinois
                         Department of Revenue
                         Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement
2020-06      10-19-2020  between the Village of Kirkland and the owners of the
                         Dibble/Fruit property commonly known as 5757 State
                         Route 72
                        
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Annexing 114.27 acres, more or less, immediately north of
                     Illinois Route 72 and west of the village in
                     unincorporated Franklin Township, for Rood Development and
                     the National Bank and Trust Company of Sycamore, IL, being
                     part of the SW 1/4 of Section 22 and part of the north 1/
03-07    6-2-2003    2 of Section 27, in TWP 42 N, R3, east of the Third
                     Principal Meridian; beginning at a point on the west line
                     of the NE 1/4 of Section 27, being 15,118 feet north of
                     the SW corner of the NE 1/4 thereof; and also the right-
                     of-way of Illinois State Route 72 where adjacent; as
                     amended by Ord. 05-07
                     Annexing two properties: Parcels 01-25-200-005, 01-25-200-
                     006 and part of Parcel 02-30-100-002; being part of
03-10    7-10-2003   Section 25, TWP 42 N, R3E of the Third Principal Meridian,
                     beginning at the NE corner of the west 1/2 of the NE 1/
                     4 of Section 25; and
                   the east 1/2 of the NE 1/4 of Section 25, TWP 43N, R3E,
                     excepting the tract described herein
05-07    5-2-2005    Approving addendum to annexation agreement with Rood
                     Development to correct a scrivener’s error
10-04    10-4-2010   Annexation agreement relative to the property located at
                     3835 Illinois Route 72 (Euclid Chemical Company)
10-05    10-4-2010   Annexing 3835 Illinois Route 72 - Euclid Chemical
10-07    10-4-2010   Annexation agreement relative to the property located at
                     3891 Illinois Route 72 (Kirkland Fire Protection District)
10-08    10-4-2010   Annexing 3891 Illinois Route 72 - Kirkland Fire Protection
                     District
2020-08  10-19-2020  Annexing the Dibble/Fruit property commonly known as 5757
                     State Route 72
2024-03  9-9-2024    Annexing the Cooley Properties, Inc. property commonly
                     known as 5607 State Route 72
                    
 
TABLE III: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Rezoning property owned by Kennedy Homes, beginning at the
02-12    4-1-2002    SE corner of the SE 1/4 of Section 26, TWP 42N, R3E, from
                     R-1, Residential Single-Family, Low Density to R-2,
                     Residential Single-Family, Medium Density
03-08    6-2-2003    Zoning property owned by Rood Development, as R-1,
                     Residential Single-Family, Low Density
                     Rezoning property owned by Hiawatha Development Corp,
03-11    7-10-2003   approximately 20 acres as described in the exhibits, to B-
                     2 Highway Commercial
10-06    10-4-2010   Zoning property commonly known as 3835 Illinois Route 72
                     as M-1, General Manufacturing
10-09    10-4-2010   Zoning property commonly known as 3891 Illinois Route 72
                     as B-1, General Business
15-03    5-4-2015    Rezoning lots 6 and 7 (Plat No. 2) in the Bull Run
                     Business Park from M-1 to B-1, General Commercial
                     Issuing a special use permit to allow a solar farm on
2019-02  2-4-2019    property located north of State Route 72 and east of
                     Hortense Drive
                     Zoning the Dibble/Fruit property commonly known as 5757
2020-09  10-19-2020  State Route 72 as M-1, General Manufacturing District and
                     A, Agricultural
                     Rezoning the property located at 31535 Ault Road from B-2,
2021-07  7-19-2021   Highway Commercial to A, Agricultural District and
                     subdividing the property
                     Zoning the Cooley Properties, Inc. property commonly known
2024-04  9-9-2024    as 5607 State Route 72 as M-1, General Manufacturing
                     District
2025-04  7-21-2025   Re-zoning 401 W. Main Street from B-1 to B-2
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 1983 Code
References to Ordinances
References to Resolutions
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
 
ILCS Cite Code Section
ILCS Cite                   Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.02              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.03              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.04              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.05              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.07              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.08              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.09              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.10              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.11              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.12              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.15              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.16              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.17              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.20              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.24              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.28              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.29              10.02
5 ILCS 70/2                 10.04
5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.        30.33
5 ILCS 315/3                34.15
5 ILCS 430                  31.72
5 ILCS 430/5-65             34.51
5 ILCS 430/10-10 et seq.    31.72
5 ILCS 430/15-10            34.51
5 ILCS 430/25-5             31.72
10 ILCS 5/1-3               34.15
10 ILCS 5/9-1.4             34.15
10 ILCS 5/9-3               34.15
20 ILCS 3420                154.051
25 ILCS 325/1-49            151.005
30 ILCS 235/1 et seq.       34.01
35 ILCS 105                 33.17
35 ILCS 115/2(c)            33.16
35 ILCS 115/9               33.16
35 ILCS 120                 33.15
35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.       33.15
35 ILCS 120/2-5             33.15
35 ILCS 636                 33.01
50 ILCS 345/20(a)           33.31
65 ILCS 5                   10.02;
                            31.58
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2             10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1             10.99
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1           10.99
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30         30.15
                            33.02;
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1            33.03;
                            33.15
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2(d)         33.03
65 ILCS 5/8-11-5            33.16
65 ILCS 5/8-11-6            33.17
65 ILCS 5/8-11-22           33.18
65 ILCS 5/8-11-24           33.19
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.  32.50
65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq.   32.16
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7           91.10;
                            91.47
65 ILCS 5/11-20-8           91.10
65 ILCS 5/11-20-12          91.10;
                            91.48
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13          91.10
65 ILCS 5/11-20-15          91.10
65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1        91.10
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01        91.10
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et seq. 34.30
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2       34.30
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(a)      34.39
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(c)      34.39
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9)   34.39
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-6(c)      34.39
65 ILCS 5/11-139-1          51.06
70 ILCS 605/1-1 et seq.     151.001
105 ILCS 15                 113.01
210 ILCS 115/2.1            51.01
210 ILCS 115/2.5            51.01
210 ILCS 115/3              52.16
220 ILCS 5/3-105            33.02
220 ILCS 5/16-102           33.02
220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)        54.02
220 ILCS 5/21-401           54.02
220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.       54.16
220 ILCS 65/4               54.05
225 ILCS 225                53.03
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.       112.12;
                            114.01
235 ILCS 5/3-12             112.18
235 ILCS 5/6-27             112.18
250 ILCS 15                 111.50
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.      131.11–
                            131.14
415 ILCS 5                  152.05
415 ILCS 5/13               53.05
415 ILCS 5/1—51           51.01;
                            53.01
605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.    54.02
                            70.01;
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.    70.99;
                            76.05;
                            Ch. 74 Sch. IV
625 ILCS 5/1-123.9          77.02
625 ILCS 5/1-188            10.02
625 ILCS 5/4-201—4-214    75.03
625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.    76.05
625 ILCS 5/11               10.98
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3         96.03;
                            96.06
625 ILCS 5/11-208.7(b)      76.02
625 ILCS 5/11-1306          96.06
625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1        77.02
625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1(b-5)   77.02
625 ILCS 5/12-201           77.02
625 ILCS 5/12-709           77.02
625 ILCS 5/20-204           70.01
720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.      96.15;
                            133.01
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.      131.10;
                            131.12
720 ILCS 550/3              131.01
720 ILCS 570/102            131.01
720 ILCS 635                131.02;
                            131.03
720 ILCS 675/1 et seq       130.16
725 ILCS 150/1 et seq       76.06
730 ILCS 150/1 et seq.      130.37
730 ILCS 154/1 et seq.      130.37
735 ILCS 5/3-101            76.07
                            76.07;
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.    96.08;
                            155.05
740 ILCS 174/15(a)          34.51
740 ILCS 174/15(b)          34.51
765 ILCS 205/2              152.07;
                            152.08
775 ILCS 5/6-101            34.51
820 ILCS 130/0.01 - 12      31.70
820 ILCS 192/1 et seq.      31.73
                            
 
REFERENCES TO 1983 CODE
1983 Code 2009 Code
1983 Code  2009 Code
1-1-3      10.18
1-1-4      10.19
1-3-2      10.02
1-5-1      30.15
1-5-2      30.16
1-5-3      30.30
1-5-4      30.31
1-5-5      30.32
1-5-6      30.33
1-5-7      30.01
1-6-1      31.01
1-6-2      31.02
1-6-3      31.03
1-6-4      31.04
1-6-5      31.05
1-7-1      31.15
1-7-2      31.16
1-7-3      31.17
1-7-4      31.18
1-8-1      31.30
1-8-2      31.31
1-8-3      31.32
1-8-4      31.33
1-9-1      31.45
1-9-2      31.46
1-10-1     31.70
1-11A-1    32.45
1-11A-2    32.46
1-11A-3    32.47
1-11A-4    32.48
1-11A-5    32.49
1-12-1     31.71
1-12-2     31.72
1-13-1     94.01
1-13-2     94.02
1-13-3     94.03
1-13-4     94.99
1-14-1     34.30
1-14-2     34.31
1-14-3     34.32
1-14-4     34.33
1-14-5     34.34
1-14-6     34.35
1-14-7     34.36
1-14-8     34.37
1-14-9     34.38
1-14-10    34.39
1-14-11    34.40
1-14-12    34.41
3-1-1      33.15
3-1-2      33.16
3-1-3      33.17
3-2A-1     112.01
3-2A-2     112.02
3-2A-3     112.03
3-2A-4     112.04
3-2A-5     112.05
3-2A-5.5   112.06;
           112.99
3-2A-6     112.07
3-2A-7     112.08
3-2A-8     112.09
3-2A-9     112.10
3-2A-10    112.11;
           112.99
3-2A-11    112.12
3-2A-12    112.13
3-2A-13    112.14
3-2A-14    112.15;
           112.99
3-2B-1     112.30
3-2B-2     112.31
3-2B-3     112.32
3-2B-4     112.33
3-2B-5     112.34
3-2B-6     112.35
3-3-1      111.01
3-3-2      111.02
3-3-3      111.03
3-3-4      111.04
3-3A-1     111.15
3-3A-2     111.16
3-3A-3     111.17
3-3A-4     111.18
3-3A-5     111.19
3-3A-6     111.20;
           111.99
3-3A-7     111.21
3-3B-1     111.30
3-3B-2     111.31
3-3B-3     111.32
3-3B-4     111.33
3-3B-6     111.34
3-3B-7     111.35
3-3B-8     111.36
3-3B-9     111.99
3-3C-1     111.50
3-3C-2     111.51
3-3C-3     111.52
3-3C-4     111.53
3-3C-5     111.54
3-3C-6     111.55
3-3C-7     111.56
3-3C-8     111.57
3-5-1      110.25
3-5-2      110.26
3-5-3      110.27
3-5-4      110.28
3-5-5      110.29
3-5-6      110.30
3-5-7      110.31
3-5-8      110.32
3-5-9      110.99
3-6-1      110.45
3-6-2      110.46
3-6-3      110.47
3-6-4      110.99
3-7-1      113.01
3-7-2      113.02
3-7-3      113.03
3-7-4      113.04
3-7-5      113.05
3-7-6      113.06
3-7-7      113.07
3-7-8      113.08
3-7-9      113.09
3-7-10     113.99
4-1-1      91.01
4-1-2      91.02;
           91.99
4-1-3      91.15
4-1-4      91.16
4-1-5      91.05
4-1-6      75.05
4-1-7      91.99
4-2-1      50.01;
           50.99
4-2-2      50.02;
           50.99
4-2-3      50.03;
           50.99
4-2-4      50.04;
           50.99
4-2-5      50.15
4-2-7      50.30;
           50.99
5-1-2      90.16;
           90.99
5-2-1      90.01
5-2-2      90.02
5-2-3      90.03
5-2-4      90.04
5-2-5      90.05
5-2-6      90.06
5-2-7      90.07
5-2-8      90.99
5-3-1      130.01
5-3-2      130.45
5-3-3      130.15
5-3-4      130.46
5-3-6      130.60
5-3-7      130.35
5-3-8      130.36
5-3-10     130.47
5-3-13     91.03
5-3-14     130.16
5-3-15     91.30
5-3-16     130.70
5-3-17     91.31
5-3-18     130.02
5-3-19     130.03
5-3-20     130.04
5-3-21     130.19
5-3-22     130.20
5-3-24     130.17
5-3-26     130.61,
           130.99
5-3-27     91.99;
           130.99
5-3-28     130.18;
           130.99
6-2-1      70.02
6-2-6      71.02
6-2-7      Ch. 73, Sch. V
6-2-9      71.15
6-2-11     70.15
           72.01;
6-2-14     Ch. 74, Sch. II &
           III
6-2-15     72.02
6-2-16     Ch. 74, Sch. IV
6-2-17     71.01
6-2-18     70.30
6-2-19     Ch. 74, Sch. III
6-2-20     Ch. 74, Sch. IV
6-2-21     70.99
           71.30,
6-3-1      71.99;
           Ch. 73, Sch. I
6-3-2      Ch. 73, Sch. II
6-3-3A.–DCh. 73, Sch. III
6-3-4      Ch. 73, Sch. IV
6-3-5      Ch. 74, Sch. I
6-3-6      70.99
6-4-1      75.01
6-4-2      75.02
6-4-3      75.03
6-4-4      75.99
7-1-1      52.01
7-1-2      52.15
7-1-3      52.30
7-1-4      52.31
7-1-5      52.32
7-1-6      52.33
7-1-7      52.34
7-1-8      52.50
7-1-9      52.51
7-1-10     52.03
7-1-11     52.35
7-1-12     52.16
7-1-13     52.65
7-1-14     52.66
7-1-15     52.52
7-1-16     52.04
7-1-17     52.36
7-1-18     52.02;
           52.99
7-1-20     52.67;
           52.99
7-2-1      53.01
7-2-2      53.02
7-2-3      53.03
7-2-4      53.04
7-2-5      53.05
7-2-6      53.06
7-2-7      53.07;
           53.99
7-2-8      53.08
7-2-9      53.99
7-3-1      51.01
7-3-2      51.02
7-3-3      51.03
7-3-4      51.04
7-3-5      51.05
7-3-6      51.06
7-3-7      51.07
7-3-8      51.08
7-3-9      51.09
7-3-10     51.99
7-4-1      92.01
7-4-2      92.02
7-4-3      92.03
7-4-4      92.04
7-4-5      92.05
7-4-6      92.06
7-4-7      92.07
7-4-8      92.08
7-4-9      92.09 
7-4-10     92.10
7-5-1      93.01
7-5-2      93.02
7-5-3      93.03
7-5-4      93.99
8-1-1      150.01
8-1-3      150.35
8-1-5      150.02 
8-1-6      150.03
8-1-7      150.04
8-1-8      150.05
8-1-9      Ch. 150, App. A
8-1-10     150.99
8-2-1      152.25
8-3-1      150.36
8-3-2      150.36
9-1-1      154.001
9-1-2      154.002
9-1-3      154.003;
           154.006
9-1-4      154.004
9-1-5      154.005
9-1-6      154.015
9-1-7      154.016
9-1-8      154.017
9-1-9      154.018
9-1-10     154.019
9-1-11     154.020
9-1-12     154.021
9-1-13     154.022
9-1-14     154.023
9-1-15     154.024
9-1-16     154.025
9-1-17     154.212;
           154.999
9-2-1      154.035
9-2-2      154.036
9-2-3      154.037
9-2-4      154.038
9-2-5      154.039
9-3-1      154.050
9-3-2      154.051
9-4-1      154.060
9-4-2      154.061
9-4-3      154.062
9-4-4      154.063
9-4-5      154.064
9-5-1      154.075
9-5-2      154.076
9-5-3      154.077
9-5-4      154.078
9-6-1      154.090
9-6-2      154.091
9-8-1      154.100
9-8-2      154.101
9-9-1      154.110
9-9-2      154.111
9-9-3      154.112
9-9-4      154.113
9-9-5      154.114
9-9-6      154.115
9-9-7      154.116
9-10-1     154.125
9-10-2     154.126
9-10-3     154.127
9-10-4     154.128
9-10-5     154.129
9-10-6     154.130
9-10-7     154.131
9-10-8     154.132
9-11-1     154.145
9-11-2     154.146
9-11-3     154.147
9-11-4     154.148
9-11-5     154.149
9-11-6     154.150
9-12-1     154.180
9-12-2     154.181
9-12-3     154.182
9-12-4     154.183
9-12-5     154.184
9-12-6     154.185
9-12-7     154.186
9-12-8     154.187
9-13-1     154.200
9-13-2     154.201
9-13-3     154.202
9-13-4     154.203
9-13-5     154.204
9-13-6     154.205
9-13-7     154.206
9-13-8     154.207
9-13-9     154.208
9-13-10-1  154.160
9-13-10-2  154.161
9-13-10-3  154.162
9-13-10-4  154.163
9-13-10-5  154.164
9-13-10-6  154.165
9-13-10-7  154.166
9-13-11    154.209
9-13-12    154.211
           154.210;
9-13-13    Ch. 154, App. A &
           B
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
–      - -         Ch. 74, Sch. III
86-1     - -         112.12
86-3     - -         150.36
86-6     - -         112.08;
                     112.34
87-3     - -         52.15;
                     52.52
87-4     - -         90.99
87-5     - -         31.33
                     75.05;
88-2     - -         91.02;
                     91.05;
                     91.99
88-4     - -         Ch. 73, Sch. III
88-6     - -         112.06;
                     112.99
91-2     - -         50.04;
                     50.99
91-4     - -         112.15;
                     112.99
91-14    - -         154.063
92-3     - -         Ch. 73, Sch. III
92-4     - -         Ch. 74, Sch. II
92-7     - -         52.36
92-8     - -         53.04
92-13    - -         51.05
93-3     - -         154.064
93-10    - -         51.03
94-1     - -         52.32
94-2     - -         53.04
94-3     - -         112.12
94-6     - -         51.05
94-7     - -         70.99
95-1     - -         51.02
95-5     - -         50.15
95-9     - -         51.02
95-12    - -         52.02;
                     52.99
95-17    - -         51.02
97-04    - -         51.03
97-5     - -         51.02
97-07    - -         51.03
97-8     - -         52.32
97-9     - -         53.04
–      5-5-1952    50.03;
                     50.99
–      7-1-1957    113.07;
                     113.99
–      3-23-1958   113.07
                     111.33;
504      2-6-1967    111.36;
                     111.99
508      10-2-1967   Ch. 73, Sch. III &
                     IV
509      3-3-1968    111.21
510      11-2-1968   50.02;
                     50.99
511      9-8-1969    33.16
512      9-8-1969    33.15
514      11-3-1969   75.03;
                     75.99
517      4-5-1971    110.32;
                     110.99
521      7-10-1972   Ch. 73, Sch. III
531      2-4-1974    Ch. 73, Sch. I
                     154.035;
                     154.039;
                     154.051;
                     154.064;
                     154.078;
                     154.091;
532      5-14-1974   154.101;
                     154.116 
                     154.132;
                     154.150;
                     154.187;
                     154.212;
                     154.999;
                     Ch. 154, App. B
534      5-15-1974   150.99
538      11-4-1974   33.17
539      12-2-1974   152.25
540      12-2-1974   152.25
541      3-3-1975    31.02
–      5-19-1980   53.07;
                     53.99
566B     12-22-1980  33.15;
                     33.16
568      1-5-1981    112.14
569      1-5-1981    112.35
570      1-5-1981    111.57
571      7-6-1981    72.02
580      - -1982     53.06;
                     53.99
                     51.01;
581      - -1982     51.03;
                     51.99;
                     52.16
                     51.01;
–      - -1983     51.03;
                     52.16
96-1     5-6-1996    Ch. 73, Sch. V
97-1     1-6-1997    Ch. 73, Sch. III
97-2     1-6-1997    Ch. 73, Sch. II
97-10    8-4-1997    50.30;
                     50.99
97-12    9-2-1997    130.61;
                     130.99
98-4     6-1-1998    30.16
98-5     6-1-1998    70.99;
                     Ch. 74, Sch. IV
99-3     3-1-1999    112.08
99-7     5-3-1999    50.15
99-8     5-3-1999    112.01
99-9     5-3-1999    112.11
99-11    7-6-1999    31.72
99-13    8-2-1999    71.01
99-14    8-2-1999    72.02
99-15    9-7-1999    154.017
99-17    10-4-1999   112.01
99-18    10-4-1999   112.09
99-21    11-1-1999   112.11
00-1     2-7-2000    70.99;
                     Ch. 74, Sch. I
00-02    3-6-2000    92.01 -
                     92.10
00-7     6-5-2000    51.02
00-08    6-5-2000    34.30–
                     34.41
                     93.01–
00-09    8-7-2000    93.03;
                     93.99
00-10    8-7-2000    130.18;
                     130.99
00-12    9-5-2000    75.01
                     94.01–
00-13    9-5-2000    94.03;
                     94.99
00-14    9-5-2000    152.01–
                     152.10
01-03    11-5-2001   130.05;
                     130.99
02-11    3-5-2002    TSO I
02-12    4-1-2002    TSO III
02-13    6-3-2002    52.15
02-15    8-20-2002   Ch. 150, App. B
02-19    10-7-2002   33.02;
                     33.99
02-20    10-7-2002   33.03;
                     33.99
02-21    10-7-2002   Ch. 74, Sch. II &
                     III
03-01    2-3-2003    TSO I
03-03    2-3-2003    30.32
03-06    4-21-2003   112.09
03-07    6-2-2003    TSO II
03-08    6-2-2003    TSO III
03-09    7-7-2003    154.207
03-10    7-10-2003   TSO II
03-11    7-10-2003   TSO III
03-12    9-2-2003    Ch. 73, Sch. III
03-14    10-6-2003   50.15
03-15    10-6-2003   51.03
03-16    12-15-2003  51.03
04-01    1-5-2004    51.02
04-3     1-5-2004    112.12
04-04    3-1-2004    33.01
04-05    3-15-2004   TSO I
                     72.01;
04-06    4-5-2004    Ch. 74, Sch. II &
                     III
                     34.15–
04-08    4-19-2008   34.17;
                     34.99
                     72.01;
                     72.02;
04-10    5-3-2004    72.99;
                     Ch. 74, Sch. II–
                     IV
04-12    7-6-2004    70.01;
                     70.99
                     131.01–
04-13    7-6-2004    131.03;
                     131.99
04-14    7-6-2004    95.01;
                     95.02
04-15    7-6-2004    31.71
04-20    10-4-2004   31.05
04-18    11-1-2004   10.98;
                     Ch. 10, App. A
04-21    12-6-2004   91.04;
                     91.99
05-02    3-7-2005    34.01
                     112.01;
05-04    4-4-2005    112.05;
                     112.33
05-07    5-2-2005    TSO II
06-05    5-15-2005   112.06
05-05    6- -2005    75.04
05-06    6-6-2005    34.50
05-10    11-7-2005   Ch. 73, Sch. III
                     71.30;
06-03    2-21-2006   71.99;
                     Ch. 73, Sch. I
06-04    3-6-2006    90.17;
                     90.99
06-11    11-27-2006  31.55–
                     31.59
07-01    1-2-2007    Ch. 74, Sch. IV
                     151.001–
                     151.005;
                     151.015;
                     151.030–
                     151.035;
07-02    4-16-2007   151.045–
                     151.059;
                     151.070–
                     151.072;
                     151.085–
                     151.088;
                     151.999
07-03    5-7-2007    30.33
07-04    5-7-2007    72.01;
                     Ch. 74, Sch. II
07-05    6-4-2007    31.04
07-06    6-4-2007    31.70
07-07    7-2-2007    52.52
                     132.01–
07-08    7-2-2007    132.04;
                     132.99
07-10    8-6-2007    150.06;
                     Ch. 150, App. A
07-11    8-6-2007    31.01
07-13    9-4-2007    150.15–
                     150.24
07-14    12-3-2007   Ch. 150, App. A
08-01    1-7-2008    31.18
                     33.30–
08-03    2-4-2008    33.34;
                     33.36
08-04    4-7-2008    112.03
08-05    4-7-2008    75.02
08-09    5-5-2008    154.076
08-10    6-2-2008    33.45–
                     33.55
08-15    7-7-2008    31.04;
                     31.05
08-17    11-3-2008   91.45–
                     91.49
08-18    9-15-2008   93.01–
                     93.03
                     110.01–
08-20    10-20-2008  110.13;
                     110.99
08-21    1-3-2008    Ch. 74, Sch. IV
                     152.01–
08-22    11-17-2008  152.12;
                     152.99
08-24    12-14-2008  51.02
08-25    12-15-2008  51.03
09-01    5-18-2009   71.16
09-02    4-6-2009    50.15
09-04    6-15-2009   31.70
09-05    6-15-2009   32.50
                     32.15;
                     32.16;
                     154.001–
                     154.006;
                     154.015–
                     154.025;
                     154.035–
                     154.039;
                     154.050;
                     154.051;
                     154.060–
                     154.064;
                     154.075–
                     154.078;
                     154.090;
                     154.091;
09-07    9-8-2009    154.100;
                     154.101;
                     154.110–
                     154.116;
                     154.125–
                     154.132;
                     154.145–
                     154.150;
                     154.160–
                     154.166;
                     154.180–
                     154.187;
                     154.200–
                     154.212;
                     154.999,
                     Ch. 154, App. A &
                     B
09-09    8-17-2009   52.37
09-10    8-17-2009   71.01
09-11    9-8-2009    50.05;
                     50.06
                     112.05;
09-12    10-5-2009   112.16;
                     112.17
09-15    11-16-2009  Ch. 73, Sch. II &
                     III
09-16    12-21-2009  30.02
10-02    6-21-2010   31.70
10-04    10-4-2010   TSO II
10-05    10-4-2010   TSO II
10-06    10-4-2010   TSO III
10-07    10-4-2010   TSO II
10-08    10-4-2010   TSO II
10-09    10-4-2010   TSO III
10-10    11-1-2010   33.02,
                     33.03
11-01    4-4-2011    91.10
11-02    4-4-2011    31.02,
                     51.05
11-04    5-2-2011    91.01,
                     91.02
11-07    5-16-2011   32.51
11-08    6-6-2011    31.70
11-09    7-5-2011    32.51
11-10    11-21-2011  96.01–
                     96.24
12-02    1-2-2012    30.03
                     Ch. 10, App. A;
                     50.99;
                     51.99;
                     52.99;
                     53.99;
                     71.99;
                     72.99;
                     75.99;
12-03    3-5-2012    90.99;
                     91.99;
                     93.99;
                     110.99;
                     111.99;
                     112.99;
                     113.99;
                     130.99;
                     132.99;
                     150.99
12-06    6-4-2012    130.21;
                     130.99
12-07    7-2-2012    91.47
12-08    7-2-2012    31.70
12-09    7-2-2012    30.33
12-10    7-16-2012   90.15;
                     90.99
12-11    7-16-2012   130.22
12-12    7-16-2012   130.23;
                     130.99
12-14    7-16-2012   133.01
12-13    8-6-2012    96.10
12-16    10-1-2012   30.01
                     112.12;
12-17    11-5-2012   114.01;
                     114.99
13-01    3-3-2013    32.51
13-06    10-7-2013   131.10
14-01    1-13-2014   TSO I
14-02    1-13-2014   76.01 -
                     76.07
14-04    3-3-2014    51.02
14-05    3-3-2014    51.03
14-06    3-19-2014   Ch. 74, Sch. II
14-07    3-19-2014   130.47
14-10    5-5-2014    130.22
14-11    5-5-2014    TSO I
14-12    7-7-2014    31.70
15-01    1-12-2015   130.61
15-03    5-4-2015    T.S.O. III
15-04    6-1-2015    31.70
15-05    7-6-2015    91.01,
                     91.02
15-06    8-3-2015    50.15
                     150.06,
15-07    10-5-2015   155.01 -
                     155.06
15-08    10-5-2015   33.70 -
                     33.73
16-01    1-19-2016   T.S.O. I
16-02    2-22-2016   154.170 -
                     154.179
16-03    2-22-2016   131.02;
                     131.99
16-04    3-7-2016    76.02
16-05    4-4-2016    112.05
16-07    6-6-2016    31.70
                     112.05;
16-08    6-20-2016   112.09;
                     112.32;
                     112.33
16-09    10-17-2016  112.18
16-11    12-19-2016  34.53
16-12    1-3-2017    33.65
16-13    1-3-2017    33.66
17-01    5-1-2017    T.S.O. I
2017-02  5-15-2017   34.52
2017-03  6-5-2017    31.70
2017-04  6-5-2017    77.01;
                     77.02
                     31.04;
2017-05  6-5-2017    31.05;
                     31.56;
                     31.59
2017-07  6-19-2017   51.02
2017-08  7-10-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-09  8-1-2017    T.S.O. I
2017-10  8-1-2017    71.01
2017-12  12-4-2017   92.01;
                     92.11
2017-13  12-4-2017   34.51
2018-01  2-5-2018    32.50
2018-02  3-5-2018    T.S.O. I
2018-03  4-2-2018    32.01–
                     32.05
18-05    6-4-2018    T.S.O. I
2018-06  6-4-2018    31.70
                     54.01–
2018-09  8-6-2018    54.23;
                     54.99
2019-01  2-4-2019    154.006;
                     154.051
2019-02  2-4-2019    T.S.O. III
2019-04  3-4-2019    T.S.O. I
                     50.15;
2019-06  4-29-2019   51.02;
                     51.03;
                     51.10
2019-07  4-29-2019   32.02;
                     32.05
2019-08  4-29-2019   30.33
2019-09  6-3-2019    30.33
                     51.11;
                     150.01–
                     150.09;
                     150.15–
2019-11  10-7-2019   150.26;
                     150.35;
                     150.36;
                     150.99;
                     Ch. 150, Apps. A–E
2019-13  12-2-2019   33.18
2019-14  12-2-2019   131.11–
                     131.15
2020-01  2-3-2017    76.02–
                     76.05
2020-02  5-4-2020    30.17,
                     33.66
2020-05  10-5-2020   130.37
2020-06  10-19-2020  T.S.O. I
2020-07  10-19-2020  154.091
2020-08  10-19-2020  T.S.O. II
2020-09  10-19-2020  T.S.O. III
2021-01  1-4-2021    154.130
2021-04  5-3-2021    33.35
2021-05  5-3-2021    90.15
2021-07  7-19-2021   T.S.O. III
2021-08  8-2-2021    90.15
2021-09  8-2-2021    31.02
2021-10  11-15-2021  110.04
2021-11  12-6-2021   114.01
2021-12  12-6-2021   50.15
2022-02  4-18-2022   Ch. 74, Sch. III
2022-04  5-2-2022    112.11
2022-05  8-1-2022    112.34
2022-06  10-17-2022  71.01
2022-07  10-17-2022  32.60–
                     32.64
                     92.03,
2023-02  4-24-2023   92.05,
                     92.10,
                     92.11
23-03    10-2-2023   31.73
2023-05  12-4-2023   51.02
2024-01  6-3-2024    76.03,
                     76.04
2024-03  9-9-2024    T.S.O. II
2024-04  9-9-2024    T.S.O. III
2025-01  5-5-2025    51.02,
                     51.03
2025-02  6-2-2025    51.02
2025-04  7-21-2025   T.S.O. III
2025-05  9-15-2025   33.19
                    
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
09-02    3-2-2009    34.60 -
                     34.68
09-03    4-6-2009    33.65
09-09    9-8-2009    34.75
2019-02  4-29-2019   T.S.O. I
20-03    3-2-2020    34.51
                    
 
